Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
The Charter
Chapter CH
CHARTER
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known as "The Code of the Township of Edison, 2007,"
and may be cited as "The Code" or "The Edison Township Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1999 Code § 1.04.010; New]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require the following definitions shall be used in the Code:
CHARTER — Means the pertinent provisions of the Optional Charter Law of
the State of New Jersey governing Mayor-Council Plan E (Article 7) under
which this Township government is constituted.
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — Means the Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Means the County of Middlesex.
DAYS — Means the calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Means an organized unit of the government established or
designated by this Code as a department and any agency or instrumentality
not allocated or assigned to such an organizational unit.
DIRECTOR — Means the head of an administrative department of the
Township government.
GOVERNING BODY — Means the Municipal Council as constituted by the
Township Charter.
AO:1
LICENSED — Means licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Means a calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
MUNICIPALITY — Means the Township of Edison in the County of
Middlesex.
OFFICER or OFFICIAL (and the title of an officer or official) — Shall be
construed as if the words "of the Township of Edison" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Means any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter
adopted, and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by the procedure
required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it remains in force
and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Means any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
of any kind or personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Means next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Means real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the
Township.
SIDEWALK — Means any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
Street shall be considered to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction is inconsistent with the
apparent intent.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — Means the Township of Edison in the County of Middlesex
and State of New Jersey.
WEEK — Means seven (7) days.
§ 1-2 EDISON CODE § 1-2
AO:2
YEAR — Means a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
Writing and written shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
And may be construed as meaning or, and or as and, if the sense requires
and indicates such meaning.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
Chapter shall mean one (1) of the major divisions of this Code identified by
a Roman numeral and divided by subject matter.
Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1999 Code § 1.01.080; New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
§ 1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4
AO:3
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [N.J.S.A. 40:49-5; 1999 Code § 1.08.010]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code or other ordinance
of the Township, where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section
violated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one (1) or more
of the following: a fine not exceeding two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or to a period of
community service not exceeding ninety (90) days at the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court.
For a violation of any housing or zoning code, the enforcement officer
shall provide a thirty (30) day period in which the owner shall be afforded
the opportunity to cure or abate the condition and shall also be afforded
an opportunity for a hearing before a Court of competent jurisdiction for
an independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the
expiration of the thirty (30) day period, a fine greater than one thousand
two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars may be imposed if a Court has not
determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the property, is determined
that the abatement has not been substantially completed.
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Township Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed
at an amount not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars. The Court
before which any person is convicted of violating any ordinance or Code
provision shall have power to impose any fine, term of punishment, or
period of community service not less than the minimum and not exceeding
the maximum fixed in the Code or such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one (1) year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the Court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
§ 1-4 EDISON CODE § 1-5.4
AO:4
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the Court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned
in the County jail or place of detention provided by the Township for any
term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or be required to perform community
service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [1999 Code § 1.08.010; New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.6. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-6. PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF
EXISTING ORDINANCES. [New]
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in
substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date
of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new
enactments.
§ 1-7. MAINTENANCE AND SALE OF CODE.
§ 1-7.1. Amendments to Code. [New]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Township
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Edison"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-7.2. Code Book to Be Kept Up-to-Date. [New]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk, or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the Office of the Clerk for
the use of the public. All changes in the Code and all ordinances adopted
§ 1-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7.2
AO:5
subsequent to the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to the Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7.3. Sale of Code Book; Periodic Supplementation. [New]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Township Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-7.4. Altering or Tampering with Code; Penalties for Violation.
[New]
It shall be unlawful to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with this
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-7.2 EDISON CODE § 1-7.4
AO:6
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Council
§ 2-1. MAYOR.
§ 2-1.1. General Powers and Duties. [1999 Code § 2.12.010; Ord. No.
O.1693-2009 § I; Ord. No. O.1766-2011 ; Ord. No. O.1821-2013]
The Mayor, as the chief executive officer of the Township, shall have the
power and duty to supervise the administration of the Charter and
ordinances of the Township and the general laws applicable thereto. He or
she shall have such powers of appointment and removal as are provided
by Charter or general law. He or she shall have the power to appoint,
with the advice and consent of the Council, to all offices where no other
provision is made for such appointment; it being the intent and purpose of
this provision, in order to control spending, that the Mayor shall obtain the
advice of the Council and consent to appoint, hire or retain any supervisory
or managerial employee whose salary, wages, and other compensation
equals or exceeds fifty thousand ($50,000.00) dollars. He or she shall assign
or approve the assignment of space in public buildings and other public
places for the temporary or permanent use of any department, agency, body,
officer or instrumentality and shall, through the Business Administrator,
control the assignment, allocation and use of furniture, equipment or other
public property in the Township government. He or she may assign and
reassign, transfer and retransfer, from time to time, either temporarily
or permanently, any property or personnel from one function to another
or from one administrative unit to another as the management of the
Township government may require, subject to the express requirements of
the Charter and all other applicable general laws. This section shall not,
however, apply to the Council or Township Clerk.
§ 2-1.2. Mayor's Staff. [1999 Code § 2.12.020; Ord. No. O.1767-2011
; Ord. No. O.1851-2013 ]
The Mayor may appoint a secretary, executive secretary or other personnel
not exceeding three (3) in number.
§ 2-1.3. Acting Mayor. [1999 Code § 2.12.030]
The Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator and any other
department head or the Township Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the
Mayor shall be prevented by absences from the Township, disability or
other cause from attending to the duties of his office. During such time, the
person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all the rights, powers and
duties of the Mayor.
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.4
AO:7
§ 2-1.4. Vacancy in Office of Director of Department. [1999 Code
§ 2.12.040]
Whenever a vacancy exists by resignation, removal or otherwise in the
office of a director of any department, the Mayor may designate an acting
director, who shall perform all the duties and functions of such department
head. Any such designation of an acting director shall terminate not later
than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of designation, unless
the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more extensions thereof.
Such acting director shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and may be
removed by the Mayor at any time without cause.
§ 2-1.5. Delegation of Powers. [1999 Code § 2.12.050]
The Mayor may delegate to the head of any department any functions,
powers or duties conferred upon the Mayor by ordinance which are not
required by Charter or general law to be performed or discharged
personally by the Mayor.
§ 2-1.6. Compensation. [1999 Code § 2.12.060; New]
The Mayor shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-2. TOWNSHIP COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. General Powers. [1999 Code § 2.08.010]
All powers of the Township and determination of all matters of policy shall
be vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by the Charter,
general law or this chapter. The Council shall exercise the legislative power
of the Township, except as may be otherwise provided by general law. It
may require any Township officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
statements regarding his or her official duties and the performance thereof,
and it may otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, officer or
agency of the Township. It may remove any Township officer other than the
Mayor or member of the Council, for cause, upon notice and opportunity to
be heard.
§ 2-2.2. Compensation. [1999 Code § 2.08.020; New]
§ 2-2.3. Rules of Procedure. [1999 Code § 2.08.030]
The deliberations of the Township Municipal Council shall be governed by
Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. The Township Attorney shall be the
a. Members. Members of the Council shall receive such compensation as
shall be fixed by ordinance.
b. President. The President of the Council shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-1.4 EDISON CODE § 2-2.3
AO:8
parliamentarian when he or she is present. In the absence of the Township
Attorney, the Township Clerk shall serve as parliamentarian.
Any questions arising not provided for in the rules herein after set forth or
the Township's Charter shall be determined by the rules set forth in Robert's
Rules of Order, Newly Revised.
§ 2-2.4. Council Meetings. [1999 Code § 2.08.040; New; Ord. No.
O.1678-2008 § I]
a. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Edison Township Municipal
Council shall be held on the second and fourth Wednesday of every
month (unless otherwise scheduled by the Municipal Council) and shall
be called to order at 7:00 p.m. or such other time as the Council may set
by resolution, except that the Council may, by resolution, dispense with
one (1) or more meetings as it deems necessary or appropriate. Regular
meetings shall be held in the Council chamber or at such other place as
may be designated by the Municipal Council by resolution or motion.
Any change in venue of regular meetings shall be duly noticed as
required by law.
b. Work session Meetings. Work session meetings of the Edison Township
Municipal Council shall be held on Mondays preceding the regular
Wednesday meeting of every month at 6:00 p.m. or such other time as
the Council may set by resolution except that the Council may, by
resolution, dispense with one (1) or more meetings as it deems
necessary or appropriate. Work session meetings shall be held in the
Council chambers or at such other place as may be designated by the
Township Council by resolution or motion. Any change in venue of work
session meetings shall be duly noticed as required by law. By the vote of
a majority, Council may recess the work session meeting for not more
than fifteen (15) minutes and reopen same at a specified time and date.
c. Holidays. When the day fixed for any regular or work session meeting of
the Governing Body falls upon a day designated by law as legal, State,
national or religious holiday, such meeting shall be held at the same
hour on the next succeeding day not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
Notice should be in the annual notice of work session and regular
meetings.
d. Special Meetings. The Council President, upon the oral or written
approval of a majority of the Council, may call a special meeting of the
Council. As provided by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-179, the Mayor may, and upon
written request of a majority of the members of the Council, shall, call a
special meeting of the Council. In the event of a refusal, inability, or
neglect of the Council President or Mayor to call a special meeting
deemed necessary by a majority of the members of the Council, such
members may themselves call a special meeting. For any special
meeting, the call may be oral or written, shall designate the purpose of
the special meeting, and no other business shall be considered. Except
in case of an emergency designated in the call for a special meeting,
§ 2-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.4
AO:9
notice of special meetings shall be given at least two (2) days in
advance thereof.
e. Annual Meeting. The Township Council shall hold an annual
organizational meeting during the first seven (7) days of January in the
Township Council chambers or such other place as may be designated
by the Township Council by resolution or motion. The specific time and
date of the organizational meeting shall be established by resolution of
Council during a business meeting in the month of December preceding
the organizational meeting. At the organizational meeting, the
Township Council shall hear reports, elect one of its members to service
as Council President and one (1) of its members to service as Council
Vice President for the ensuing year, adopt its rules of order, adopt its
meeting schedule for the year, make annual appointments, and transact
such other business as properly may be brought before the body.
f. Budget Adoption. The annual budget is to be introduced, approved,
amended and adopted by resolution adopted by no less than a majority
of the full membership of the Council according to the following general
procedures:
1. Submission by Mayor of recommended budget to Council.
2. Departmental budget presentations.
3. Introduction and approval (first reading, by title) by August 10.
4. Public advertising.
5. Public hearing.
6. Amendments and public hearings if required.
7. Adoption by September 20 (subject to the terms of N.J.S.A.
40A:4-10)
8. Deadlines may be extended by Director of the Division of Local
Government Services with the approval of the Local Finance Board.
9. Transmission of certified copy to County Board to be made within
fifteen (15) days of adoption (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 to N.J.S.A. 40A:4-18
included).
g. Adjourned Meetings. Adjourned meetings shall be called to order and
held at the time and place appointed by the motion or resolution under
which they are held.
h. Meetings Open to the Public. State Statutes provide that all meetings of
the Township Council shall be open to the public subject to provisions
allowing for executive session discussion. The open public meetings
statement shall be read by the Township Clerk at all work sessions,
regular and special meetings. The Business Administrator, Attorneys,
Clerk and Engineer and such other Township officers or employees, if
§ 2-2.4 EDISON CODE § 2-2.4
AO:10
they be required by general or special order of the Council, shall attend
regular or special meetings of the Council. The Mayor may attend
meetings of the Council and may take part in discussions of the Council
but shall have no vote, except in the case of a tie on the question of
filling a vacancy on the Council in which case he may cast the deciding
vote.
i. Quorums.
1. A quorum shall be as provided by the Revised Statutes of the State
of New Jersey, viz., four (4) Councilpersons. If no quorum exists at
any particular meeting, then those assembled shall have the power
and are authorized to set a new date and then adjourn. In all cases,
reasonable advance notice of the new meeting date shall be given
to all members of the Council or left at their place of residence.
2. When a sufficient number of members to constitute a quorum is
present, the Council President or the Council Vice President, shall
preside, or in the absence of both, the Council member having the
longest term of service shall take his or her seat. In the case of two
(2) members both having the same term of service the member to
preside shall be determined by lot among those having equal
longest service. If no member of Council is present one-half (1/2)
hour after the appointed time for any meeting, the Clerk shall
adjourn the meeting.
j. Meetings of the Edison Council, Work session, Regular or Special.
1. Meetings of the Edison Council, work session, regular or special
shall be entitled to take precedence over any other use of the
Council chamber with the exception of regularly scheduled
meetings and work sessions of the Edison Township Planning Board
and the Edison Township Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. The Council may meet at any time in informal conference for
discussion and consideration of any Township business or to meet
with any officer or employee of the Township or any other person or
persons on Township business; provided, however, that notices of
such meetings shall first have been communicated to at least two
(2) area newspapers and to the public, in accordance with the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey. Such conferences may be routinely
scheduled, or specially arranged for pressing or emergent
business, after notice to public and press have been given as
provided in the statutes.
3. All members of the public and press in attendance at such meetings
shall be permitted to hear and observe all discussions, decision and
actions of the Council, except those matters which are delineated
in 7b(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9) of Chapter 231 of the
Public Laws of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey. That portion of a
meeting from which the public and the press shall be excluded shall
not take place until a resolution is passed at the public portion of
§ 2-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.4
AO:11
§ 2-2.5. Council Officers' Duties. [1999 Code § 2.08.050]
§ 2-2.6. Regular Meeting; Order of Business. [1999 Code § 2.08.060;
New; Ord. No. O.1678-2008 §§ II, III]
the meeting stating the general nature of the subject to be
discussed and a sincere estimate of the time and circumstances
under which the discussion conducted in closed session can be
publicly disclosed.
4. This section shall not apply to any gathering of less than an
effective majority of the Council, nor shall it apply to gatherings at
conventions or seminars or similar occasions attended or open to
all members of three (3) or more similar public bodies.
a. The President shall take chair for the meeting and shall immediately
call the Council to order. After the call to order, the Council President
shall request the Clerk to call the roll and note the absences. The Clerk
shall also keep a record of attendance of the Clerk, the Attorney, and
the Township Administrator. In the event of the absence of the Clerk or
the Deputy Clerk, the presiding officer shall appoint a Clerk pro
tempore.
b. The Clerk shall perform his or her duties according to the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey. The Clerk shall record and keep the minutes of
all regular, work session and special meetings and shall keep the
Revised General Ordinances book properly and fully indexed; he or she
shall perform all the duties usually devolving upon such officer; in
addition, he or she shall perform such other duties as the Township
Council may direct.
a. The business of each regular meeting shall be conducted in the
following manner:
1. Call to order;
2. Salute to the Flag ("Pledge of Allegiance");
3. Roll call;
4. Reading of the Open Public Meetings Act statement;
5. Resolutions of Recognition;
6. Approval of minutes;
7. Mayor's report;
8. Reports from Council committees;
9. Department reports;
10. Ordinance for further consideration and public hearing;
§ 2-2.4 EDISON CODE § 2-2.6
AO:12
§ 2-2.7. Work Session Meeting; Order of Business. [1999 Code
§ 2.08.070; New; Ord. No. O.1678-2008 §§ III, IV]
11. Proposed ordinances;
12. Public comments on resolutions;
13. Proposed resolutions;
14. Communications;
15. Oral petitions and remarks;
16. Miscellaneous;
17. Adjournment.
b. The aforesaid order of business at any meeting may be changed by a
majority vote of the members of the Township Council present at the
meeting. It shall be the Council President's prerogative to modify the
agenda to conduct a closed session discussion of the Township Council.
The Council President shall publicly announce at the beginning of such
meeting any modification of the agenda to conduct such closed session
discussion.
c. All consent agenda items shown on the regular meeting agenda, and
having been properly posted for the public's perusal prior to the
beginning of the meeting, shall be considered in the form of one (1)
motion by Township Council.
If any member of the Township Council requests of the Council
President or presiding officer that a consent agenda item be considered
and voted upon independently of all other consent agenda items, then
that item will be read by title and a separate vote will be taken. All other
consent agenda items not affected by the request shall be considered in
the form of one motion by the Township Council.
d. Agenda. The agenda for each regular and special meeting of the
Council shall be prepared by the Clerk. Except for emergency matters
which may be added to the agenda at any time with the approval of four
(4) members of Council the agenda for each regular meeting of the
Council shall include only such matters of Council business as have
been placed on the agenda at the Council work session meeting at the
request of a member of Council. In preparing the agenda, the Clerk will
list on the agenda the property address and lot and block for any
property that is the subject of an ordinance or resolution.
a. The business of each work session meeting shall be conducted in the
following manner:
1. Call to order;
2. Salute to the Flag ("Pledge of Allegiance");
§ 2-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.7
AO:13
3. Roll call;
4. Reading of the Open Public Meetings Act Statement;
5. Approval of minutes;
6. Oral petitions and remarks;
7. Mayor's report;
8. Reports from Council committees;
9. Points of Light;
10. Department reports;
11. Council liaison to the Planning Board;
12. Ordinances for further consideration and public hearing;
13. Proposed ordinances;
14. Proposed resolutions;
15. Communications;
16. Discussion;
17. Closed session:*
18. Adjournment.
*It is the Council President's prerogative to determine when a
"Closed Session" will occur during the meeting and will publicly
announce the decision at the beginning of the meeting.
b. All agenda items and all discussion items shall be submitted to the
Clerk by the Wednesday preceding the Council meeting for inclusion on
the work session meeting agenda.
c. Items which are not submitted to the Clerk by the Wednesday
preceding the work session meeting may be added to the agenda prior
to the beginning of the meeting with the approval of the Council
President, or by an affirmative vote, without debate, of the majority of
the Councilpersons present at the meeting.
d. The aforesaid order of business at any meeting may be changed by
majority vote of the members of the Township Council present at the
meeting. It shall be the Council President's prerogative to modify the
agenda to conduct a closed session discussion of the Township Council.
The Council President shall publicly announce at the beginning of such
meeting any modification of the agenda to conduct such closed session
discussion.
§ 2-2.7 EDISON CODE § 2-2.7
AO:14
§ 2-2.8. Council President; Duties. [1999 Code § 2.08.080; New]
e. All work session meetings shall end at 9:00 p.m. This time may be
extended by a majority vote of the Councilpersons present at the
meeting.
f. All regular meetings shall end no later than 10:00 p.m. This time may be
extended by a majority vote of the Councilpersons present at the
meeting.
a. The Council President shall preside over the deliberations of the
Township Council and shall conduct the meetings, thereof, and shall
also participate in the determination of the Township affairs to the
extent permitted by statute.
b. The Council President shall, on all occasions, preserve the strictest
order and decorum and shall cause the removal of all persons who
interrupt the orderly proceedings of Council.
c. When two (2) or more Councilpersons shall rise to speak at the same
time, the Council President shall designate the one (1) entitled to the
floor.
d. The Council President shall decide all questions of order without
debate, subject to an appeal to the Township Council, and may call upon
the parliamentarian for an opinion on any questions of order.
e. The Council President or Council members shall not make promises or
commitments to anyone which directly, or by inference, bind the
Township.
f. The Council President shall be a member ex officio of all Township
Council committees and shall be informed in advance of all meetings of
such committees.
g. In the absence of the Council President, or in the event that he or she is
unable to perform his or her duties, the Vice President of Council, or in
his or her inability to act, the Councilperson having the longest term as
such, shall act as the presiding officer.
h. The Council President shall see that all matters referred to the Council
committees are acted upon and reported promptly.
i. Presiding Officer; Election and Duties.
1. The presiding officer of the Council shall be the President, who
shall be elected at the reorganization meeting and shall hold office
for a period of one year. The President for each succeeding year
shall be elected by the Council at the first regular meeting in
January, and when elected, he or she shall take office immediately
and shall hold the office for one (1) year from that date or until his
or her successor shall have been duly elected. Notwithstanding any
§ 2-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.8
AO:15
§ 2-2.9. Special and Ad Hoc Committees. [1999 Code § 2.08.090]
Special and ad hoc committees may be created by motion or resolution
of the Township Council and shall consist of such number as shall be
determined by such motion or resolution. The members of all special and
ad hoc committees and the chairpersons thereof shall be appointed by
the Presiding Officer at a regular or special meeting. A majority of the
committee members shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-2.10. Vacancies; Nominations to Authorities, Boards,
Commission, Committees and Other Agencies. [1999 Code
§ 2.08.100; Ord. No. O.1678-2008 § V]
Whenever a vacancy shall occur on one (1) of the Township's authorities,
boards, commissions or committees, except for those authorities, boards,
commissions and committees for which the Mayor is the sole appointing
authority, nominations to fill the vacancies shall be brought to the attention
of the Council in writing, at least seven (7) days prior to the Council
meeting when action is expected to be taken along with a copy of the
candidate's resume. Any applicant seeking to fill a vacancy shall complete
the application form entitled "Township of Edison Application For
Appointment to Citizen Advisory Boards and Commissions" created by
Common Cause of New Jersey, adopted by the Township Council and on
file with the Township Clerk's office. Whenever possible, prior consultation
with the authority, board, commission or committee that has the vacancy
shall occur, and the Councilperson proposing the name shall report on his
or her discussions. An interview process for prospective candidates shall be
provision to the contrary, the person elected to serve as President
of the Council shall not serve more than two (2) successive terms.
2. The Council shall also select a Vice President, who shall hold the
office for the calendar year in which he or she is elected and who
may be reelected for not more than one (1) additional term. The
Vice President shall preside in the absence of the President.
3. The President shall assume the chair of the presiding officer
immediately after his or her election.
4. The President shall vote on all questions, his or her name called
last. The President shall sign all ordinances adopted by the Council
during his or her presence. In the event of the absence of the
President, such ordinances shall be signed by the presiding officer.
j. Duties and Responsibilities of the Council President. In addition to the
matters outlined in this section, the Council President shall provide
final approval of work session meeting agendas. In this connection, the
Township Council President will consult with the Township Clerk or his
or her designee on a biweekly basis concerning the work session
meeting agendas and will give his or her final approval on the items to
be listed.
§ 2-2.8 EDISON CODE § 2-2.10
AO:16
conducted at the discretion of the Council. Under no circumstance shall the
nomination and the appointment of a candidate occur simultaneously. All
nominations and appointments shall be in accordance with the appropriate
statute.
§ 2-2.11. Ordinances, Resolutions and Petitions. [1999 Code
§ 2.08.110; Ord. No. O.1234-2010 ]
§ 2-2.12. Rules of Debate and Decorum. [1999 Code § 2.08.120; Ord.
No. O.1678-2008 § VI]
a. All ordinances must be presented in writing. Any Councilperson may
introduce any resolution or ordinance. All ordinances and resolutions
shall be drafted by the Township Attorney upon request of the Council
or Mayor. Each ordinance shall be published by the Clerk, considered
and adopted by the Council and become effective according to the
procedure prescribed by the Charter and general law.
b. Upon the adoption of an ordinance the same shall be properly
numbered and recorded at length by the Township Clerk. The assigned
number of the ordinance shall appear in the advertisement of the
ordinance.
c. Every ordinance submitted for consideration by the Township Council
shall be presented in writing. Resolutions, to the extent possible should
be presented in writing, verbal resolutions may be reduced to writing as
directed by the Council.
d. Prior to Submission to Business Administrator and Department Head.
Prior to introduction, such proposed ordinance or resolution requiring
or permitting administrative action may be submitted to the Business
Administrator and the Department Head concerned, each of whom shall
submit to the Council an opinion as to the administrative implications of
the proposed ordinance or resolution.
e. Title. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited to a single object
which shall be expressed in its title.
f. All petitions, memorials or other papers addressed to the Township
Council shall be presented by the Clerk who shall state in his or her
place the general object of the petition, memorial or other paper.
a. Except as otherwise required by statute, or specifically provided in
these rules of order, all action of the Township Council shall be by a
majority vote of those present. A member abstaining will be noted in the
record, but will not count as a vote to achieve a majority.
b. A question presented and seconded is under consideration, and no
motion shall be received thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the
table, to postpone or amend until question is decided. These motions
shall have preference in the order in which they are mentioned, and the
first two (2) shall be decided without debate.
§ 2-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.12
AO:17
c. Upon demand of one (1) member of the Township Council or when
directed by statute, a roll call vote shall be taken and the ayes and nays
entered into the official minutes of the meeting.
d. The roll shall be called alphabetically.
e. No member of the Township Council shall question the vote or motives
of a fellow Councilperson.
f. Any member may call for the division of the question.
g. Each Council member, prior to voting shall leave the opportunity to
express his or her opinion on the motion. Upon any roll call there shall
be no discussion or explanation given by any member voting and he or
she shall vote "aye" or "nay" unless he or she shall first receive
permission from the Council to explain the vote.
h. Every Township Councilperson desiring to speak for any purpose
whatsoever shall address the presiding officer, and upon recognition,
shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding
personal attacks and indecorous language.
i. After any question has been decided, any member who voted in the
majority may receive consideration thereof, which shall be favorably
determined if it receives the assent of a majority of the whole Council,
namely four (4) votes, but no discussion of the main question shall be
allowed, unless a reconsideration is had.
j. No allusion shall be made to the motives actuating any member in his or
her course of debate or other performance of duty.
k. A Councilperson, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when
speaking unless it is to call a point of order or as herein otherwise
provided. If a Councilperson, while speaking, shall be called on a point
of order, he or she shall cease speaking until the point of order is
determined by the presiding officer; if in order, he or she shall be
permitted to proceed.
Any Councilperson may appeal to the Township Council from the
decision of the presiding officer upon a question of order, whereupon
without debate, the presiding officer shall submit to the Council the
question "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?", and the
Township Council shall decide the question by a majority vote.
l. When a motion has been made and seconded, it shall be so stated by the
presiding officer before it is open for discussion, and after being thus
stated, it shall be deemed in the possession of the Township Council,
but may be withdrawn or amended by the mover at any time before
discussion.
m. No member should abstain except for reasons of conflict, or because of
insufficient knowledge of the matter being voted upon.
§ 2-2.12 EDISON CODE § 2-2.12
AO:18
§ 2-2.13. Addressing the Council. [1999 Code § 2.08.130; Ord. No.
O.1678-2008 § VII; Ord. No. O.1733-2010 ]
Any person desiring to address the Council shall first seek recognition
by the presiding officer and, upon recognition, shall confine his or her
statement to the order of business prescribed by this section.
n. A motion to adjourn shall always be an order and shall be decided
without debate.
o. Filing of Reports and Resolutions. All reports and resolutions shall be
filed with the Clerk and entered in the minutes.
p. Certification of Passage of Ordinances.
1. Whenever an ordinance has been vetoed by the Mayor and is
passed by the Council over such veto in the manner provided by the
law, the Clerk shall append to such ordinance a certificate in
substantially the following form:
I hereby certify that the above ordinance adopted by the Council of
the Township of Edison on the ____ day of ____, 20____ was vetoed
by the Mayor of the Township and was passed over said veto on the
____ day of ____, 20____.
Township Clerk.
a. Resolutions. Under the heading of "Public Comment on Resolutions"
any person may address the Council in regard to one (1) or more
resolutions listed for consideration at that meeting.
b. Ordinances. Under the heading of "For Further Consideration and
Public Hearing of Ordinances" any person may address the Council
during the public hearing on an ordinance under consideration at that
meeting.
c. Oral Petitions and Remarks. Under the heading of "Oral Petitions and
Remarks" any person may address the Council on any matter over
which the Council has jurisdiction; provided, however, that preference
shall be given to those persons who have notified the Clerk in advance
within the time required for the preparation of the agenda, or their
desire to be heard.
d. Addressing the Council. After a motion is made by a Councilperson, no
person shall address the Council, except on request of Council.
e. Manner of Addressing the Council. Upon recognition from the Council
President or presiding officer, a person shall proceed to the floor and
give his or her name, and address, in an audible tone of voice for the
records. He or she shall limit his or her statement to six (6) minutes.
Any person may speak only once during the time of the meeting allotted
each of the categories of business described in paragraph a, b and c
above. Each such statement shall be limited to six (6) minutes. Any
§ 2-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.13
AO:19
§ 2-2.14. Decorum. [1999 Code § 2.08.140; Ord. No. O.1607-2008
§ 7; Ord. No. O.1678-2008 § VIII; Ord. No. O.1607-2008 ; Ord. No.
O.1722-2009 ]
person who has already spoken may speak in rebuttal to any comment
by another member of the public on the same issue(s) which rebuttal
shall be limited to three (3) minutes and shall be limited to one (1)
rebuttal per meeting. However, each person may speak and present
a rebuttal on each ordinance, when the ordinance is presented for a
public hearing, for the duration of time as set forth above.
1. Statements shall be addressed to the Council President and not to
any member thereof. A Councilperson shall not direct any question
to a speaker addressing the Council except through the Council
President or presiding officer.
2. It shall be the duty of the Council President or presiding officer or
his designee to monitor the speaking times with an appropriate
timer and notify the speaker when the speaker's time has elapsed.
a. Council Relations. A cooperative attitude along with courtesy and
respect between Council members are necessary ingredients for full
consideration of adverse viewpoints no matter how strongly held, for
smooth transaction of the Council business, and for the promotion and
preservation of public respect and confidence for the Council. It is,
therefore, incumbent upon each Council member to be cooperative,
courteous and respectful to other Council members, Directors,
municipal officials or professionals hired on behalf of the Township, by
their words, behavior, and considerate listening, particularly during
controversy, disagreement, or expression of divergent view.
b. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who
becomes boisterous shall be barred by the presiding officer from
further attendance at the meeting of the Council. On request of the
presiding officer, any individual not in compliance with standards of
behavior of Council meetings shall be escorted from the chamber.
c. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall be sergeant at arms of the
Council meetings and shall be present at the Council meetings. The
sergeant at arms shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the
presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at
the Council meetings.
d. All citizens shall conduct themselves in an appropriate manner.
e. There shall be no food or beverage in the Council chambers while the
Council is in session.
f. No animal shall be permitted in the Council chambers at any time,
without Council approval except for a seeing eye dog accompanying a
person who is blind.
§ 2-2.13 EDISON CODE § 2-2.14
AO:20
§ 2-2.15. Correspondence. [1999 Code § 2.08.150]
Whenever a member of the Governing Body shall have occasion to prepare
any correspondence or other document relating to his or her duties, a
copy of such correspondence or other document shall be provided to the
Township Clerk for inclusion in the Township files.
§ 2-2.16. Adoption of Ordinances and Resolutions. [1999 Code
§ 2.08.160]
g. The members of the Township Council and administration shall:
1. Fully participate in Township Council meetings and other public
forums while demonstrating respect, kindness, consideration and
courtesy to others.
2. Prepare in advance of Council meetings and be familiar with issues
on the agenda.
3. Be respectful of other people's time. Stay focused and act
efficiently during public meetings.
4. Serve as a model of leadership and civility to the community.
5. Practice civility and decorum in discussions and debate.
6. Treat all staff as professionals.
7. Never publicly criticize an individual employee.
8. Be welcoming to speakers and treat them with care and gentleness.
9. Do not take advantage of services or opportunities for personal
gain because of their position.
10. Keep confidential information concerning property and personnel
private, unless legal permission is given.
11. Refrain from using non-authorized resources such as equipment
and supplies which are not available to the public.
a. All powers of the Township and determination of all matters of policy
shall be vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by the
Charter, general law or this chapter.
b. The Council shall exercise the legislative power of the Township, except
as may be otherwise provided by general law. It may require any
Township officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit statements
regarding his or her official duties and the performance thereof, and it
may otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, officer or
agency of the Township. It may remove any Township officer other than
the Mayor or member of the Council, for cause, upon notice and
opportunity to be heard.
§ 2-2.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.17
AO:21
§ 2-2.17. Amendments to Rules of Council. [1999 Code § 2.08.170]
§ 2-3. through § 2-4. (RESERVED)
a. The Council President or any member of the Township Council may
propose amendments to these rules at any regular or adjourned
meeting.
b. The Council President will then appoint a special committee of three (3)
members of the Township Council to consider the proposed
amendments. The special committee will present its recommendations
at the next regular or adjourned meeting of the Township Council.
c. Any amendment to the Township Code concerning Council procedure
shall be by ordinance.
§ 2-2.17 EDISON CODE § 2-3
AO:22
ARTICLE II
Officers and Employees
§ 2-5. TOWNSHIP CLERK.
§ 2-5.1. Appointment, Term and Qualifications. [1999 Code
§ 2.16.010; New; Ord. No. O.1760-2010 ]
There shall be an office of the Clerk, the head of which shall be the
Township Clerk. The Clerk shall be appointed by the Council for a term of
three (3) years and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by
ordinance. He or she shall, prior to appointment, be qualified by training
and experience to perform the duties of the office. The Clerk shall hold
a Registered Municipal Clerk Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et
seq. The Township Clerk shall report directly to the Municipal Council.
§ 2-5.2. Deputy Clerk of Council. [1999 Code § 2.16.015; Ord. No.
O.1760-2010 ]
There shall be a Deputy Clerk, who shall be appointed by the Council for
a term of three (3) years and shall receive such compensation as shall be
established by the Township Council by ordinance. The Deputy Clerk shall
perform such duties as are assigned by the Township Clerk and the Council.
During the absence or disability of the Township Clerk, the Deputy Clerk
shall have all the powers of the Township Clerk and shall perform the duties
and functions of such office.
§ 2-5.3. Clerk of Council. [1999 Code § 2.16.020]
The Township Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Township Council. He or
she shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the Council and shall engross
all ordinances and all resolutions of a permanent character in the books
to be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance he or she shall also
engross and certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law.
Each ordinance so engrossed shall be signed by the presiding officer of the
Council and Clerk, who shall attest that it was duly adopted upon a date
stated, pursuant to law, and when so signed, the engrossed copy shall be
deemed to be a public record of the ordinance. Any omission by the Clerk or
presiding officer of the Council to engross, sign or certify as herein required
shall not impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has been
duly adopted. At the close of each year, with the advice and the assistance
of the Municipal Attorney, the Clerk shall bind, compile or codify all the
ordinances and resolutions, or true copies thereof, which then remain in
force and effect. He or she shall also properly index the record books,
compilation or codification of ordinances or resolutions.
§ 2-5.4. Custodian of Records. [1999 Code § 2.16.030]
The Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely keep all the records,
books and documents of the Township except such as shall be committed
§ 2-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.4
AO:23
by Charter or ordinance to any other office or be transferred thereto by
resolution of the Council. He or she shall, upon request and upon the
payment of fees prescribed therefor, by ordinance of the Council, furnish a
certified copy of any such paper in his or her custody, under the corporate
seal of the Township.
§ 2-5.5. Corporate Seal. [1999 Code § 2.16.040; Ord. No.
O.2001-2018 ]
§ 2-5.6. Custodian of Surety Bonds, Insurance Policies and
Contracts. [1999 Code § 2.16.050]
The Clerk shall be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any Township office or officer or employee,
except his or her own bond, which shall be placed in the custody of the Chief
Financial Officer; all insurance policies upon or with respect to risks insured
for the benefit of the Township or to protect it against any claim, demand
or liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor, services,
supplies, equipment and materials to which the Township may be a party.
The Clerk shall also have custody of all leases of property owned by the
Township. The Township Clerk shall be the depository for and have custody
of all performance bonds running to the Township as obligee and other form
of security given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons
on account of work done or to be done in or for the Township.
§ 2-5.7. Additional Powers and Duties. [1999 Code § 2.16.060]
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by statute, Charter and ordinances, the Township Clerk shall:
a. The Township Clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the Township to be
affixed to any instruments and writings when authorized to do so by any
ordinance or resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify
any document on record in his or her office or to certify any act or paper
which from the records of his or her office shall appear to have been a
public act of the Township or a public document. He or she shall not
affix the seal or permit it to be affixed to any instrument or writing or
other paper except as in this section provided, unless required to do so
by law or ordinance.
b. Reproduction of the Corporate Seal, as well as the official emblems of
the Edison Police Department and Edison Fire Department, shall be
prohibited without authorization to do by ordinance or resolution of the
Council or express written permission of the Mayor.
a. Serve as the chief administrative officer in all elections held in the
Township, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the Revised
Statutes;
b. Serve as chief registrar of voters of the Township, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes;
§ 2-5.4 EDISON CODE § 2-5.7
AO:24
§ 2-5.8. Notice of Meetings. [1999 Code § 2.16.070]
The Township Clerk shall issue notices to the respective members of the
Council and to all other persons whose attendance may be required at any
regular meeting of the Council. Such notice shall be in accordance with a
schedule which the Clerk shall prepare on the first day of January of the
ensuing year. The Clerk shall, whenever a special meeting of the Council
is called in accordance with the law, issue and cause notices thereof to
be served upon the members of the Council and any other persons whose
presence may be required.
§ 2-5.9. Township Clerk's Office; Employees. [Ord. No. O.1760-2010
]
There shall be employees of the Township Clerk's Office who shall be
supervised by the Township Clerk and the Council. Such employee's
compensation and benefits shall be subject to their respective bargaining
agreements.
§ 2-6. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.
§ 2-6.1. Appointment; Term. [1999 Code § 2.48.030B; Ord. No.
O.1625-2008 § 1]
There shall be an Emergency Management Coordinator, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor to serve for a term of three (3) years pursuant to
N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1.
§ 2-6.2. Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator(s). [Ord. No.
O.1625-2008 § 2]
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint one (1) or more
Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator(s) with the consent of the
Mayor. Any such Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator(s) shall
serve for a term coextensive with that of the Emergency Management
Coordinator. Whenever possible, such Deputies shall be appointed from
among the salaried officers of the municipality.
§ 2-7. through § 2-20. (RESERVED)
c. Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance of
applications of licenses as may be authorized by the Council pursuant to
the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.) and
the ordinances of the Township;
d. Perform such functions as are vested in the Municipal Clerk by statute
and ordinances relating to bingo and raffles licensing;
e. Have such other and additional functions, powers and duties as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance.
§ 2-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7
AO:25

ARTICLE III
Departments
§ 2-21. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION.
§ 2-21.1. Organization. [1999 Code § 2.04.010; Ord. No.
O.1548-2007 ]
§ 2-21.2. Supervision by Business Administrator. [1999 Code
§ 2.04.020]
Except as may be otherwise expressly provided, the various statutory and
other nondepartmental agencies of the Township government shall be under
the supervision of the Business Administrator to the extent that such
supervision is not inconsistent with the Charter and general laws applicable
to such agencies, respectively.
§ 2-21.3. Publications and Periodicals to Reflect Names of Officials.
[1999 Code § 2.04.060]
The Township, in the course of its administration, issues various
publications and periodicals to the public. To fairly reflect the Governing
Body, it is deemed that all future publications and periodicals shall
a. The Township government shall be comprised, in addition to the
Council, of the following departments, divisions, bureaus and offices:
1. Office of the Mayor;
2. Office of the Clerk;
3. Department of Administration;
4. Department of Law;
5. Department of Public Works;
6. Department of Finance;
7. Department of Parks and Recreation;
8. Department of Health and Human Services;
9. Department of Planning and Engineering;
10. The respective divisions, bureaus and offices into which such
departments are divided pursuant to this chapter;
11. The various judicial, legislative and independent agencies of local
government provided pursuant to the Charter or general law.
b. The term of the office of all department directors enumerated above
shall be coterminous with the term of office of the Mayor,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained hereinafter.
§ 2-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-21.3
AO:27
appropriately reflect the name of the Mayor, the Council President and
respective Councilpersons.
§ 2-22. DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION.
§ 2-22.1. Business Administrator. [1999 Code § 2.20.010; Ord. No.
O.1508-2006 ]
§ 2-22.2. Department Organization; Powers of Business
Administrator. [1999 Code § 2.20.020]
The Department of Administration shall consist of Divisions of the Budget,
Division of Personnel and Division of Central Purchases. Through such
divisions and otherwise, the Business Administrator, under the direction
and supervision of the Mayor, shall:
a. Appointment; Term. There shall be a Department of Administration, the
head of which shall be the Business Administrator. He or she shall have
the qualifications and shall be appointed in the manner prescribed by
the Charter. The compensation of the Business Administrator shall be
such sum annually as shall be fixed by ordinance. He or she shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, for a
period of four (4) years.
b. Duty to Serve in Absence of Division Heads. In the absence of
appointments to division heads within the Department of
Administration, the Business Administrator, who serves as department
head to the Department of Administration, shall perform the functions
of those divisions.
c. Removal or Failure to Reappoint; Notice. In the event of the removal or
failure of reappointment of the Business Administrator, that
administrator may be entitled to a three-months' written notice of the
removal or non-reappointment, or if the Mayor determines that the
removal shall be immediate, then the Administrator may be paid any
unpaid balance of his salary plus his salary for a maximum of the next
three (3) calendar months following the effective date of the Mayor's
action unless the removal is for good cause. For the purposes of this
subsection, "good cause" shall mean conviction of a crime or offense
involving moral turpitude, the violation of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:69A-163 through N.J.S.A. 40:69A-167, or the violation of any code of
ethics within the Township of Edison.
a. Assist the Mayor in the preparation of the Township Budget;
b. Develop and enforce sound purchasing and personnel practices and
procedures for all departments, offices and agencies of the Township;
c. Supervise the administration of each of the departments established by
ordinance, and, for this purpose, to have and exercise such duties and
powers as are provided by the Charter;
§ 2-21.3 EDISON CODE § 2-22.2
AO:28
§ 2-23. DIVISION OF THE BUDGET.
§ 2-23.1. Budget Officer; Appointment; Compensation. [1999 Code
§ 2.20.030]
There shall be a Division of the Budget within the Department of
Administration, the head of which shall be the Budget Officer. He or she
shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience
in the formulation and administration of governmental or large corporate
budgets and in the analysis of budgetary costs. The compensation of the
Budget Officer shall be such sum, annually, as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-23.2. Budget Officer; Powers and Duties. [1999 Code § 2.20.040]
The Budget Officer, under the direction of the Business Administrator, shall:
d. Prescribe and issue rules and regulations for the efficient management
of the government, not inconsistent with the Charter and ordinances of
the Township;
e. Be responsible for the efficient management of his or her department
and have the general powers and duties of a department head as
provided by Charter or by ordinance;
f. Coordinate the operations and administration of departments,
divisions, offices and agencies of the Township government.
a. Organize and administer the work of the Division;
b. Prepare and prescribe uniform forms of budget requests for the use of
all departments and all other spending agencies, together with
appropriate instructions for such use;
c. Review and analyze all budget requests for appropriations and make
recommendations with respect thereto to the Business Administrator;
d. Study the organization and operation of any and all departments, and
all other spending agencies for the purposes of budget analysis;
e. Prescribe and require each department and other spending agencies,
for which Township appropriations are made, to maintain records and
produce reports of their respective work load and performance,
expressed in appropriate work units, which may be prescribed or
approved for each of the departments and other spending agencies by
the Budget Officer;
f. Compile the budget document in accordance with the policies
established by the Mayor, for presentation by the Mayor to the Council
in accordance with the Charter.
§ 2-22.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-23.3
AO:29
§ 2-23.3. Budget Document. [1999 Code § 2.20.050]
The budget document shall be in such form as is required by law for
municipal budgets, and there shall be, in addition, appended thereto, a
detailed analysis of the various items of expenditures and revenue. Such
analysis shall include, for each department, division and agency, the total
number of positions of each class and grade authorized by the budget,
compared with the corresponding number actually employed at the
beginning and end of the preceding budget period. So far as practicable,
the detailed analysis shall support the various expenditure estimates in
terms of the cost of performance of functional programs and activities,
stating separately operating and capital costs. As soon as the Business
Administrator determines that such supporting analysis is practicable with
respect to the work of any department or functional program or activity,
the budget document shall include appropriate statements of the cost of
performance measured in quantitative countable units of work.
§ 2-23.4. Budget Operation. [1999 Code § 2.20.060]
The Budget Officer shall supervise the administration of each annual
budget. Immediately after the budget has been enacted and after
consultation with the heads of the departments, he or she shall establish
quarterly or such other periodic allotments of appropriations to each
department as the Business Administrator shall approve. At the beginning
of each allotment period, the amount specified shall become available to
each department for obligation during that period. Such allotments for any
department may be modified, upon request of the head of the department,
by the Business Administrator or by direction of the Mayor. The Budget
Officer shall file with the supervisor of accounts a copy of each allotment
and modification thereof. An encumbrance system of accounts to control all
expenditures within the limits of budget appropriations and such allotments
shall be maintained by the Department of Finance.
§ 2-23.5. Administrative Review by Budget Officer. [1999 Code
§ 2.20.070]
The Budget Officer shall maintain a continuous administrative review of
departmental operating methods, organization and management. In
cooperation with the department heads and divisions thereof, he or she
shall develop standards to improve administrative practices and procedures
and the management of the Township government, and shall make
recommendations of such standards to the Business Administrator.
§ 2-23.6. Expenditure Control. [1999 Code § 2.20.080]
If at any time during the budget year, the Budget Officer shall ascertain
that the available revenue plus balances for the year will be less than the
total appropriations, he or she shall so advise the Business Administrator,
who shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several
offices, departments and agencies. Upon such reconsideration and with
§ 2-23.3 EDISON CODE § 2-23.6
AO:30
the approval of the Mayor, he or she shall revise the allotments so as to
forestall, so far as possible, the making of commitments and expenditures
in excess of the revenue to be realized during the fiscal year.
§ 2-24. DIVISION OF CENTRAL PURCHASES.
§ 2-24.1. Purchasing Agent; Appointment; Compensation. [1999
Code § 2.20.090]
There shall be a Division of Central Purchases within the Department of
Administration. The head of the Division shall be the Purchasing Agent. He
or she shall, prior to his or her appointment, have been qualified by training
in commercial or governmental purchasing. His or her compensation shall
be said sum, annually, as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-24.2. Purchasing Agent; Duties. [1999 Code § 2.20.100]
The Purchasing Agent, under the direction and supervision of the Business
Administrator, shall:
§ 2-24.3. Purchasing Procedures. [1999 Code § 2.20.110; Ord. No.
O.1514-2006 ; Ord. No. O.1686-2009 § I; Ord. No. O.1794-2012 § II;
Ord. No. O.1860-2014 ]
a. Purchase, store and distribute all supplies, material and equipment and
contract for all services required by any department, office or agency of
the Township, except that the Department of Public Works shall be
responsible for contracts for public works and improvements;
b. Establish and enforce specifications with respect to such services,
supplies, materials and equipment;
c. Inspect and supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies,
materials and equipment and the rendition of contractual services and
determine their qualities, quantities and conformance and
specifications;
d. Have charge of any and all central storerooms and warehouses which
may hereafter be established;
e. Transfer to or between departments, offices and agencies and from or
to central stores, such supplies, materials and equipment as need
appears, and arrange for the sale of surplus or obsolete items thereof.
a. Each department, the Clerk and Tax Assessor, shall follow such
procedures and such forms for purchasing as the Business
Administrator shall proscribe. Upon request of the Business
Administrator, each department head, the Clerk and the Tax Assessor,
shall submit a complete statement of the work and labor under contract
and the materials, supplies and equipment which will be required by
the department during the ensuing year, half year or quarter year as the
Business Administrator may determine, according to the best estimate
§ 2-23.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.3
AO:31
of the department head, the Clerk and Tax Assessor. Such statement
shall be in such form and detail as the Administrator may require.
b. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(3) the Business Administrator is
hereby designated as the Contracting Agent for the Township of Edison.
Except as detailed in paragraph c below with respect to proposed
services and all extraordinary unspecifiable services, as contracting
agent for the Township, the Business Administrator may enter into
contracts on behalf of the Township for the performance of any work, or
the furnishing of any materials or supplies, the total cost of which is less
than seventeen thousand five hundred ($17,500.00) dollars. Any
contract equal to or in excess of seventeen thousand five hundred
($17,500.00) dollars shall require the approval of the Township Council.
The Contracting Agent may also authorize the refund of any license,
permit or program fee, established by this Code, which has been paid in
error. For any contract, which in the aggregate, is equal to or more than
fifteen (15%) percent of the bid threshold established by the Local
Contracts Law, the Contracting Agent or his designee shall solicit at
least two (2) competitive written quotes in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6.1.
c. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all professional services and all
extraordinary unspecifiable services as defined in the N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1
et seq., shall be subject to receipt of at least two (2) and preferably
three (3) quotations when the cost of the professional service or
extraordinary unspecifiable service is estimated to exceed five
thousand ($5,000.00) dollars, if practicable.
d. Fair and Open Process. When the cost of the professional services and
all extraordinary unspecifiable services are estimated to be seventeen
thousand five hundred ($17,500.00) dollars or more, the Purchasing
Agent will assist department heads to satisfy the requirements of the
Division of Local Government Services (DCA) regarding use of the "fair
and open" purchasing process including the following:
1. Draft request for proposals/request for quotations with criteria
award;
2. Publicize in official newspaper or website ten (10) days prior to bid
opening;
3. Publicly open and announce results;
4. Review proposals; and
5. Township Council makes public award.
e. Department heads should award or recommend award of contracts for
these two (2) processes to the lowest responsible proposal. While price
is an important characteristic of the proposal, attention must also be
directed to the following:
§ 2-24.3 EDISON CODE § 2-24.3
AO:32
1. The quality with which the proposal addresses the needs of the
Township,
2. The experience, capacity and capability of the proposal to meet the
needs of the Township as set forth in the specifications or request
for proposal.
f. Award and recommendations of award of contracts shall conform with
the provisions of:
1. Local Public Contracts Law [N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.]
2. Pay to Play laws [N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4 et seq.]
3. Applicable local ordinances of the Township of Edison, such as this
section (Purchasing Procedures) of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Edison.
g. The Business Administrator shall establish a procedure for the
purchase of any item required for immediate protection of the public
health, safety or welfare of the municipality, in accordance with the
terms of the Local Public Contracts Law, which will permit such
emergency purchases to be made for specific purposes in a manner
other than that prescribed by this section.
h. Except as the Business Administrator or such other officer as he or she
may designate may authorize in case of emergency, no purchase shall
be made and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved unless the
procedure prescribed by and pursuant to the Charter and this Code
have been followed. The Township will not be bound by any purchase or
contract made contrary to this policy and any employee or
representative of the Township who violates the policy may face
disciplinary action as well as personal liability for any costs or
obligations improperly incurred.
i. The insurance commission or such officer as they may designate shall
be in charge of the purchasing of insurance. The procedure employed
shall be by public advertisement for bids, and the contract shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder providing the broadest
coverage for the type of insurance bid. The insurance commission or
such other officer as they may designate shall draw up the
specifications for coverage. This section shall not apply to obtaining of
insurance coverage or binders when the safety or protection of the
public or the public conveyance require or the exigency of the public
service will not admit to such advertisement, in the discretion of the
insurance commission.
j. Every two (2) years and before any contract for any health insurance
(including medical coverage, dental coverage, prescription coverage
and the like), health insurance brokers and/or third party
administrators for health insurance is awarded, the Purchasing Agent
shall solicit quotes from at least five (5) health insurance providers,
§ 2-24.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.3
AO:33
§ 2-24.4. Receiving Procedure. [1999 Code § 2.20.120]
Immediately upon delivery of any purchase item, the receiving department
shall make a record thereof on a form to be approved by the Business
Administrator, and the department's acceptance of delivery shall be
certified by the department head. A voucher properly prepared and
executed by the vendor shall be submitted to the Chief Financial Officer
who shall not authorize payment unless and until he or she has first
examined a properly prepared and certified receiving report, and has
satisfied himself or herself that the items billed were properly authorized
and delivered in accordance with the purchase order or any change thereof
authorized by the Department of Administration.
§ 2-24.5. Purchase Controls. [1999 Code § 2.20.130]
All purchases made and contracts awarded for any supplies, materials or
equipment or contractual services shall be made pursuant to a written
requisition from the head of the department, office or agency whose
appropriation will be charged and the certification of the supervisor of
accounts that a sufficient unencumbered balance of appropriation is
available to pay thereof.
§ 2-24.6. Set-Aside Program for Qualified Minority, Women and/or
Veteran Businesses. [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. O.2050-2019]
brokers and/or third party administrators or provide them with copies
of the bidding specification, request for proposals or request for
qualifications as the case may be and request response to the same,
and provide the Township Council with any and all responses received.
Additionally, any contract for health insurance, health insurance
brokers and/or third party administrators for health insurance shall
require the vendor to provide a detailed list of claims and pay-outs on at
least a quarterly basis, and the same shall be provided to the Township
Council.
a. Title. The title of this section shall be "An Ordinance Establishing a
Qualified Minority-, Women-, and Veteran-Owned Business Set-Aside
Program" (hereinafter collectively referred to the "Set-Aside Program").
This section is being enacted pursuant to and in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-42 et seq.
b. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — Any agreement for the erection, repair
or alteration of any building, structure, bridge, roadway or other
improvement to real property.
CONTRACT — Any agreement for the sale of goods or for the provision
of services to the Township of Edison.
§ 2-24.3 EDISON CODE § 2-24.6
AO:34
MINORITY GROUP MEMBERS — Persons who are African-American,
Hispanic, Portuguese, Asian Americans, American Indians or Alaskan
natives.
NJSAVI — New Jersey Selective Assistance Vendor Information, a
database that identifies businesses that are registered and/or certified
as a minority/women/veteran-owned business enterprise with the State
of New Jersey, through the Division of Revenue.
QUALIFIED BUSINESS — A minority-owned enterprise, or a womenowned
enterprise, or a veteran-owned enterprise, as defined herein and
certified as such through and with the State of New Jersey Division
of Revenue, or a general contractor who hires as a subcontractor
a minority-owned, woman-owned, and/or veteran-owned business
enterprise as part of a contract award by the Township.
QUALIFIED MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — A business which
has its principal place of business in this state, is independently owned
and operated, is at least 51% owned and controlled by minority group
members and is certified as such through and with the State of New
Jersey Division of Revenue.
QUALIFIED VETERAN BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — A business which
has its principal place of business in this state, is independently owned
and operated, and is at least 51% owned and controlled by a veteran.
QUALIFIED WOMEN'S BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — A business which
has its principal place of business in this state, is independently owned
and operated, is at least 51% owned and controlled by women and is
certified as such through and with the State of New Jersey Division of
Revenue.
SET-ASIDE CONTRACTS —
SUBCONTRACT — A contract by which one agrees to render services
or to provide materials necessary for the performance of another
contract.
THOSE PROCUREMENTS — All purchases, contracts, or acquisitions
by the Township which are permitted by law.
TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Administrator and/or
his or her designee.
A contract for goods, equipment, construction, or services,
inclusive of subcontracts, which is designated as a contract for
which bids are invited and accepted only from qualified veteran
business enterprises, qualified minority business enterprises or
qualified women's business enterprises, as appropriate;
1.
A portion of a contract when that portion has been so designated;
or
2.
3. Any other purchase or procurement so designated.
§ 2-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.6
AO:35
TOWNSHIP PURCHASING AGENT — The Township Purchasing Agent
and/or his or her designee.
VETERAN — Any citizen and resident of this state now or hereafter
honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances who
served in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States or
a reserve component thereof for at least 90 days, and shall include
disabled veterans.
WOMEN'S BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — A business which has its
principal place of business in this state, is independently owned and
operated, is at least 51% owned and controlled by women and is
certified as such through and with the State of New Jersey Division of
Revenue.
c. Applicability. These provisions concerning qualified businesses'
participation in the Township of Edison's purchasing set-aside program
shall apply to contracts for goods, services and/or construction awarded
by or through the Township Purchasing Department.
d. Purpose. The purpose of this program of implementing the provisions of
the Township of Edison's qualified business set-aside program is to set
aside, or otherwise allocate, 5% of the dollar value, utilizing the prior
fiscal year as a baseline, of all of the Township's goods, services and
construction contracts, to be utilized for qualified business enterprises.
e. Goals; revisions.
1. For the fiscal year beginning January 1, 2020, and for every fiscal
year thereafter, the following goals for qualified business
participation shall serve as the initial goals for the Township of
Edison to pursue. Of the 5%, there shall be:
(a) 33% Township contract participation for qualified minorityowned
businesses.
(b) 33% Township contract participation for women-owned
businesses.
(c) 33% Township contract participation for veteran-owned
business.
2. The Mayor and Township Council may revise the goals established
herein by subsequent ordinance.
3. The above-stated percentages relate to the total dollar value,
measured from the prior fiscal year, of all Township contracting
departments and contracting agencies to be set aside for qualified
businesses, as appropriate, as goals for Township departments and
contracting agencies to achieve by the end of each fiscal year.
4. The monetary value of subcontracts awarded pursuant to this
section shall be taken into account when reviewing whether the
goals established by this section have been achieved.
§ 2-24.6 EDISON CODE § 2-24.6
AO:36
f. Good-faith efforts:
1. Efforts which are merely pro forma shall not be deemed the goodfaith
efforts necessary to generate a level of qualified business
participation sufficient to meet the goals' requirements of the
program.
2. Actions that demonstrate a good-faith effort on the part of the
Township's contracting departments and agencies may include, but
are not limited to:
(a) Notices to qualified businesses soliciting their participation in
the set-aside program.
(b) The Purchasing Agent's provision of plans, specifications and
requirements of the contract(s) to interested qualified
businesses.
(c) The Purchasing Agent's provision of an annual list of
anticipated Township purchases (approximate) by item
category, dollar amount and month of bid.
g. Effect on provisions. If a Township contract for goods, services, or
construction, which would otherwise be subject to the provisions of this
section, is or becomes subject to federal or state laws which conflict
with this program or actions thereof, federal or state law shall apply,
and the contract shall be interpreted and enforced accordingly.
h. Role of Township Administrator. In the implementation of the
Township's minority-, women-, and veteran-owned business enterprise
set-aside program and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-49,
the Township Administrator or Purchasing Agent, if so designated by
the Township Administrator, shall be responsible to do the following:
1. Make a good-faith effort to attain the goals established by the
Township's governing body pursuant to this program.
2. Designate a contract, subcontract or other means of procurement
as a set-aside contract if it is likely to receive bids from at least two
qualified businesses at a fair and reasonable price, to be
determined by the Purchasing Agent, and considering, without
limit, the budget determined to be necessary for the procurement.
3. If it is determined by the Purchasing Agent that two bids cannot be
obtained or that acceptance of the low responsible bid will result in
the payment of an unreasonable price, the Purchasing Agent may
recommend to the Township Administrator that the bids be
resolicited on an unrestricted basis.
4. Designate contracts and/or subcontracts as set-aside contracts
prior to advertisement, and notice of such designation shall be
included in the advertisement.
§ 2-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.6
AO:37
i. Certification and Compliance Officer. The Township Administrator shall
designate a Certification and Compliance Officer in the Purchasing
Department to realize the intent of this section as set forth herein. With
respect to all contracts and procurements, it shall be the Certification
and Compliance Officer's authority and responsibility to:
1. Maintain a list of eligible businesses; interact with the Department
of Finance and Purchasing Department to determine which
Township contracts should be set aside for participation herein;
oversee outreach to the qualified business enterprises; and oversee
and coordinate seminars for qualified business enterprises to
expand the number of qualified businesses eligible to participate in
this set-aside program.
2. Maintain a listing of qualified businesses in the Edison Township
area for use by the Township's departments and offices.
3. Submit semiannual reports to the Township Administrator to
document the percentage of set-aside contracts which have been
awarded to qualified businesses pursuant to the Township's setaside
program.
4. Have access to all records and files of all Township contracting
agencies and departments that relate to construction, goods and
services contracts in order to monitor and review compliance.
5. Make a written annual report to the Township Administrator
indicating the good-faith effort made by the Purchasing
Department to attain the set-aside goals set forth in this program.
Such report shall be submitted to the Township Administrator,
Mayor and Council not later than January 31 of each year, of the
previous year's activity. The Township shall publish a list of the
Township's attainments (goals) for the immediate preceding local
fiscal year, in two newspapers circulating in Middlesex County, by
March 1 of each year pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-48.
6. Ascertain, with the assistance of the Purchasing Agent, the identity
of qualified businesses in the Edison Township area.
7. Classify each business according to contract types in which the
business represents itself to have capabilities, place all classified
businesses on a solicitation list and distribute the list to the
Purchasing Agent. This list shall also include businesses within the
area of Edison Township.
8. Survey all businesses placed on the solicitation list to determine
their past and current participation level in Township contracts.
The results may be used to ascertain the contracting agency's
good-faith effort to attain the goals as established by the Township.
j. Implementation.
§ 2-24.6 EDISON CODE § 2-24.6
AO:38
1. The Township's Certification and Compliance Officer shall make
such findings, recommendations and proposals as are necessary
and appropriate to the implementation of the Township's set-aside
program. If, as a result of his or her monitoring activities, the
Certification and Compliance Officer determines that the goals set
forth in this section are not being met by the Township, the
Certification and Compliance Officer may recommend any or all of
the following actions listed in Subsection j2(a) through (c).
2. The Certification and Compliance Officer shall submit a report to
the Township Administrator setting forth the nature of the
problem(s) and any suggestions for better implementation of the
program. If the Township Administrator concludes that the
Township's qualified minority-, women-, and veteran-owned
business enterprise set-aside plan is unlikely to produce the
participation goals, he or she may recommend that the
Certification and Compliance Officer revise the Township's plan to
provide additional opportunities for qualified business
participation, such as, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Recommendations as to stronger solicitation efforts to identify
more qualified minority-, women-, and veteran-owned
businesses as potential sources of supply.
(b) Recommendations as to the elimination of extended experience
or capitalization requirements, when programmatically
feasible, to permit participation of qualified businesses in the
set-aside program.
(c) Recommendations as to publication of advertisements for bids
in more than one newspaper, e.g., minority-oriented
newspapers.
k. Certification.
1. To ensure that only qualified businesses that are owned and
controlled in both form and substance by minorities, women and
veterans, which are counted towards the goals' requirements set
forth in this section and the Township's minority business
enterprise/women's business enterprise/veteran's business
enterprise program(s), any minority- or women- or veteran-owned
business, including a joint venture, desiring to participate in the
Township's set-aside program must be certified as a legitimate
minority business enterprise/women's business enterprise/veteran
business enterprise. Such certification shall follow the State of New
Jersey's rules for being included in the NJSAVI database as set forth
herein, and/or any other New Jersey governmental entity or agency
that has qualified and certified a business as a qualified business
enterprise described herein and throughout using the same criteria
for determining a business' qualifications, and registration therein
§ 2-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.6
AO:39
shall constitute certification for the purposes of the Township's setaside
program.
2. Each qualified business owner shall submit a fully executed
certification affirming that his or her business meets all the
requirements to be a qualified business by January 1 of each year.
3. The Certification and Compliance Officer will evaluate the
submitted information to determine whether the applicant meets
the criteria for qualified minority-, women-, and/or veteran-owned
business enterprises. Prior to making a certification
recommendation to the Township Administrator, the Certification
and Compliance Officer may, in his/her discretion, request an
interview with the applicant. Failure of an applicant to comply with
requests for information or documentation may result in a
determination of certification status based on the information
supplied or a suspension of the application for certification.
4. Following certification, the Certification and Compliance Officer
may require the business to furnish additional information from
time to time in order to establish its continued eligibility for
certification.
5. Upon becoming certified, a business shall notify the Certification
and Compliance Officer if there is a change in the business that
affects its status as a qualified business, including changes in
ownership, control or management.
6. If a business is denied certification, the Township Administrator or
his or her designee shall notify the business, in writing, of the
reasons for its determination. The business may appeal the denial
to the Township, which shall conduct a hearing at which the
business shall have the opportunity to present witnesses and
documents in support of its application for certification. The
business must file its request for a hearing with the Township. No
appeals will be considered if filed later than 15 days from the date
of the notice. Businesses that are denied certification may not
reapply for certification for a period of six months from the date of
denial.
7. Businesses that have been previously certified through programs
considered by the Certification and Compliance Officer to be
similar or in concert with the Township's goals and objectives for
qualified business contractors may be granted certifications
pursuant to this plan upon approval by the Township Administrator.
8. The right of the Township Director of Finance to evaluate a bidder
or contractor's ability to satisfy financial, technical or other
criteria, separate and apart from the certification process provided
for in this program, is not altered by this section.
§ 2-24.6 EDISON CODE § 2-24.6
AO:40
9. The certification granted pursuant to this section shall entitle a
business to participate in any category of contract or procurement
for which it qualifies. The certification shall not be considered
contract- or project-specific. The Township may, but shall not be
required to, delay the award of any contract pending the appeal of
the Township Administrator's decision to deny certification.
l. Decertification.
1. Any qualified business enterprise may be decertified for the
following reasons:
(a) For providing false or misleading information to the
Certification and Compliance Officer during the certification
process.
(b) If the qualified business enterprise is no longer an ongoing
business entity.
(c) If the business entity has changed to the extent that it is no
longer owned and controlled by minorities, or women, or
veterans pursuant to the requirements of this program.
(d) For failure to report to the Township of Edison, within 10 days,
any determination of the federal government or any state
government, municipality or school board, or any department,
subdivision, agency or authority of the federal government or
any state government, municipality or school board, denying or
revoking the certification of the business as a minority-, or
women-, or veteran-owned business enterprise.
(e) For failure to maintain registration with the State of New
Jersey's SAVI database, or any other accepted certifier.
2. Upon review of the documentation concerning decertification, the
Certification and Compliance Officer shall make a recommendation
promptly to the Township Administrator concerning decertification,
whereby the Township Administrator shall determine whether the
business shall be decertified, and shall notify the business of such
decision in writing. The business may appeal the decision to the
Township in accordance with the provisions above. Reasons for
decertifying a business shall be expressed by certified mail. The
decertified business may not reapply for certification for a period of
time to be determined by the Township Administrator and/or his or
her designee, but in no event longer than a period of one year.
m. Re-certification. On a yearly basis, a qualified business shall submit any
information requested by the Certification and Compliance Officer
annually, to ascertain whether such business is still a qualified business
pursuant to this program. If it is determined that the annual submission
of information has changed to such an extent that the qualified
business' status has changed, affecting the certified status, the
§ 2-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.6
AO:41
Certification and Compliance Officer may recommend that the business
be required to reapply for certification.
n. Certification standards. The Certification and Compliance Officer shall
undertake the efforts necessary to educate businesses that wish to be
certified as a minority-, women-, or veteran-owned business that in
order to be certified the business must be able to comply with the
following conditions:
1. Eligible minority business enterprises, women's business
enterprises, or veteran business enterprises under this program
shall be independent businesses. There shall be conclusive
evidence that the ownership and control of such business is real,
substantial and continuing and shall go beyond the pro forma
ownership of the business as reflected in its ownership documents.
The minority business enterprise/women business enterprise/
veteran business enterprise owners shall enjoy the customary
interests of ownership. They shall share in the risks and profits
commensurate with their interest of ownership. Recognition of the
business as a separate entity for tax or corporate purposes is not
necessarily sufficient for recognition as a minority business
enterprise/women's business enterprise/veteran's business
enterprise. To determine the legitimacy of an independent minority
business enterprise/women's business enterprise/veteran business
enterprise, the Certification and Compliance Officer shall consider
all relevant factors concerning ownership and control of business
assets, including, but not limited to, the date the business was
established, whether its resources for the work of the contract are
adequate and the degree to which financial, equipment-leasing and
other relationships with nonminority firms vary from industry
practice.
2. The minority business enterprise/women's business enterprise/
veteran business enterprise owners shall have the power to direct
or cause management and policy directions of the firm/business, as
well as make major decisions on matters of management, policy
and operations. The firm shall not be subject to any restrictions
limiting the customary discretions of the minority or women or
veteran owners. This shall include provisions in bylaws,
partnership agreements or charter requirements for cumulative
voting rights or otherwise that prevent the minority or women or
veteran owners, without the cooperation or vote of any owner who
is not a minority or woman or veteran, from making a business
decision of the firm.
3. Where nonminority owners of the firm are disproportionately
responsible for the firm's operation, then, by the standards of this
program, the firm is not controlled by minorities or women or
veterans and shall not be considered a qualified business within the
program's meaning.
§ 2-24.6 EDISON CODE § 2-24.6
AO:42
4. In establishing a status of a legitimate minority- and/or womenowned
and/or veteran-owned business, all securities which
constitute ownership and/or control of a corporation shall be held
directly by minorities or women or veterans. Securities held in trust
or by any guardian for a minor shall not be considered as held by a
minority and/or woman and/or veteran in determining the
ownership and/or control of a corporation.
5. Capital or expertise contributed by minority and/or women and/or
veteran owners to acquire their interest in the firm shall be real
and substantial. A promise to contribute capital, a note payable to
the firm or its owners who are not minorities, or the mere
participation as an employee, rather than as a manager, shall be
examples of insufficient contributions.
6. In determining eligibility as a minority business enterprise/
women's business enterprise/veteran business enterprise business,
in addition to the above standards, the Certification and
Compliance Officer shall give special consideration to the following
circumstances:
(a) Minority business enterprises/women's business enterprises/
veteran business enterprises which are newly formed and
whose ownership and/or control have changed since the date
and/or time of the advertisement of the contract shall be
closely monitored to determine the reasons and the
relationship between the timing, formation and/or change in
the firm.
(b) Careful scrutiny and review of previous and/or continuing
employer/employee relationships between or among present
owners shall be conducted to ensure that the employer/owner
has the management responsibilities pursuant to this program.
(c) Any relationship between a minority business enterprise/
women's business enterprise/veteran business enterprise and
a non-minority-owned business having interest in the minority/
women/veteran-owned business shall be carefully monitored to
determine if the interest of the minority/women/veteran-owned
business enterprise conflicts with the ownership and control
requirements of this program.
7. Joint ventures may be eligible to compete as minority/women's/
veteran-owned business enterprises under this program, provided
that the qualified business enterprise partner of the joint venture
meets the eligibility standards of a minority/women's/veteranowned
business enterprise set forth herein and the qualified
partner shares in the ownership, control and management
responsibilities, the risks and profits of the joint venture and the
qualified business enterprise partner is responsible for a clearly
defined portion of the work to be performed.
§ 2-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.6
AO:43
§ 2-25. DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
§ 2-25.1. Personnel Officer; Appointment; Compensation. [1999
Code § 2.20.140; Ord. No. O.1548-2007 ]
There shall be a Division of Human Resources within the Department of
Administration. The head of the Division shall be the Township Human
Resources Officer. Prior to his or her appointment he or she shall have had
training in responsible personnel administration. The compensation of the
Township Human Resources Officer shall be such sum, annually, as shall be
fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-25.2. Human Resources Officer; Duties. [1999 Code § 2.20.150;
Ord. No. O.1548-2007 ; Ord. No. O.1793-2012 § 2]
The Township Human Resources Officer shall:
o. Violations and penalties.
1. When the Township determines, after hearing, that a business has
been classified as a qualified business enterprise on the basis of
false information knowingly supplied by the business and has been
awarded a contract to which it would not otherwise have been
entitled, the Township may, in accordance with the provisions
afforded to it by N.J.S.A. 40A:11-47:
(a) Assess against the business any difference between the
contract and what the Township's cost would have been if the
contract had not been awarded in accordance with the
provisions of this section;
(b) In addition to the amount due under Subsection o1(a), assess
against the business a penalty in an amount of not more than
10% of the amount of the contract involved; and
(c) Order the business ineligible to transact any business with the
Township for a period to be determined by the Township, which
shall not exceed five years, per N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4. Prior to any
final determination, assessment or order under this section,
the Township shall afford the business an opportunity for a
hearing on the reasons for the imposition of the penalties set
forth in Subsections o1(a), (b) or (c) of this section.
2. The Township may file an action to enforce a civil penalty imposed
by this section providing for its collection or enforcement by a civil
proceeding, which action shall be brought as a summary action in
the Law Division of the Superior Court pursuant to New Jersey
Court Rule 4:67.
a. Assist in the recruitment of qualified persons, for the offices and
positions in the Township government;
§ 2-24.6 EDISON CODE § 2-25.2
AO:44
§ 2-26. OFFICE OF CABLE TELEVISION.
§ 2-26.1. Created; Duties; Fee for Tapes. [1999 Code § 2.20.160]
b. Prepare and recommend to the Business Administrator such rules as he
or she may find necessary, appropriate or desirable to improve
personnel administration within the government;
c. Prepare, install and maintain a job classification plan based upon the
duties, authority and responsibility of offices, employments and
positions in the government;
d. Prepare and maintain a pay plan based upon such job classification;
e. Establish and maintain a roster of all persons in the government, which
shall set forth the significant facts relating to personnel administration,
including health benefit records for all active and retired employees. A
report including the health benefit received and the coverage type for
all active and retired employees shall be provided to the Township
Council on an annual basis.
f. Establish and develop in-service training programs for persons in the
Township government;
g. Maintain a continuous study of the operation and effect of personnel
methods and practices in the Township, including hours and days of
work, leaves of absence, sick leave, vacation, pension and retirement
provisions, and report his or her findings and recommendations to the
Business Administrator.
h. Maintain the official records of all compensated absences included: sick
days, vacation days, personal days, disability or medical leave either
used or earned or accumulated. These records shall be submitted to the
Finance Department for formal verification with a report of that
verification being supplied to the Mayor and Township Council on an
annual basis.
i. Maintain copies of all individual employment agreements indicating the
terms of employment, salary and benefits paid to the employee. All such
agreements shall be reviewed by the Department of Law for compliance
with applicable State law concerning contract procurement. Copies of
all such agreements shall be provided to the Township Clerk and
Township Council.
a. There is created within the Department of Administration an Office of
Cable Television under the supervision of the Mayor and the Business
Administrator who shall operate Edison TV and be responsible for cable
television matters of the Township.
b. The Office of Cable Television shall provide for the taping and
broadcasting of all meetings of the Township Council, subject to the
rules of the Council. The Office of Cable Television shall provide for the
§ 2-25.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-26.1
AO:45
§ 2-27. MAYOR'S AUTHORITY TO SUPERVISE THE DIVISIONS OF
FIRE AND POLICE.
§ 2-27.1. Director of Public Safety; Appropriate Authority. [1999
Code § 2.20.170; Ord. No. O.1607-2008 § 5; Ord. No. O.1722-2009 ;
Ord. No. O.1865-2014 ]
Within the Department of Administration there shall be a Division of Fire
and Division of Police. Any and all functions, duties or responsibilities which
are assigned to the Director of Public Safety by this Code shall be assigned
to the Mayor. The Mayor shall be designated as the "appropriate authority"
as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The Mayor shall promulgate and adopt
such rules and regulations of the government of the Division of Police and
for the discipline of its members.
§ 2-28. DIVISION OF POLICE.
Source history: 1999 Code §§ 2.20.180, 2.20.190, 2.20.200, 2.96.010,
2.96.020, Ord. No. O.1607-2008, Ord. No. O.1722-2009, Ord. No.
O.1865-2014.
§ 2-28.1. Established; Police Chief; Appointment. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014 ]
The Police Force heretofore established by ordinance is continued as the
Division of Police and is subject to all laws and ordinances relating to a
municipal Police Department. The head of the Division shall be the Chief of
Police, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be the executive head
of the Division.
taping and broadcast of the public meetings of the following boards,
bodies and agencies:
1. The Edison Housing Authority;
2. The Edison Free Public Library;
3. Township of Edison Planning Board;
4. Township of Edison Zoning Board of Adjustment;
5. Township of Edison Insurance Commission.
c. The Office of Cable Television shall provide for the broadcast of the
public meetings of the Edison Board of Education and shall coordinate
with the Board regarding same.
d. There is established a fee in the amount of fifty ($50.00) dollars per
tape for a copy of any programming broadcast on Edison TV. The Edison
TV manager will submit a monthly report on all programming aired on
Edison TV to Council and the cable committee.
§ 2-26.1 EDISON CODE § 2-28.2
AO:46
§ 2-28.2. Personnel of Division of Police. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014;
Ord. No. O.1920-2016]
§ 2-28.3. Functions of Division of Police. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
The Division of Police shall, within the Township, preserve the peace,
protect life and property, prevent and detect crime. It shall have all the
functions, powers and duties prescribed by law for a municipal Police
Department, generally, or by any provision of the Charter and ordinances
relating to the Township Police Department, Chief of Police or the officers
and persons of the Department.
§ 2-28.4. Police Authority. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
a. The maximum complement of the Division of Police in the Township is
as follows:
1. One (1) Chief of Police; and
2. Two (2) Deputy Chiefs; and
3. Eight (8) Captains of Police; and
4. Nineteen (19) Lieutenants of Police; and
5. Thirty-five (35) Sergeants of Police; and
6. One hundred forty-five (145) Patrol Officers.
b. The actual complement shall be as determined to be needed by the
Mayor and shall be appointed by the Mayor, from time to time, all of
whom shall act and be known as Police Officers of the Township.
a. The Police Force is established by authority of the Township ordinance,
subsection 2-28.1 of this chapter. The Police Force is continued as to the
Division Police and is subject to all laws and ordinances relating to a
Municipal Police Department. The head of the Division shall be the
Police Chief.
b. Authority. The power and duties of the Police Department are
established by authority of subsection 2-28.3. The Division of Police
shall, within the Township, preserve the peace, protect life and
property, and prevent and detect crime. It shall have all the functions,
powers and duties described by law for a municipal Police Department
generally, or by any provision of the chapter and ordinances relating to
the Township Police Department, Chief of Police or the officers and men
and women of the Department.
1. Preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders against the penal laws and ordinances effective within
the Township, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections, disburse
unlawful or dangerous assemblages and preserve order at all
elections and public meetings and assemblages;
§ 2-28.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-28.4
AO:47
§ 2-28.5. Rules and Regulations for Governance. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014]
The appropriate authority as established in this chapter, and in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, shall promulgate rules and regulations for the
governance of the Police Division and for the discipline of its members.
§ 2-28.6. Executive Office. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
The Chief of Police shall be the executive officer of the Division of Police.
§ 2-28.7. Chief of Police. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
The Police Chief shall exercise any and all rights, authorities, powers and
responsibilities reserved solely to the Chief of Police as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 and other rights, authorities, powers and responsibilities not
reserved solely to the Chief of Police by statute as delegated by the Mayor.
2. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the use of streets by vehicles and persons, and make
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the Charter, ordinance
and general law, for such a purpose;
3. Remove all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other public
places; and inspect and observe all places of public amusement and
assemblage and all places of business requiring any State or
municipal license or permit;
4. Provide proper Police attendance and protection at fires;
5. Enforce the laws and ordinances in effect within the Township and
prevent the violation of them by any person; and apprehend and
arrest all persons legally charged with the violations of any law or
ordinance;
6. Provide for the attendance of its Police Officers or civilian
employees in court as necessary for the prosecution and trial of
persons charged with crime and other violations of the law, and
cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting
authorities of Federal, State and County governments;
7. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the Police
efficiency of the members of the Division.
8. Make, administer and enforce, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations for the government of the force and for the disposition,
conduct and discipline of the members of the Division, for this
purpose, the Mayor shall be the appropriate authority to
promulgate same.
§ 2-28.4 EDISON CODE § 2-29
AO:48
§ 2-29. ENTRY LEVEL AND PROMOTIONAL CRITERIA.
Source history: 1999 Code §§ 2.96.380, 2.96.390, 2.96.400, 2.96.405,
2.96.410, 2.96.420, 2.96.430, 2.96.450, 2.96.460, 2.96.470, 2.96.480,
Ordinance Nos. O.1314-2004, O.1390-2004, O.1606-2008, O.1607-2008,
O.1651-2008, O.1676-2008, O.1722-2009, O.1808-2012, O.1865-2014.
§ 2-29.1. Findings. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
The Township Council finds that promulgation of appropriate and consistent
standards for the hiring and promotion of Police Officers serves the public
interest in the following ways:
§ 2-29.2. Entry Level Criteria Established. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
a. The public is informed and made aware of the criteria pursuant to
which such appointments are made.
b. Police Officers currently serving the Township can properly prepare
themselves to be eligible for promotion to the next rank.
c. Persons wishing to apply for positions as Police Officers are able to
learn and prepare to meet the hiring criteria.
a. Applicants for employment as Police Officers must meet the following
qualifications:
1. Be a citizen of the United States and a resident of New Jersey by
the date of appointment;
2. Be a high school graduate or equivalent between eighteen (18) and
thirty-five (35) years of age;
3. Have a good moral character and not been convicted of criminal
offense involving moral turpitude;
4. Be psychologically and physically fit to perform all the duties of a
Police Officer;
5. Be able to read, write and speak the English language
conversantly;
6. Possess a valid New Jersey driver's license by date of appointment;
7. Shall possess a minimum of sixty (60) credits from an accredited
college or university. In lieu of the minimum of sixty (60) college
credit requirement, an applicant (i) shall have completed two (2)
years of active military service with an honorable discharge; or (ii)
shall be PTC (New Jersey Police Training Commission) certified or
(iii) have been a Police Officer in good standing for a period of at
least one (1) year in another jurisdiction.
§ 2-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.2
AO:49
§ 2-29.3. Entry Level Officers. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014; Ord. No.
O.1935-2016]
8. Be of sound body and good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New
Jersey as to his/her eligibility;
9. Meet such other requirements as are established in the police rules
and regulations;
10. Be physically capable of meeting the mandated firearms
qualifications mandated by the Attorney General's guidelines.
b. No person shall be hired, or rehired, if that person has ever pled guilty
or been convicted of an indictable offense in this State, or any state; or
received the benefit of pre-trial intervention, or an equivalent
diversionary program, arising out of an indictable offense, in this or any
other state. No person shall be hired or rehired, if that person has pled
guilty, been found guilty, or enrolled in any diversionary program
arising from any disorderly or petty disorderly persons offense if such
offense involves moral turpitude.
a. Application.
1. All applicants shall complete a detailed application which will be
thoroughly investigated. Failure to pass the background
investigation will disqualify an applicant. Examples areas of
concern which can lead to disqualification are:
(a) Criminal history;
(b) Continuous poor driving record;
(c) Falsification of any information required of the applicant (given
at any time);
(d) Other negative information uncovered by investigators.
2. Final determination as to passage or failure of the background
investigation will be made by the Chief of Police or his designee.
b. The Mayor shall employ one (1) of the following two (2) procedures for
appointing to the position of entry level Police Officer. The Mayor
reserves the right to utilize either or both of the following procedures in
whatever order of preference he/she chooses. All applicants shall be
charged a nonrefundable fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars and
reimburse the Township for any fees for criminal background checks or
fingerprinting. These fees can be waived by the Mayor on proof of
indigence.
§ 2-29.2 EDISON CODE § 2-29.3
AO:50
OPTION 1.
1. Police Training Procedure: This procedure will allow the Mayor
to limit applicants to person(s) who are Police Officers in good
standing in another jurisdiction; or are PTC (New Jersey Police
Training Commission) certified; or who are presently attending
a certified New Jersey police training school. In such case, the
following selection criteria shall be used:
(a) An application committee designated by the Mayor, which
shall include at least the Chief of Police and the Township
Administrator, shall review the applications.
(b) Applicants who are deemed eligible by the application
committee shall undergo an oral interview by a review
committee designated by the Mayor, which shall include at
least the Chief of Police. Applicants who pass the oral
interview may move onto the next phase.
(c) A background check will be conducted on the number of the
proposed candidates to be hired plus fifty (50%) percent of the
proposed number of candidates to be hired. Those passing the
background check are eligible for the next phase.
(d) The review committee selected candidates shall undergo a
medical and psychological examination, which shall be
conducted by a licensed physician and licensed psychologist
selected by and paid by the Township.
(e) The applicant passing the aforesaid examinations may be
selected by the Mayor to fill Police Officer vacancies, provided
that they have completed and received PTC certification or
are a Police Officer in good standing at the time of
appointment. The Mayor shall make the final appointment
from the list of candidates interviewed utilizing the "Rule of
Three."
(f) New appointees hired under this procedure will serve a
probationary period of one (1) year as required by the Division
of Police Rules and Regulations which shall begin on the first
day of employment.
OPTION 2.
1. The Township may establish a list of qualified applicants for the
position of Police Officer for those persons not qualified to be
appointed pursuant to Option 1 above, in accordance with the
following procedure:
(a) A written test to be administered by a valid and reliable
outside CS testing agency or testing company with a minimum
of five (5) years experience in the design and administration
of Police Officer hiring and promotional testing. Applicants
must achieve a grade of seventy (70%) percent or higher to be
considered for the next phase.
§ 2-29.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.3
AO:51
(b) All candidates must take a physical agility exam consistent
with a Police Officer's job description. The agility exam shall
be graded based upon a testing rubric established by the
Police Chief.
(c) The final score shall consist of sixty (60%) percent of the
written test score and forty (40%) percent of the physical
agility test score for a total of one hundred (100) points.
(d) Applicants that have served with the Edison Police Auxiliary
for a period of at least four (4) years prior to the
commencement of the testing procedure shall have five (5)
points added to their score.
(e) Applicants who are bone fide Edison residents on the date of
the examination shall have five (5) points added to their score.
(f) All eligible applicants shall undergo an oral interview by a
review committee designated by the Mayor, which shall
include at least the Chief of Police. Applicants who pass the
oral interview may move onto the next phase.
(g) A background check will be conducted on the number of the
proposed candidates to be hired plus fifty (50%) percent of the
proposed number of candidates to be hired. Those passing the
background check are eligible for the next phase.
(h) The review committee selected candidates shall undergo a
medical and psychological examination, which shall be
conducted by a licensed physician and licensed psychologist
select by and paid by the Township.
(i) The applicant passing the aforesaid examinations may be
selected by the Mayor to fill Police Officer vacancies. The
Mayor shall make the final appointment from the list
candidates interviewed utilizing the "Rule of Three."
(j) New appointees selected by Option 2 will be required to
attend Police Academy and serve a one (1) year probationary
period which shall begin the first day of employment following
graduation from the Police Academy.
c. A list with the rankings of the candidates will be certified by the
Township Clerk. The list will be in force for two (2) years from the date
that it is certified and a new list shall be established within ninety (90)
days of the expiration of any list. The list shall not be extended.
d. All applicants shall be charged a nonrefundable fee of fifty ($50.00)
dollars and any fees borne by Edison for criminal background checks,
fingerprinting and the like. An applicant who can establish to the
satisfaction of the Mayor that he or she is indigent will have the fee
waived.
§ 2-29.3 EDISON CODE § 2-29.4
AO:52
§ 2-29.4. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Subsection 2-29.4 was reserved by Ord. No. O.1865-2014.
§ 2-29.5. Promotional Criteria; Patrol Officer to Sergeant. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014]
All promotions from Patrol Officer to Sergeant shall be made pursuant to
the following examination criteria, which shall consist of one hundred (100)
total points:
a. Qualifications. A candidate must have completed a minimum of seven
(7) years of service as a Patrol Officer with the Edison Police
Department on the date of the written examination.
b. Written Test.
1. The test shall be drafted specifically for the Edison Police
Department which shall be designed and administered by a valid
and reliable outside testing agency or testing company with a
minimum of five (5) years experience in the design and
administration of Police Officer hiring and promotional testing.
2. Study guides will be made available prior to the examination.
3. The written test shall constitute seventy-five (75%) percent of the
Officer's score. Only those candidates who achieve a score of
seventy-five (75%) percent or higher will be allowed to move to the
next phase.
4. The testing agency shall place the names and grades of the passing
candidates into a sealed envelope and placed with the Township
Administrator. At the end of the process, the Township
Administrator shall submit the sealed envelope to the Chief of
Police.
c. Oral Test. The oral test shall constitute fifteen (15%) percent of the
Officer's score and shall be conducted by the Command Staff, which
shall include the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, and Captains, who shall
rate the candidates on a form developed by the Chief of Police. The
Command Staff shall not discuss their evaluations with other Command
Staff members. The Chief of Police and Deputy Chief shall remove the
highest and lowest scores of each candidate and average the remaining
scores.
d. Veterans. Anyone who 1) is a veteran as defined in N.J.S.A. 11A:5-1(b);
2) who has a minimum of two (2) years service; and 3) has been
honorably discharged, shall receive 1 point for said service.
e. College Credit. Anyone who possess a Bachelors degree or higher shall
receive 0.5 points.
§ 2-29.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.5
AO:53
f. Seniority. Points will be given for fully completed years of service on the
Edison Police Department as of the announced closing date for
eligibility to take the written test as follows:
Years Points
08-10 0.5
11-12 1.0
13-14 1.5
15-16 2.0
17-18 2.5
19-20 3.0
g. Disciplinary History.
1. If a candidate has no disciplinary history in the ten (10) years prior
to the date of the scoring of the examination, the candidate shall
receive five and one-half (5.5) points.
2. If a candidate has two (2) written reprimands or three (3)
suspension days or less in the ten (10) years prior to the date of the
scoring of the examination, the candidate shall receive two and
one-half (2.5) points. If a candidate has any combination of the
above listed disciplinary actions, the candidate will receive zero (0)
points.
3. If a candidate has one (1) discipline of four (4) suspension days or
more; more than three (3) written reprimands; or a demotion in
rank in the ten (10) years prior to the date of the scoring of the
examination, said candidate shall receive zero (0) points.
h. Compiling the Ranking List of Candidates.
1. The Chief of Police shall obtain from the Township Administrator
the sealed envelope which contains the results of the written test.
2. The Chief of Police and the Deputy Chief shall compute the scores
and issue the list of rankings.
3. The Chief of Police shall maintain the scores and all evaluation
sheets until the next promotional test is conducted.
i. Appointment to Position.
1. Vacancies shall be filled utilizing the "Rule of Three." Should the
scoring result in a tie in any position but the first rank, the list shall
be expanded to include all those candidates eligible in those
positions. If there is a tie in the number one (1) position, all of those
candidates will be included on the list; however, if there is also a tie
in a lower rank necessary to establish the "Rule of Three," all said
candidates will be included to establish the "Rule of Three."
§ 2-29.5 EDISON CODE § 2-29.5
AO:54
§ 2-29.6. Promotional Criteria; Sergeant to Lieutenant. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014]
2. A review committee designated by the Mayor, which shall include
at least the Chief of Police, shall review the list compromising the
candidates contained in the "Rule of Three" and issue
recommendations to the Mayor.
3. The Mayor shall appoint the candidate pursuant to the "Rule of
Three."
j. Duration of List of Candidates.
1. Upon the completion of the ranking of candidates, the list will be
certified by the Township Clerk.
2. The list will be in force for two (2) years from the date it is certified
and a new list shall be established within ninety (90) days of the
expiration of any list. The list shall not be extended.
k. Miscellaneous.
1. Violation of any Edison Police Department rules and regulations,
departmental policy and procedure or violation of any State or
Federal statute occurring after the list is certified may result in the
candidate being removed from the promotional list or having his or
her position lowered on the list. If a candidate is lowered on the list,
the procedure utilized shall be consistent with paragraph g of this
subsection.
2. The removal of a candidate, pursuant to paragraph k1 of this
subsection will be at the ultimate discretion of the Mayor.
a. Qualifications.
1. The candidate must have completed a minimum of two (2) years
service in grade as Sergeant in the Edison Police Department to be
eligible for promotion to Lieutenant.
2. (a) Each candidate for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant shall
take a written examination drafted specifically for the Edison
Police Department which shall be designed and administered
by a valid and reliable outside testing agency or testing
company with a minimum of five (5) years experience in the
design and administration of Police Officer hiring and
promotional testing. Only those candidates who achieve a
score of seventy-five (75%) percent or higher will be allowed to
move to the next phase.
(b) The testing agency shall place the names and grades of the
passing candidates into a sealed envelope and placed with the
Township Administrator. At the end of the process, the
§ 2-29.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.6
AO:55
Township Administrator shall submit the sealed envelope to
the Chief of Police.
3. The oral test shall be conducted by the Command Staff, which shall
include the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief and Captains, who shall
rate the candidates on a form developed by the Chief of Police. The
Command Staff shall not discuss their evaluations with other
Command Staff members. The Chief of Police and Deputy Chief
shall remove the highest and lowest scores of each candidate and
average the remaining scores.
4. The final score shall consist of the written examination score fifty
(50%) percent and the oral examination score forty (40%) percent.
Candidates will receive one-half (0.5) point for each full year of
time in grade as a Sergeant in the Edison Police Department to a
maximum of five (5) points.
5. Disciplinary History.
(a) If a candidate has no disciplinary history in the ten (10) years
prior to the date of the scoring of the examination, the
candidate shall receive five (5.0) points.
(b) If a candidate has two (2) written reprimands or three (3)
suspension days or less in the ten (10) years prior to the date of
the scoring of the examination, the candidate shall receive two
and one-half (2.5) points. If a candidate has any combination of
the above listed disciplinary actions, the candidate will receive
zero (0) points.
(c) If a candidate has one (1) discipline of four (4) suspension days
or more; more than three (3) written reprimands; or a
demotion in rank in the ten (10) years prior to the date of the
scoring of the examination, said candidate shall receive zero
(0) points.
b. Compiling the Ranking List of Candidates.
1. The Chief of Police shall obtain from the Township Administrator
the sealed envelope which contains the results of the written test.
2. The Chief of Police and the Deputy Chief shall compute the scores
and issue the list of rankings.
3. The Chief of Police shall maintain the scores and all evaluation
sheets until the next promotional test is conducted.
c. Appointment to Position.
1. Vacancies shall be filled utilizing the "Rule of Three." Should the
scoring result in a tie in any position but the first rank, the list shall
be expanded to include all those candidates eligible in those
positions. If there is a tie in the number one (1) position, all of those
§ 2-29.6 EDISON CODE § 2-29.6
AO:56
§ 2-29.7. Promotional Criteria; Lieutenant to Captain. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014]
candidates will be included on the list; however, if there is also a tie
in a lower rank necessary to establish the "Rule of Three," all said
candidates will be included to establish the "Rule of Three."
2. A review committee designated by the Mayor, which shall include
at least the Chief of Police, shall review the list compromising the
candidates contained in the "Rule of Three" and issue
recommendations to the Mayor.
3. The Mayor shall appoint the candidate pursuant to the "Rule of
Three."
d. Duration of List of Candidates.
1. Upon the completion of the ranking of candidates, the list will be
certified by the Township Clerk.
2. The list will be in force for two (2) years from the date it is certified
and a new list shall be established within ninety (90) days of the
expiration of any list. The list shall not be extended.
e. Miscellaneous.
1. Violation of any Edison Police Department rules and regulations,
departmental policy and procedure or violation of any State or
Federal statute occurring after the list is certified may result in the
candidate being removed from the promotional list or having his or
her position lowered on the list. If a candidate is lowered on the list,
the procedure utilized shall be consistent with paragraph a5 of this
subsection.
2. The removal of a candidate, pursuant to paragraph e1 of this
subsection will be at the ultimate discretion of the Mayor.
a. Qualifications.
1. The candidate must have completed a minimum of two (2) years
service in grade as Lieutenant in the Edison Police Department to
be eligible for promotion to Captain.
2. (a) Each candidate for promotion to the rank of Captain shall take
a written examination drafted specifically for the Edison Police
Department which shall be designed and administered by a
valid and reliable outside testing agency or testing company
with a minimum of five (5) years experience in the design and
administration of Police Officer hiring and promotional testing.
Only those candidates who achieve a score of seventy-five
(75%) percent or higher will be allowed to move to the next
phase.
§ 2-29.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.7
AO:57
(b) The testing agency shall place the names and grades of the
passing candidates into a sealed envelope and placed with the
Township Administrator. At the end of the process, the
Township Administrator shall submit the sealed envelope to
the Chief of Police.
3. The oral test shall be conducted by the Command Staff, which shall
include the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief and Captains, who shall
rate the candidates on a form developed by the Chief of Police. The
Command Staff shall not discuss their evaluations with other
Command Staff members. The Chief of Police and Deputy Chief
shall remove the highest and lowest scores of each candidate and
average the remaining scores.
4. The final score shall consist of the written examination score thirty
(30%) percent and the oral examination score sixty (60%) percent.
Candidates will receive one-half point (0.5) for each full year of
time in grade as a Lieutenant in the Edison Police Department to a
maximum of five (5) points.
5. Disciplinary History.
(a) If a candidate has no disciplinary history in the ten (10) years
prior to the date of the scoring of the examination, the
candidate shall receive five (5.0) points.
(b) If a candidate has two (2) written reprimands or three (3)
suspension days or less in the ten (10) years prior to the date of
the scoring of the examination, the candidate shall receive two
and one-half (2.5) points. If a candidate has any combination of
the above listed disciplinary actions, the candidate will receive
zero (0) points.
(c) If a candidate has one (1) discipline of four (4) suspension days
or more; more than three (3) written reprimands; or a
demotion in rank in the ten (10) years prior to the date of the
scoring of the examination, said candidate shall receive zero
(0) points.
b. Compiling the Ranking List of Candidates.
1. The Chief of Police shall obtain from the Township Administrator
the sealed envelope which contains the results of the written test.
2. The Chief of Police and the Deputy Chief shall compute the scores
and issue the list of rankings.
3. The Chief of Police shall maintain the scores and all evaluation
sheets until the next promotional test is conducted.
c. Appointment to Position.
§ 2-29.7 EDISON CODE § 2-29.7
AO:58
§ 2-29.8. Promotional Criteria; Deputy Chief of Police. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014]
§ 2-29.9. Promotional Criteria; Chief of Police. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014]
1. Vacancies shall be filled utilizing the "Rule of Three." Should the
scoring result in a tie in any position but the first rank, the list shall
be expanded to include all those candidates eligible in those
positions. If there is a tie in the number one (1) position, all of those
candidates will be included on the list; however, if there is also a tie
in a lower rank necessary to establish the "Rule of Three," all said
candidates will be included to establish the "Rule of Three."
2. A review committee designated by the Mayor, which shall include
at least the Chief of Police, shall review the list compromising the
candidates contained in the "Rule of Three" and issue
recommendations to the Mayor.
3. The Mayor shall appoint the candidate pursuant to the "Rule of
Three."
d. Duration of List of Candidates.
1. Upon the completion of the ranking of candidates, the list will be
certified by the Township Clerk.
2. The list will be in force for two (2) years from the date it is certified
and a new list shall be established within ninety (90) days of the
expiration of any list. The list shall not be extended.
e. Miscellaneous.
1. Violation of any Edison Police Department rules and regulations,
departmental policy and procedure or violation of any State or
Federal statute occurring after the list is certified may result in the
candidate being removed from the promotional list or having his or
her position lowered on the list. If a candidate is lowered on the list,
the procedure utilized shall be consistent with paragraph a5 of this
subsection.
2. The removal of a candidate, pursuant to paragraph e1 of this
subsection will be at the ultimate discretion of the Mayor.
a. Any individual, officer or candidate to be promoted to the position of
Deputy Chief of Police shall have served in the position of Captain for a
period of at least two (2) years or Lieutenant for a period of at least four
(4) years in a permanent capacity in the Edison Police.
b. The Chief of Police shall give his written recommendations to the
Mayor.
c. The Mayor shall select the Deputy Chief of Police.
§ 2-29.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.9
AO:59
§ 2-29.10. Conflict of Interest. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
For the purposes of the Command Staff review, if any member of the
Command Staff or the Chief of Police has a family member who is a
candidate for promotion, said individual shall be recused from the process
for that round of oral testing which so affect the Command Staff personnel.
Family member is defined in this section as father, mother, brother, sister,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son, daughter, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, or any person living under the roof of a
Command Staff member.
§ 2-29.11. Testing Schedule — Promotional. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
Pursuant to the subsections of this section, at the discretion of the Director
of Public Safety, promotional testing shall be conducted in two (2) year
cycles. Make-up tests shall not be permitted for any reason; except that a
make-up test will be permitted for those employees who meet the specific
promotional criteria for the original test, are serving active military, and
are unavailable to take the promotional test due to deployment or other
assignment due to official military service. If it becomes necessary to hold a
make-up exam, the test will be held on October 1st, or the first business day
following October 1st, in the year following the original promotional test.
§ 2-29.12. Appointment of Retired or Former Members of the
Division of Police. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
No person who has previously retired or resigned from the Edison Division
of police shall be reappointed in rank by the Director of Public Safety
without the prior approval of Mayor and the Township Council.
§ 2-29.13. Computerized Criminal History Checks. [Ord. No.
O.1865-2014]
The Division of Police shall on the request of any of the Township's volunteer
first aid squads or the Senior Outreach Service, conduct a computerized
criminal history check of perspective members from the State Bureau of
Investigation (SBI) in accordance with N.J.S.A. 53:1-20.6 and N.J.A.C.
13:59-1.1 et seq. All such criminal history checks shall be used only for
the purpose of the perspective membership application and for no other
purpose in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq.
a. Any individual, officer or candidate to be promoted to the position of
Chief of Police shall have served in the position of Deputy Chief of Police
or Captain for a period of at least two (2) years or Lieutenant for a
period of at least four (4) years in a permanent capacity in the Edison
Police.
b. The Mayor shall select the Chief of Police.
§ 2-29.9 EDISON CODE § 2-29.14
AO:60
§ 2-29.14. Criminal Offenses. [Ord. No. O.1865-2014]
Any Police Officer who pleads guilty, or is found guilty of any indictable
offense, in this or any other state; or of a disorderly persons offense in this
or any other state involving moral turpitude, or enrolled in a diversionary
program such as pre-trial intervention, shall forfeit his/her position as a
Police Officer upon entry of a judgment of conviction or enrollment into a
diversionary program.
§ 2-30. POLICE FIREARMS.
§ 2-30.1. Disposition of Firearms. [1999 Code § 2.96.490; Ord. No.
O.1809-2012; Ord. No. O.1818-2013]
§ 2-31. POLICE EXTRA DUTY EMPLOYMENT.
a. Definitions. As used in this section:
FIREARM — Means a firearm as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1 and
includes an ammunition used in that firearm.
REPLACEMENT — Means the act of replacing the firearm assigned to
a member of the Township's Police Department with another firearm.
b. Except as provided in paragraphs c and d below, any firearm replaced
by the Edison Township Police Department shall be collected from the
member of the Police Division to which it was assigned and shall be
destroyed. The Edison Police Division shall not trade in or sell firearms
which are replaced for any purpose.
c. Paragraph b shall not apply to firearms that are sold or otherwise
conveyed by the Edison Police Division:
1. To another law enforcement agency in the State; or
2. Donated to a legitimate museum for historical purposes; or
3. To a licensed firearm dealer for the sole and exclusive purpose of
resale to a sworn officer of the Edison Police Department to whom
the weapon has been assigned.
d. Any firearm donated to a museum pursuant to this section shall be
rendered inoperable.
e. Replaced firearms shall, within a reasonable period, be destroyed in a
manner that shall render them permanently unusable as firearms. A
record shall be made and retained by the Police Division of the make,
model, serial number and year and manufacturer of the individual
firearms in each batch of replaced firearms that is destroyed and/or
sold or otherwise conveyed by the Edison Police Division as permitted
in paragraphs c and d above.
§ 2-29.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-31.1
AO:61
§ 2-31.1. Police Extra Duty Employment Provisions. [Ord. No.
O.2029-2018]
a. The Chief of Police or his designee, at his discretion, may assign
members of the Department not on regular duty and who may volunteer
for police extra duty employment.
b. While on extra duty employment, the members of the Department shall
be subject to all provisions of Police rules, regulations and directives.
For cause, the Chief of Police or his designee may revoke or suspend
this privilege at his discretion.
c. The Chief of Police may contract the services of a third party
Management Company to manage extra duty employment through
Council Resolution. At any time when a third party is not in contract
with the Township to manage extra duty employment, the Chief of
Police or his designee shall manage extra duty employment directly.
d. Any activity, construction or event, by vendors that divert or interrupt
motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic flow or may expose the public to the
risk of injury on any roadway within Edison Township, primarily
patrolled by the Edison Police Department, shall require the services of
off-duty Edison Township police officer(s).
1. Flagmen will not be permitted unless they are NJ State or County
employees certified in the practice of traffic direction.
2. Limited access highways or other roadways where the Edison
Police Department does not have primary responsibility, such as
Hwy. 287 or the NJ Turnpike, are excluded from this clause.
e. The Chief of Police retains the right to hire any outside agency
personnel to supplement Extra Duty Employment during any exigent
circumstance or large-scale event.
f. The Chief of Police or his designee may deny any extra duty
employment which he deems unsafe, or that which may jeopardize the
proper and efficient operations of the Department.
g. Procedure with Third Party Management Company. Extra Duty Clients
contracting for extra duty employment shall contact the Management
Company at least two weeks prior to the job/function, enter into
contract with the Management Company, and abide by all stipulations
set forth by said contract.
1. Extra Duty Clients enter into agreement with the third party
Management Company. All scheduling or requests for officers to
work extra duty are handled by the Management Company. Extra
Duty Clients make requests directly with the Management
Company via web portal access or live telephone support.
2. The Management Company directly invoices Extra Duty Clients
(additional financing/late fees may apply).
§ 2-31.1 EDISON CODE § 2-31.1
AO:62
3. All aspects of the contract between Extra Duty Clients and the
Management Company are governed by the Township contract
award and resolution to include practices and expenses as defined
in the included Fee Schedule.
h. Officers Assigned by Fair Rotation and Limited in Hours.
1. All extra duty employment shall be assigned by the Management
Company on a fair rotating basis utilizing a web portal and
software to receive job bids from officers and assign work
according to the defined algorithm.
(a) The rotation list shall be ordered and sorted by four-digit police
identification (ID) numbers; lowest to highest number. The
rotation list shall be composed of all participating sworn
members exclusive of rank.
2. If any job is not filled after the rotation and assignment procedure
due to lack of interest from officers, it will remain available in the
web portal on a first-come first-assign basis.
3. Neither the Township nor the Chief of Police have any obligation to
provide Extra Duty Officers. While Extra Duty Clients may request
off duty officers for jobs, the jobs might not be staffed if officers
decline to work or bid on such jobs, or in the instance where the
Chief of Police denies such work.
4. Extra Duty Clients shall not be entitled to select individual officers
nor limit the pool of officers who may bid on a job. Jobs are
assigned by the Management Company based on a fair rotational
algorithm.
5. Fair Rotational Algorithm shall be based on a monetary point
system, reset once each year on January 1st. For all jobs bid, the
officer with the lowest total points for the calendar year shall be
awarded the job. Where there is a tie in points, the officer with the
lower ID number shall be awarded the detail.
(a) The Chief of Police or his designee may designate certain
critical details where the points generated from the detail do
not accrue in the officers' annual monetary point tally.
(1) Example: Municipal Court will not count towards the
annual monetary point tally, which should serve to
encourage full staffing for this critical detail.
6. No officer may work or be reimbursed for more than 40 hours extra
duty during any Township payroll period (Thursdays —
Wednesdays).
i. Fee Schedule.
§ 2-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-31.1
AO:63
1. Security Work. The rate of pay for extra duty employment,
excluding traffic services, shall be $50 per hour.
2. Traffic Services. The rate of pay for extra duty employment traffic
services or "road jobs," is:
(a) $80 per hour from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.
(b) $90 per hour from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m.
3. Additional Fees and Expenses.
(a) Emergency Fee - $5 Per Hour: All extra duty employment shall
be scheduled more than two (2) hours prior to the start of the
work. If the Extra Duty Client requests work less than two (2)
hours before the start of said work, it shall be deemed
"emergency" and a $5 per hour fee shall be added onto the pay
rate.
(b) Township Fee - 10% Per Hour: A 10% administrative fee will be
added to the pay rate, excluding the Vehicle Fee, billed by the
Management Company and paid to the Township.
(c) Management Fee - 7.75% Per Hour: A 7.75% management fee
will be added to the pay rate, excluding the Vehicle Fee, billed
and retained by the Management Company for their services.
(d) Vehicle Fee - $10 Per Hour: Any extra duty employment that
requires the use of a Township police vehicle shall have a $10
per hour fee added for the use of the vehicle for all billable
hours, billed by the Management Company and paid to the
Township.
4. Special Law Enforcement Officer III.
(a) In accordance with State legislation and shared services
agreement between the Council and Board of Education,
Special Law Enforcement Officers III's ("SLEO III") may be
employed by the Department and assigned to work in the
Township schools.
(1) SLEO III are restricted to working in the schools as
described by State legislation, and may not engage in
Extra Duty employment, which is otherwise reserved for
Edison Police Officers.
(2) Conversely, Edison Police Officers may work in the schools
when there are not enough SLEO III to cover all shifts
offered; and only upon the sole determination of the Board
of Education to hire Police Officers, which shall be at the
Security Rate of $50 per hour.
§ 2-31.1 EDISON CODE § 2-31.1
AO:64
(b) SLEO III shall earn $32 per hour, or as otherwise set by the
then current shared services agreement adopted by Council.
(c) Management Fee - 7.75% Per Hour. The scheduling function
for SLEO III may be outsourced. At such time, a 7.75%
management fee will be charged to the Board of Education and
retained by the Management Company for their services.
j. Minimum Hours of Compensation.
1. The minimum compensation will be for four (4) hours at the
applicable rate, excluding Board of Education jobs.
(a) Security Work. Shall be hour for hour past four (4) hours.
(b) Traffic Services. If the work is more than four (4), hours but
less than eight (8) hours, the officer will be compensated for
eight (8) hours as billable hours. After eight (8) hours, Traffic
Services will be hour for hour past eight (8).
(c) Hour for Hour. Shall be broken down into quarter hour
segments with the billable be hour rounded up to the next
quarter hour.
2. If Extra Duty Client must cancel said services, the Extra Duty Client
shall be required to give notice at least four (4) hours prior to the
start for traffic control and at least eight (8) hours for all other
services. A four (4) hour minimum charge will be levied for failure
to adhere to the above cancellation policy.
3. If after an officer arrives at an assignment for extra duty work/
police special services and all or part of that work is cancelled, the
contracting party shall pay a minimum charge of four (4) hours.
4. Board of Education Exception. The minimum compensation for
Board of Education (BOE) jobs will be three (3) hours at the
applicable rate.
(a) For calculation purposes, if a BOE job exceeds three (3) hours,
it will be rounded to four (4) hours. After four (4) hours, time
will round to the next quarter hour.
k. Recording Hours Worked.
1. Officers will clock in with the Management Company as described
by the Management Company (Application, Computer, Phone).
2. Clocking in shall begin when the officer arrives at the scene, or job
site location, for all extra duty employment, or the specified start
time, whichever is later.
(a) Emergency Road Job Exception. Only for emergency Traffic
Services, "road jobs," officer clock in time begins when they
report to the Watch Commander to draw a vehicle. In these
§ 2-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-31.1
AO:65
§ 2-32. (RESERVED)
§ 2-33. DIVISION OF FIRE.
§ 2-33.1. Division of Fire, Rescue and Emergency Services. [1999
Code § 2.20.210; Ord. No. O.1665-2008§ I]
instances, the officer shall report directly to the emergency
road job without delay.
3. Officers, consistent with Police Department directives will also
notify Edison Dispatch when they arrive and depart from the job,
providing details of such job so that it can be entered into the Police
Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system.
4. In the case where an Extra Duty Client provides a timesheet at the
work site, the officer will forward the timesheet copy to the
Management Company through the Records Bureau.
l. Officer Cancellations — Give Back. In any instance where an officer
cancels an awarded job, the officer shall contact the Management
Company and give the job back for reassignment by the Management
Company.
a. The Division of Fire, Rescue and Emergency Services (hereinafter the
"Division") shall consist of the personnel set forth in this subsection
2-33.1 and in subsection 2-33.2 and shall include (i) the following five
(5) fire volunteer companies (hereinafter referred to as the "Volunteer
Fire Companies"): Raritan Engine Company #1, Raritan Engine
Company No. 2, Edison Volunteer Fire Company No. 2, H.K. Volunteer
Fire Company No. 1, and Oak Tree Volunteer Fire Company, (ii) any and
all paid firefighters, (iii) fire officers, and (iv) Emergency Medical
Technicians of the Township.
b. The Chief shall be the head of the Division and shall be appointed by the
Director of Public Safety. The Chief of the Division shall be the
executive head of the Division and shall be in charge thereof. The Chief
shall report to and be under the supervision of the Director of Public
Safety.
c. The Deputy Chiefs of the Division shall be appointed by the Director of
Public Safety. Deputy Chiefs shall be second in command. The Deputy
Chiefs shall report to and be under the supervision of the Chief of the
Division. A Deputy Chief designated by the Chief of the Division shall
perform the duties of the Chief of the Division in the Chief's absence.
d. There shall be two (2) Volunteer Deputy Chiefs of the Division who shall
be appointed by the Director of Public Safety. Volunteer Deputy Chiefs
shall have operational oversight and coordination of the Volunteer Fire
Companies. Volunteer Deputy Chiefs shall report to and be under the
supervision of the Chief of the Division.
§ 2-31.1 EDISON CODE § 2-33.1
AO:66
§ 2-33.2. Personnel of Division of Fire, Rescue and Emergency
Services. [1999 Code § 2.20.220; Ord. No. O.1665-2008§ II]
§ 2-33.3. Functions of Division of Fire. [1999 Code § 2.20.230]
The Division of Fire shall provide protection against loss of life and property
by fire or disaster. To this end it shall:
e. There shall be one (1) Chief Fire Inspector who shall administer the
Office of the Fire Prevention Bureau.
f. There shall be a Division Officer assigned to the Training Bureau who
shall administer the Training Bureau.
g. There shall be a Division Officer assigned to the Emergency Medical
Services (the "EMS") Bureau who shall administer the EMS Bureau.
a. Full-Time/Paid Branch. The full-time/paid branch of the Division shall
consist of the Chief and such number of Deputy Chiefs, Battalion Chiefs,
Captains, Firefighters, Chief Fire Inspector, Fire Inspectors,
Emergency Medical Technician Supervisor and Emergency Medical
Technicians as shall be determined and appointed by the Director of
Public Safety from time to time.
The actual complement of members of the full-time/paid branch of the
Division shall be determined by the Director of Public Safety, all of
whom shall act and be known as firefighters and emergency medical
technicians of the Township.
b. Volunteer Branch. There shall be a volunteer branch within the
Division. The personnel of the Volunteer Fire Companies will be
consistent with the bylaws of each of the Volunteer Fire Companies.
The volunteer officers shall serve under the supervision of the Chief
and Deputy Chiefs of the Division and shall be responsible for the strict
enforcement of all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relating to
the Division.
The actual complement of Volunteer Fire Company Officers shall be
determined by the bylaws of each of said Volunteer Fire Companies.
c. Chain of Command of Full-Time/Paid and Volunteer Branches. In order
to promote and advance the efficient operations of the Division, the
Chief shall, by general order, establish a chain of command for the
Division.
a. Maintain and operate firehouses and fire-fighting equipment;
b. Administer a Fire Prevention Bureau;
c. Inspect buildings and other fire risks within the Township;
§ 2-33.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.3
AO:67
§ 2-33.4. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-33.4, Fire Precincts, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1999 Code § 2.20.240, was appealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. O.1665-2008.
§ 2-33.5. Firefighters; Entry Level Criteria. [1999 Code § 2.20.250;
Ord. No. O.1748-2010; Ord. No. O-1800-2012]
d. Enforce all general laws, ordinances and fire regulations as authorized
or required thereby;
e. Maintain its equipment and fire department quarters;
f. Cooperate with other departments in time of need or emergency.
a. All appointments to the Edison Fire Division shall be made pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-44, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-81.2 and/or as otherwise required
by the Township Code for the hiring of new employees, this section or at
law. Each applicant shall have the qualifications as required by N.J.S.A.
40A:14-44, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-81.2 and/or as otherwise required by the
Township Code for the hiring of new employees, this section or at law,
and in addition:
1. All appointments to the Edison Fire Division shall be made from the
members of the volunteer fire company(s) or force, who shall have
served as an active fireman or at least two (2) years prior to such
appointment, or be an exempt firefighter of Edison Township and if
no such member or exempt fireman is available for such
appointment, any qualified person may be appointed. The
determination of whether a member of the volunteer fire
company(s) or force "has served as an active fireman for at least
two (2) years prior to such appointment" shall be made by the Chief
of the Fire Division, based upon a written policy issued by the Chief
of the Fire Division which shall be applicable to all the members of
the volunteer fire company(s) or force.
2. All appointees shall not be under twenty-one (21) or over forty (40)
years of age at the time of the appointment.
3. All appointees must be a citizen of the United States.
4. All appointees shall be eligible for acceptance in the Public
Employees' Retirement System of New Jersey or in the Police and
Fireman's Retirement System of New Jersey.
5. All appointees shall be able to read, write, speak and comprehend
the English language well and intelligently.
6. All appointees shall be of good moral character.
§ 2-33.3 EDISON CODE § 2-33.5
AO:68
7. All appointees shall never have been convicted of any criminal
offense involving moral turpitude, an offense involving dishonesty,
or a crime of the third degree or above.
8. All appointees shall have a high school diploma or general
equivalency diploma.
9. All appointees must be able to pass physical agility test.
10. All appointees should be medically fit and sound, exhibiting no
physical impairment which would render the applicant incapable of
performing the duties of a firefighter. Applicant must have normal
hearing, be able to distinguish colors accurately and have 20/30
corrected vision.
11. All appointees must pass the prescribed examinations of physical
agility, written, oral, medical and psychology.
12. All appointees must possess a valid New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission driver's license at the time of appointment.
Should any provision of this section conflict with the Township
Code for the hiring of new employees or other requirements of the
law, the more stringent provision shall prevail unless contrary to or
prohibited by law.
b. All applicants shall consent to and pass the background investigations
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-81.2 and/or as otherwise required by the
Township Code for the hiring of new employees, this Section or at law,
the following background investigations:
1. FBI record check;
2. State Police record check;
3. Local Police record check;
4. Education record check;
5. Credit bureau record check;
6. Military record check;
7. Past/current employment record check;
8. Interviews of family, friends, neighbors and acquaintances,
employers (past and present), teachers, clergy, co-workers, law
enforcement personnel and any other person who may know the
applicant;
9. Driving record;
10. Medical/physical history and evaluation, and psychological history
and evaluation, including present and past injuries and history of
sick days taken during periods of employment;
§ 2-33.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.5
AO:69
11. Personal habits including, but not limited to, social habits and
possible substance abuse;
12. Any other area that might affect the applicant's performance as a
member of the Division.
Should any provision of this section conflict with the Township
Code for the hiring of new employees or other requirements of the
law, the more stringent provision shall prevail unless contrary to or
prohibited by law.
c. Each applicant shall possess a general knowledge of the organization
and duties required by the Division and have the ability to perform the
following duties either as an individual or as a group:
1. Forcible Entry: Have a knowledge of the tools and be able to make
entry to an occupancy with the proper tool in a reasonable amount
of time.
2. S.C.B.A.: Shall be physically, medically and mentally capable to don
S.C.B.A. in prescribed time and perform firefighting duties with full
turnout gear.
3. First Aid: Shall be able to perform EMS duties as prescribed by the
division, to an appropriate level of training and gain and maintain
certification as determined by the Division.
4. Ropes: Shall have a knowledge of Division rope, equipment, knots
and care of same.
5. Salvage: Shall know proper equipment to utilize and under proper
conditions to protect personal property.
6. Hose, Nozzles, Appliances: Shall have basic understanding of the
use, choice, maintenance, testing and repair and perform basic
evolutions on the fire ground in advancing hose lines.
7. Ladders: Shall be able to choose, place, maintain, ascend and
descend the appropriate ladder.
8. Ventilation: Shall be aware of situations and methods of ventilation
used by the Division and perform such functions.
9. Inspection: Shall possess a common knowledge of hazardous
conditions related to various occupancies and perform public
presentations.
10. Rescue: Shall be able to use safe and proper procedures to effect a
rescue of a victim in various situations.
11. Sprinklers: Shall possess a basic knowledge in the types, parts, use
and pumper operation.
§ 2-33.5 EDISON CODE § 2-33.5
AO:70
12. Safety: Shall have the utmost concern for safe Fire Division
operations on the fire ground, in station, driving and be able to
identify such conditions and remedy.
13. Fire Behavior: Shall have a basic knowledge of fire chemistry,
behavior and dynamics.
14. Personal Conduct: Shall be able to work with others, superior
officers, take and perform orders and function in a team effort.
d. Notification.
1. The hiring process will begin by a notification to all Edison
volunteers through notices posted in all Edison fire stations and
notification in the public newspapers stating that the Division of
Fire is establishing a list and hiring entry level firefighters. The
notification will list qualifications required, duties, responsibilities,
entry level salary and basic employment benefits.
2. There will be a nonrefundable fifty ($50.00) dollar application fee
charged each candidate. Any candidate who can establish to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Safety that he or she is
indigent will have the fee waived.
e. Background Check.
1. Each applicant shall submit to the background checks as required
by subsection 2-33.5b and applicant shall pay the costs of the
background checks as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-18.2(b). The
background check will be performed after the applicant has taken
and passed the written examination, course examination and oral
board but before the List is created.
2. The following areas are set forth to list the reasons for which an
applicant might fail this phase of the criteria:
(a) Conviction of a crime of the third degree or higher;
(b) Conviction of any crime involving arson;
(c) Falsification of any pre-employment information;
(d) Applicant does not possess a valid New Jersey driver's license,
or negative results which would affect or call into question the
applicant's ability to fulfill the job responsibilities;
(e) Applicant is not a high school graduate or equivalent;
(f) Applicant, in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety, is not
of a high moral character based on the results of interviews
and investigations;
(g) Failure of drug screen;
§ 2-33.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.5
AO:71
(h) Negative medical/physical history and/or evaluation which
would affect or call into question the applicant's ability to fulfill
the job responsibilities;
(i) Negative psychological history and/or evaluation which would
affect or call into question the applicant's ability to fulfill the
job responsibilities;
(j) Failure of the applicant to cooperate with background
investigations including but not limited to not providing
consent to such searches, sign required waivers and/or
releases, not appearing for medical evaluation and/or
psychological evaluation, and/or pay the costs of the
background checks as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-18.2(b).
f. Testing Procedures.
1. All applicants for the position of firefighter will be administered the
following tests which will be weighted as indicated:
(a) Written examination (weighted one-third (1/3)). The written
test will be administered by a company, organization or agency
that is in the regular business of supplying the fire service with
entry level written validated examinations.
(1) A minimum score of seventy (70%) percent must be
attained on the written examination in order to qualify for
the remainder of the testing.
(b) Final oral board (weighted one-third (1/3)).
(1) This board, which will consist of seven (7) members, will
be chosen from well respected members, past and present,
of the fire service community, on either a local or State
level. Four (4) members of the board will be selected by
the Director of Public Safety, and three (3) members will
be selected by the Township Council.
(2) This board will prepare a series of questions to be posed to
each applicant. The board members will be permitted to
ask questions concerning the fire service and problems
and qualities that may be encountered by or desired in fire
service personnel.
(3) Each applicant will be scored by each member of the board
in numerical format.
(c) Physical performance examination (weighted one-third (1/3)).
The applicant, given the proper equipment, will complete the
prescribed course in the allotted time. Medical vital signs will
be taken before and after the test by members of the training
bureau. The test will be in two (2) sections, the first being the
course examination and the second being the height ability
§ 2-33.5 EDISON CODE § 2-33.5
AO:72
examination. The two (2) sections have a maximum score of
one hundred (100) points.
(1) Course Examination.
(i) The examination is designed to test the degree of the
candidate's physical ability. Emphasis is placed on
agility, speed and most importantly, endurance.
(ii) The candidate will wear full turnout gear, turnout
coat, boots or bunkers, helmet, hood and gloves for
Station No. 1 through Station No. 5; breathing
apparatus will be added for Stations No. 6 through No.
9.
(iii) The candidate will stand in front of the ladder at
Station No. 1. When given the command "GO" by the
examiner, he or she will raise the ladder to the roof.
He or she will proceed up the ladder to the roof, touch
the top of the parapet and proceed down the ladder.
The candidate will then pick up a fifty (50) foot rolled
up length of hose at Station No. 2 and proceed to carry
it to Station No. 3 and lay it down beside the engine.
The candidate will then proceed to the rear of the
engine and gather the necessary tools to make a hookup
of fifty (50) feet of three-inch hose to the hydrant at
Station No. 4. A hydrant gate will be hooked up to the
other port on the hydrant. The candidate will turn the
hydrant on fully. The candidate will return to the
engine at Station No. 5 and don a breathing
apparatus. From the rear of the engine at Station No.
6, he will stretch a two hundred (200) foot one and
three-fourths (1 3/4) inch pre-connect line through the
door at Station No. 7 and up the stairs to Station No.
8. At Station No. 8, the candidate will drop the nozzle
and drag a weighted dummy from Station No. 8 to
Station No. 9, which is the finish.
(iv) Height Ability Examination. The candidate will be able
to climb the one hundred (100) foot aerial ladder at
full extension and at a sixty (60) degree angle to the
top of the ladder and return to the table/base of the
aerial ladder.
(v) Scoring. Scoring of the candidate on the Course
Examination and Height Ability Examination will be as
follows:
§ 2-33.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.5
AO:73
Points Time
Course 80 Below 3:15
70 3:16--3:30
60 3:31--3:45
50 3:46--4:00
40 4:01--4:15
30 4:16--4:30
20 4:31--4:45
10 4:46--5:00
Height 20 No time limit,
but must
complete.
g. Ranking of Applicants, List and Appointments.
1. Ranking. After completion of all phases of the testing (including the
results of background investigations, but not including the results
of the medical/physical and psychological evaluations), each
applicant will be placed in the appropriate class as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-10.1a.
Class I: will consist of all successful applicants residing in Edison
Township;
Class II: will consist of all successful applicants residing in
Middlesex County;
Class III: will consist of all successful applicants residing in other
counties within New Jersey;
Class IV: will consist of all other qualified applicants.
2. List of qualified Entry Level Firefighters. The list will be in effect
for two (2) years from the date of completion of the testing
procedure. Applicants will be hired from this list, based on their
ranking, subject to the appointment procedure below.
3. Appointment.
(a) At the time of appointment all applicants must continue to be
qualified for appointment to the Edison Division of Fire as
required by this section and must continue to be a resident of
their residency Class as provided above. Additionally,
background checks and other related investigations of
applicants will be performed again if it has been more than six
(6) months since they were performed to create the List, and
may be performed again if less than six (6) months has elapsed.
Applicants may be disqualified, reduced in residency Class
§ 2-33.5 EDISON CODE § 2-33.5
AO:74
§ 2-33.6. Firefighters; Promotion Procedures. [1999 Code
§ 2.20.260; Ord. No. O.1998-2018]
and/or ranking as a result of said background checks and
investigations.
(b) After the results of paragraph (a) above are received and the
List is re-ranked, applicants from Class I, in order of their
ranking will be sent for medical/physical/psychological
evaluations. In the event that an applicant fails to satisfactorily
pass any of the medical/physical/psychological evaluations, the
next ranking applicant from the List will be sent for these tests.
If there are no applicants remaining from Class I, the ranking
applicant from Class II will be sent. This procedure will be
repeated through Class III and Class IV until the last ranking
applicant in Class IV has been sent.
a. Criteria for Promotion to Captain shall be made pursuant to the
following examination criteria, which shall consist of one hundred (100)
total points:
1. Qualifications. A candidate must have completed a minimum of ten
(10) years of active service as a full-time Division fire fighter on the
date of the written examination with certifications or licenses from
an accredited agency in:
(a) Instructor Level 1 — as issued by DCA
(b) Drill Ground Instructor — as issued by DCA
(c) Incident Management Systems - Level 1 Certification issued by
DCA
(d) Incident Safety Officer — as issued by DCA
Note: Equivalent educational certificates in the above areas
must be approved by the Chief of the Division of Fire.
2. Written examination.
(a) Written examination will be prepared, administered and
graded by an appropriate outside testing service. The scoring
for these examinations will be from zero to one hundred (100).
Only those candidates who achieve a score of seventy-five
(75%) percent or higher will be allowed to move to the next
phase.
(b) Study guides will be made available prior to the examination.
(c) The written test shall constitute sixty (60%) percent of the fire
fighter's score.
§ 2-33.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.6
AO:75
(d) The testing agency shall place the names and grades of the
passing candidates into a sealed envelope and placed with the
Township Administrator. At the end of the process, the
Township Administrator shall submit the sealed envelope to
the Chief of Fire.
3. Oral Test. The oral test shall constitute thirty (30%) percent of the
fire fighter's score and shall be conducted by the Oral board. The
board shall include the Director of Public Safety or their designee,
Chief of Fire, Deputy Chief and two Senior Battalion Chiefs; one
selected by the Director of Public Safety and one selected by the
Chief of Fire. The Director of Public Safety may assign one
additional designee in the event one (1) of the aforementioned
positions is vacant. Candidates shall be interviewed as to their
knowledge of Edison Division of Fire Standard Operating
Procedures, Incident Command System, equipment and practices,
knowledge of Division of Fire stations, response areas, fire ground
operations and safety, building construction, Uniform Fire Code
and Emergency Scene Strategy and Tactics. The board shall not
discuss their evaluations with other board members. The Chief of
Fire and Director of Public Safety or their designee shall remove
the highest and lowest scores of each candidate and average the
remaining scores.
4. Veterans. Anyone who 1) is a veteran as defined in N.J.S.A.
11A:5-1(b); 2) who has a minimum of two (2) years' service; and 3)
has been honorably discharged, shall receive 1 point for said
service.
5. College Credit. Anyone who possess an Associates' degree or
higher in the Fire Sciences Field, shall receive 0.5 points.
6. Seniority. Points will be given for fully completed years of service
on the Edison Fire Department as of the announced closing date for
eligibility to take the written test as follows:
Years Points
10-12 0.5
13-14 1.0
14-15 1.5
16-17 2.0
18-19 2.5
20+ 3.0
7. Disciplinary History.
(a) If a candidate has no disciplinary history in the five (5) years
prior to the date of the of the written exam, said candidate
shall receive five and one-half (5.5) points.
§ 2-33.6 EDISON CODE § 2-33.6
AO:76
(b) If a candidate has two (2) written reprimands or three (3)
suspension days or less, in the five (5) years prior to the date of
the written exam, said candidate shall receive two and one-half
(2.5) points. If a candidate has a combination of two (2) written
reprimands and one (1) or more suspension days, the
candidate will receive zero (0) points.
(c) If a candidate has one (1) discipline of four (4) suspension days
or more; more than three (3) written reprimands; or a
demotion in rank in the five (5) years prior to the date of the
written exam, said candidate shall receive zero (0) points.
8. Compiling the Ranking List of Candidates.
(a) The Chief of Fire shall obtain from the Township Administrator
the sealed envelope which contains the results of the written
test.
(b) The Chief of Fire and the Director of Public Safety or their
designee shall compute the scores and issue the list of
rankings.
(c) The Chief of Fire shall maintain the scores and all evaluation
sheets until the next promotional test is conducted.
9. Appointment to Position.
(a) Vacancies shall be filled utilizing the "Rule of Three." Should
the scoring result in a tie in any position but the first rank, the
list shall be expanded to include all those candidates eligible in
those positions. If there is a tie in the number one (1) position,
all of those candidates will be included on the list; however, if
there is also a tie in a lower rank necessary to establish the
"Rule of Three," all said candidates will be included to establish
the "Rule of Three."
(b) A review committee designated by the Mayor, which shall
include at least the Chief of Fire, shall review the list
compromising the candidates contained in the "Rule of Three"
and issue recommendations to the Mayor.
(c) The Mayor shall appoint the candidate pursuant to the "Rule of
Three."
10. Duration of List of Candidates.
(a) Upon the completion of the ranking of candidates, the list will
be certified by the Township Clerk.
(b) The list will be in force for two (2) years from the date it is
certified, and a new list shall be established within ninety (90)
days of the expiration of any list. The list shall not be extended.
§ 2-33.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.6
AO:77
11. Miscellaneous.
(a) Violation of any Edison Fire Department rules and regulations,
departmental policy and procedure or violation of any State or
Federal statute occurring after the list is certified may result in
the candidate being removed from the promotional list or
having his or her position lowered on the list. If a candidate is
lowered on the list, the procedure utilized shall be consistent
with paragraph 7 of this subsection.
(b) The removal of a candidate, pursuant to paragraph 11a of this
subsection will be at the ultimate discretion of the Mayor.
b. Criteria for Promotion to Battalion Chief shall be made pursuant to the
following examination criteria, which shall consist of one hundred (100)
total points:
1. Qualifications. A candidate must have completed a minimum of two
(2) years of active service as a full-time Division Fire Captain on the
date of the written examination with certifications or licenses from
an accredited agency in:
(a) Incident Management Systems — Level 2 Certification issued
by DCA
(b) Level 2 Fire Instructor — as issued by DCA
(c) Certified NJ Uniform Fire Code Inspector — as issued by DCA
Note: Equivalent educational certificates in the above areas
must be approved by the Chief of the Division of Fire.
2. Written examination.
(a) Written examination will be prepared, administered and
graded by an appropriate outside testing service. The scoring
for these examinations will be from zero to one hundred (100).
Only those candidates who achieve a score of seventy-five
(75%) percent or higher will be allowed to move to the next
phase.
(b) Study guides will be made available prior to the examination.
(c) The written test shall constitute forty-five (45%) percent of the
fire fighter's score.
(d) The testing agency shall place the names and grades of the
passing candidates into a sealed envelope and placed with the
Township Administrator. At the end of the process, the
Township Administrator shall submit the sealed envelope to
the Chief of Fire.
3. Oral Test. The oral test shall constitute forty-five (45%) percent of
the fire fighter's score and shall be conducted by the Oral board.
§ 2-33.6 EDISON CODE § 2-33.6
AO:78
The board shall include the Director of Public Safety or their
designee, Chief of Fire, Deputy Chief and two Senior Battalion
Chiefs; one selected by the Director of Public Safety and one
selected by the Chief of Fire. The Director of Public Safety may
assign one additional designee in the event one (1) of the
aforementioned positions is vacant. Candidates shall be
interviewed as to their knowledge of Edison Division of Fire
Standard Operating Procedures, Incident Command System,
equipment and practices, knowledge of Division of Fire stations,
response areas, fire ground operations and safety, building
construction, Uniform Fire Code and Emergency Scene Strategy
and Tactics. The board shall not discuss their evaluations with
other board members. The Chief of Fire and Director of Public
Safety or their designee shall remove the highest and lowest scores
of each candidate and average the remaining scores.
4. The final score shall consist of the written examination score fortyfive
(45%) percent and the oral examination score forty-five (45%)
percent. Candidates will receive one-half (0.5) point for each full
year of time in grade as a permanent Captain in the Edison Fire
Department to a maximum of five (5) points.
5. Disciplinary History.
(a) If a candidate has no disciplinary history in the five (5) years
prior to the date of the written exam, said candidate shall
receive five (5) points.
(b) If a candidate has two (2) written reprimands or three (3)
suspension days or less in the five (5) years prior to the date of
the written exam, said candidate shall receive two and one-half
(2.5) points. If a candidate has a combination of two (2) written
reprimands and one (1) or more suspension days, the
candidate will receive zero (0) points.
(c) If a candidate has one (1) discipline of four (4) suspension days
or more; more than three (3) written reprimands; or a
demotion in rank in the five (5) years prior to the date of the
written exam, said candidate shall receive zero (0) points.
6. Compiling the Ranking List of Candidates.
(a) The Chief of Fire shall obtain from the Township Administrator
the sealed envelope which contains the results of the written
test.
(b) The Chief of Fire and the Director of Public Safety or their
designee shall compute the scores and issue the list of
rankings.
(c) The Chief of Fire shall maintain the scores and all evaluation
sheets until the next promotional test is conducted.
§ 2-33.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.6
AO:79
7. Appointment to Position.
(a) Vacancies shall be filled utilizing the "Rule of Three." Should
the scoring result in a tie in any position but the first rank, the
list shall be expanded to include all those candidates eligible in
those positions. If there is a tie in the number one (1) position,
all of those candidates will be included on the list; however, if
there is also a tie in a lower rank necessary to establish the
"Rule of Three," all said candidates will be included to establish
the "Rule of Three."
(b) A review committee designated by the Mayor, which shall
include at least the Chief of Fire, shall review the list
compromising the candidates contained in the "Rule of Three"
and issue recommendations to the Mayor.
(c) The Mayor shall appoint the candidate pursuant to the "Rule of
Three."
8. Duration of List of Candidates.
(a) Upon the completion of the ranking of candidates, the list will
be certified by the Township Clerk.
(b) The list will be in force for two (2) years from the date it is
certified, and a new list shall be established within ninety (90)
days of the expiration of any list. The list shall not be extended.
9. Miscellaneous.
(a) Violation of any Edison Fire Department rules and regulations,
departmental policy and procedure or violation of any State or
Federal statute occurring after the list is certified may result in
the candidate being removed from the promotional list or
having his or her position lowered on the list. If a candidate is
lowered on the list, the procedure utilized shall be consistent
with paragraph 5 of this subsection.
(b) The removal of a candidate, pursuant to paragraph 9a of this
subsection will be at the ultimate discretion of the Mayor.
c. Criteria for Promotion to Deputy Chief of Fire
1. Any individual, fire fighter or candidate to be promoted to the
position of Deputy Chief of Fire shall have served in the position of
Battalion Chief for a period of at least two (2) years or Captain for a
period of at least three (3) years in a permanent capacity in the
Edison Fire Department. In lieu of the aforementioned service
credit in each rank, a candidate may have a combined amount of
service credit in the ranks of Captain and Battalion Chief, totaling
three (3) years, to be eligible for promotion to the position of
Deputy Chief of Fire. In addition to the service credit, a candidate
must have all certifications required of a Battalion Chief as well
§ 2-33.6 EDISON CODE § 2-33.6
AO:80
§ 2-34. EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
§ 2-34.1. Third Party Payment Plan for Emergency Medical Services.
[1999 Code § 2.20.280]
possess the Incident Management Level 3 Certification from DCA
to be eligible for promotion to the position of Deputy Chief of Fire.
2. The Chief of Fire shall give his written recommendations to the
Mayor.
3. The Mayor shall select the Deputy Chief of Fire.
d. Criteria for Promotion to Chief of Fire
1. Any individual, fire fighter or candidate to be promoted to the
position of Chief of Fire shall have served in the position of Deputy
Chief of Fire for a period of at least two (2) years or Battalion Chief
for a period of at least three (3) years in a permanent capacity in
the Edison Fire. In lieu of the aforementioned service credit in each
rank, a candidate may have a combined amount of service credit in
the ranks of Battalion Chief and Deputy Chief of Fire, totaling three
(3) years, to be eligible for promotion to the position of Chief of
Fire.
2. The Mayor shall select the Chief of Fire.
e. All promotional lists established by this section shall be posted in a time
and manner prescribed by appropriate collective bargaining
agreements.
a. The New Jersey State Department of Health has issued licensure for the
Edison Division of Fire—Emergency Ambulance ["the Program"]
administered by the Edison Division of Fire, Township of Edison ["the
Division"]; and
b. The Program has been in operation providing experience and statistics
regarding the service and the patients served; and
c. The Division is applying for a "Provider Number" from the Federal and
State Medicare/Medicaid Programs, enabling the municipality to
institute Third Party Payment Plan [the "Payment Plan"]; and
d. Most residents have a health insurance plan or Medicare/Medicaid,
which provides payments to relieve their payment obligations; and
e. The Township shall not balance bill the deductibles and co-pays for
Edison residents including those covered by Medicare/Medicaid, nor
bill those Edison residents for payment obligations without insurance
coverage; and
f. It is in the best interest of the taxpayers of the municipality to establish
the Third Party Payment Plan in accordance with the Health Care
§ 2-33.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-34.1
AO:81
§ 2-35. DIVISIONS OF POLICE OR FIRE; DECREASE OF FORCE FOR
REASONS OF ECONOMY. [1999 Code § 2.20.290; Ord. No.
O-1775-2011]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-25 and N.J.S.A.
40A:14-143, the Township Council, if they shall deem it necessary for
reasons of economy, may decrease the number of members and officers of
the Police or Fire Divisions or force or their grades or ranks. In case of
demotion from the higher ranks, the officers or members to be so demoted
shall be in the inverse order of their appointment. When the service of
members or officers is terminated, such termination shall be in the inverse
order of their appointment. Any member or officer who is demoted or
whose service is terminated by reason of such decrease shall be placed
on a special employment list, and in the case of subsequent promotions, a
person so demoted shall be reinstated to his original rank and in the case
of termination of service and new appointment, first preference shall be
given to persons on said special employment list. The special employment
Finance Administration guide lines ["HCFA"] so that taxpayers will not
be responsible for any out of pocket expenses.
1. The Director of the Division (the "Director") and the Chief Financial
Officer of the Municipality (the CFO) in consultation with the
Municipality's EMS Program Consultant will be responsible for the
Plan's billing.
2. The fee service is initially set as four hundred ($400.00) dollars.
Base rate, plus seven dollars and fifty ($7.50) cents per mile per
trip. Non-transports where aid is provided two hundred ($200.00)
dollars.
3. The Director and the CFO shall annually review the Plan's cost
accounting records. The CFO shall obtain an industry average.
4. The Division is authorized to enter into contracts with various
hospitals that provide [ALS] services to the patients that are
transported by Edison Ambulance Service allowing the hospitals to
bundle bill Medicare for services rendered. The hospital will
reimburse the municipality for its transportation costs within fortyfive
(45) days of receiving payment.
5. The Township may contract with the volunteer first aid squads to
provide 3rd party billing as established in this section.
6. The CFO shall annually, no later than March 1, adjust the fees for
services as set forth in paragraph f2 herein pursuant to the
recommendation of the Director and the EMS Program
Consultants.
7. A certified copy of this section shall be filed with the applicable
Federal and/or State agencies.
§ 2-34.1 EDISON CODE § 2-35
AO:82
list shall continue indefinitely or until such officer is restored to his or her
previous rank or appointment.
§ 2-36. through § 2-41. (RESERVED)
§ 2-42. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
§ 2-42.1. Organization; Director of Finance. [1999 Code § 2.24.010;
New]
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance. The Director shall, prior to his or her appointment,
be qualified by training or experience in governmental finance and fiscal
management. His or her compensation shall be such sum, annually, as shall
be fixed by ordinance. The Department of Finance, under the supervision
and direction of the Director, shall be organized into five (5) divisions:
Division of Accounts and Control, Division of Custody and Disbursement,
Division of Revenue, Division of Assessment and Division of Real Estate.
§ 2-42.2. Director of Finance; Duties. [1999 Code § 2.24.020]
The Director of Finance shall be responsible for all financial activities
and functions of the Township government, other than those activities and
functions for which responsibility is vested in the Business Administrator.
He or she shall furnish a corporate surety bond at the expense of the
Township, for the faithful performance of his or her duties, in such penal
sum and in such form as shall be approved by resolution of the Council. He
or she shall have all the functions, powers and duties relating to revenue
and finance, to the extent that such functions, powers and duties are not
vested in the Department of Administration. Through the divisions of the
Department and otherwise, the Director of Finance shall be responsible
for the accounting, preauditing and control of all Township revenues and
expenditures; for the custody, receipt and disbursement of all Township
funds; for the safety and investment of the Township's investments; for the
management of the Township debt; for the development of fiscal policies
for recommendation to the Mayor; and for safeguarding of the Township's
financial interest to the fullest extent.
§ 2-42.3. Comptroller; Duties. [1999 Code § 2.24.030]
There is established the position of comptroller in the Department of
Finance who may be the Township's Chief Financial Officer. He or she shall
have those duties and responsibilities assigned to him or her by the Director
of Finance.
§ 2-43. DIVISION OF ACCOUNTS AND CONTROL.
§ 2-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-43.1
AO:83
§ 2-43.1. Supervisor of Accounts. [1999 Code § 2.24.040]
The head of the Division of Accounts and Control shall be the Supervisor of
Accounts. He or she shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by
training and experience in governmental accounting, budget operation and
controls and in systems and methods of financial management. His or her
compensation shall be such sum, annually, as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-43.2. Functions of Division of Accounts and Control. [1999 Code
§ 2.24.050]
The Supervisor of Accounts, through the Division of Accounts and Control,
shall:
a. Maintain the central books of accounts of the Township according to
such forms, standards and procedures as shall be prescribed or
approved by the Director of Finance. Any and all Township Officials
shall, upon request of the Supervisor of Accounts, place at his or her
disposal all records, books, bonds, documents and papers which he or
she may deem necessary to aid him or her in his or her duty of keeping
such accounts;
b. Enforce a uniform system of accounts for all departments of the
Township prescribed by the Director of Finance;
c. Preaudit all payrolls, claims, and demands against the Township upon
certification by a department head that the amount is due and unpaid
according to the records and information of his or her department;
d. Require reports of receipts and disbursements from each department of
the Township to be made daily or at such intervals as will most
efficiently protect the Township's interest;
e. Maintain a central payroll system and all social security pension and
insurance records required for municipal personnel;
f. Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded; pass upon each proposed expenditure in conformity with the
Charter and ordinances of the Township, and unless the Division Head
shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation
available, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no commitment or
expenditure shall be made;
g. Keep records and books of accounts for the exercise of the foregoing
financial budgetary control over each department of the Township; and
keep such accounts as will show the amount of each appropriation, the
accumulative amount paid therefrom, and the unpaid obligations and
unencumbered balance thereof;
h. Prepare such statistical studies and reports as may be required by other
departments and the divisions and by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-43.1 EDISON CODE § 2-43.3
AO:84
§ 2-43.3. Commitments and Disbursements. [1999 Code § 2.24.060]
§ 2-44. DIVISION OF CUSTODY AND DISBURSEMENT.
§ 2-44.1. Director of Finance. [1999 Code § 2.24.070]
The head of the Division of Custody and Disbursement shall be the Director
of Finance. He or she shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by
training and experience in municipal tax and revenue administration. He or
she shall:
§ 2-44.2. Functions of Division of Custody and Disbursement. [1999
Code § 2.24.080; Ord. No. O.1794-2012§ 1]
a. No department, office or agency of the Township shall expend or
commit any funds of the Township unless the Supervisor of Accounts,
through the Division of Accounts and Control, shall first certify that
there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and funds available
for the purpose.
b. Prior to the payment of any bill, claim or demand against the Township,
a department head shall certify that the materials, supplies or
equipment have been received according to a purchase order system or
that the work, labor or services have been rendered according to order
or contract.
c. Disbursements in the payment of bills, claims or demands shall be made
by the Director of Finance, after preaudit and warrant by him or her.
Every warrant shall be payable to the order of the person entitled to
receive it and shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the
account of appropriation to which it is chargeable. Each warrant or
check shall bear the signature of the Mayor and/or the Director of
Finance.
d. The Township Council shall approve or disapprove all claims after it has
reviewed the list of bills. In the event that the Township Council
questions a claim, supporting documentation shall be forwarded by the
administration.
a. Administer the work of the Division;
b. Have charge of receipt, custody, deposit and disbursement of all funds
belonging to or under the control of the Township or of any department,
office or agency of the municipality;
c. Disburse funds from the Township treasury only upon warrant of the
Supervisor of Accounts, approved by the Business Administrator;
d. Render regular accountings of his or her cash receipts and
disbursements in such form and at such intervals as he or she shall
deem necessary and as required by the Business Administrator.
§ 2-43.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-44.2
AO:85
a. The Division of Custody and Disbursement shall:
1. Deposit all funds received by the Division in such depositories as
may be designated by resolution of the Council. All moneys of the
Township not required for current operations shall be invested
pursuant to law or shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts.
All such interest shall be accounted for in the Township books of
account;
2. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Township
or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise
provided by law, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes
for transfer, registration or exchange;
3. Receive and safely keep and disburse moneys received and raised
for public schools and keep separate accounts thereof;
4. Make disbursement of all Township funds upon warrant of the
supervisor of accounts by an individual warrant or check for each
bill, claim, wage, salary payment as approved by the Business
Administrator or the Township Council as required by law and/or
the Township Code and not otherwise;
5. Shall establish a system that requires all manual checks from one
($1.00) dollar to nineteen thousand nine hundred ninety-nine
($19,999.00) dollars must have two (2) original signatures and all
manual checks if twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars or greater
must have three (3) original signatures, and if the check requires
three (3) signatures one must be the Mayor or in the absence of the
Mayor the Business Administrator, further, if the individual manual
check is for a contract and the total cost of the contract is twenty
thousand ($20,000.00) dollars or greater then any manual check
must have three (3) signatures;
6. Shall ensure that all bills and encumbrances are posted within the
Township's accounting systems and that the same are reconciled
within ten (10) days of the end of each month and that a listing of
the same be provided to the Township Council;
7. Shall ensure that all revenues are posted within the Township's
computerized accounting system within ten (10) days of receipt
and that monthly report of the same be provided to the Township
Council.
b. The Director of Finance shall keep a full and systematic account of all
cash receipts and disbursements by the Division of Custody and
Disbursements in proper books, as he or she deems necessary. He or
she shall, at least once every month and more often if the Council
requires, furnish the Council, through the Mayor, with a statement of all
moneys received and expended by him or her, including school moneys,
subsequent to his or her last report. He or she shall annually, during the
month of January, make a full report to the Council of his or her receipts
§ 2-44.2 EDISON CODE § 2-44.2
AO:86
§ 2-45. DIVISION OF REVENUE.
§ 2-45.1. Collector of Revenue; Functions of Division of Revenue.
[1999 Code § 2.24.090]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Revenue, the
head of which shall be the Collector of Revenue. The Collector of Revenue
shall supervise the functions and personnel assigned to the Division. The
Collector of Revenue shall cause to be deposited daily, to the credit of the
Township, all moneys received, in one (1) or more depositories selected
from banking institutions authorized by the Township; maintain full and
complete records and accounts of all sums collected and received according
to such procedures and systems as may be prescribed or approved by the
Director of Finance; and make such periodic reports and accountings of the
funds of the Township collected, received and deposited as may be required,
which reports and accountings shall be filed as a public record with the
Township Clerk. The activities stated in subsections 2-45.2 through 2-45.5
shall be assigned to the Division.
§ 2-45.2. Real Property Tax Collection; Collector of Taxes; Deputy.
[1999 Code § 2.24.090A; New]
and expenditures during the preceding year, and shall, whenever
required, lay before the Council, for examination or audit, all books,
papers and vouchers pertaining to his or her office.
a. The Collector of Taxes shall be assigned to the Division and shall
perform the following duties:
1. Perform the functions of a Collector of Taxes under general law,
including, without limitation thereto, the preparation and mailing
of tax bills and the maintenance of tax accounting records in such
manner as may be prescribed or approved by the Director of
Finance; and assist the Division of Assessment in the preparation of
the annual tax list and duplicate;
2. Receive and collect all current and delinquent, real and personal
property taxes and charges; receive penalties and interest
pursuant to law; and account for all collection in such form and
vouchers pertaining to his or her office;
3. Make or cause to be made and certify searches for tax and other
liens on real property, as may be authorized by law, and charge and
collect, for the use of the municipality, the fee required pursuant to
law for any such search.
b. There shall be a Deputy Collector as authorized by N.J.S.A. 54:5-4, who
shall not only assist the collector, but, in the absence of the collector, be
authorized to perform and be responsible for the performance of all
duties and functions of the Collector.
§ 2-44.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-45.2
AO:87
§ 2-45.3. Utility Charge Collection; Collector of Utility Charges.
[1999 Code § 2.24.090B]
The Collector of Utility Charges shall be assigned to the Division, and the
Division shall perform the following duties:
§ 2-45.4. Licenses and Permits Issuance. [1999 Code § 2.24.090C]
§ 2-45.5. Township Fee Collection. [1999 Code § 2.24.090D]
The Division of Revenue shall serve as the central cashier for the Township.
It shall receive all monetary payments made to the Township and shall,
upon direction of the Business Administrator, render bills for services, fees,
costs, penalties, etc., for activities which were heretofore assigned to the
various departments, divisions and/or ancillary agencies of the Township.
No provision of this section shall be designed to apply to the Municipal
Court of the Township, nor shall any activities housed in locations other
than the Township Municipal Complex where the Division of Revenue is
c. The Tax Collector shall be certified as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et
seq.
a. Compute and record water and sewer charges, if any, to consumer
accounts from meter readings and other information furnished by the
Division of Water Supply and the Division of Sewers of the Department
of Public Works,1 according to the rate duly established pursuant to the
Charter and ordinances;
b. Render bills for water, sewer and miscellaneous charges to consumers;
receive payments on account thereof; and collect delinquent accounts
and report the names of delinquent accounts which are more than six
(6) months past due to the Director of Finance;
c. Maintain books and records to record all charges, payments, credits
and delinquencies in water, sewer and miscellaneous accounts.
a. Licenses and Permits Issuance. The issuance of licenses and permits
shall be assigned to the Division, and the Division shall perform the
following duties:
1. The Division shall receive applications and payments for all
licenses and permits, provided that the Business Administrator may
direct specific applications or payments to be made to other
divisions of the Township government as may best serve the public
convenience.
2. The Tax Collector shall assign applications to the proper agency for
investigation and report, and upon approval, where necessary, of
any application by the authorized department or agency of the
Township, the Division shall issue the license to the applicant.
1. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 27, Department of Water and Sewer.
§ 2-45.2 EDISON CODE § 2-45.5
AO:88
located be required to utilize the central cashier function unless it is
determined by the Business Administrator not to be inconvenient to the
client public. The Division shall promptly transmit billing registers to the
affected department, division or ancillary agency and issue forth periodic
reports to the Township Council.
§ 2-46. DIVISION OF ASSESSMENT.
§ 2-46.1. Tax Assessor; Assistants; Functions. [1999 Code
§ 2.24.100]
§ 2-46.2. Qualifications of Tax Assessor; Assistants. [1999 Code
§ 2.24.110; New]
a. Appointments; Term of Office.
1. The Division of Assessment shall be composed of a single Tax
Assessor, who shall be head of the Division, and not more than two
(2) assistants and such other clerical help and personnel as shall be
necessary to properly conduct the business of the Division. They
shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by ordinance.
2. The Tax Assessor and the assistant assessors shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Municipal Council.
3. The term of office of the Tax Assessor shall be consonant with that
of the elected term of the Mayor.
b. Functions. The Division, under the direction of the Tax Assessor, shall:
1. Value all real and personal property in the Township for the
purposes of assessments and taxation in accordance with general
law, the Charter and ordinances, and exercise all the powers of a
Municipal Assessor pursuant to law;
2. Prepare the tax lists and duplicate as required by law and maintain
adequate assessment records of each and every parcel of real
property assessed or exempted;
3. Have custody of and maintain an up-to-date Township tax map and
provide for the recording thereon of all changes in ownership or
character of property assessed;
4. Make appraisals of property for any Township purpose upon the
direction of the Director of Finance;
5. Perform such other duties as are or may be required of a Tax
Assessor by the laws of the State of New Jersey and the applicable
ordinances of the Township.
a. The qualifications of the Tax Assessor shall be formal or other education
and training in fields related to the economics of or valuation of real and
personal property, with preferably a degree or certificate of completion
§ 2-45.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-46.2
AO:89
§ 2-46.3. Board of Assessments for Local Improvements. [1999
Code § 2.24.120]
There shall be a Board of Assessments for local improvements when
necessary for the assessment of local improvements, and such Board, when
so constituted, shall serve within the Division of Assessment. The Board
shall consist of three (3) members and shall be appointed by the Council
pursuant to Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes, when necessary.
The Board, as constituted, shall have the function, powers and duties and
shall follow the procedures prescribed by the Revised Statutes.
§ 2-47. DIVISION OF REAL ESTATE.
§ 2-47.1. Supervisor of Real Estate. [1999 Code § 2.24.130]
The head of the Division of Real Estate shall be the Supervisor of Real
Estate. He or she shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by
training and experience in the management and sale of real property. His
or her compensation shall be such sum, annually, as shall be fixed by
ordinance.
§ 2-47.2. Functions of Division of Real Estate. [1999 Code
§ 2.24.140]
The Division of Real Estate shall, through the Supervisor, be responsible
for the management and sale of all Township-owned property acquired by
of a course or courses in the appraising of real estate and assessment
principles and practices from a college or other institution of
recognized standards in this field; experience in real and personal
property appraisals and/or assessments, such experience being related
to all types of real property, inclusive of residential, commercial and
industrial properties; thorough knowledge of the accepted procedures
used in assessing real and personal property and of the laws, rules,
regulations, practices and policies relating to tax assessments and
of the forms required for tax purposes and of supervising the
establishment and maintenance of needed records and files; ability
to develop a suitable work program to apply existing laws, rules and
regulations to tax assessing work, to supervise the varied clerical
functions in the office, to give suitable assignments and instructions to
clerical employees and field investigators and to supervise their work.
b. The qualifications of the assistants shall be education equivalent to that
represented by graduation from a standard high school; courses in real
property appraising or assessing; experience in assessing or appraising
real property; a knowledge of State laws, statutes and local ordinances
pertaining to assessing and taxation; accuracy in clerical work and
arithmetic; and supervisory ability.
c. The Tax Assessor shall be certified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148.1 et
seq.
§ 2-46.2 EDISON CODE § 2-47.2
AO:90
foreclosure or otherwise for nonpayment of taxes, as well as the sale of
real property of the Township no longer needed for public purposes. It shall
also be responsible for the sale of any and all tax sale certificates covering
properties which it is determined not to acquire through foreclosure or
otherwise. All of the sales of both tax sale certificates and real property shall
be conducted in accordance with general law and any local ordinances,
under the supervision of the Supervisor of this Division and in accordance
with the terms and conditions prescribed by the Council for any specific
sale.
§ 2-48. through § 2-55. (RESERVED)
§ 2-56. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.
§ 2-56.1. Director of Health and Human Services. [1999 Code
§ 2.28.010; Ord. No. O.1548-2007]
There shall be a Department of Health and Human Services, the head of
which shall be the Director of Health and Human Services. His or her
compensation shall be such sum annually as fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-56.2. Divisions of Health and Human Services. [1999 Code
§ 2.28.020; Ord. No. O.1548-2007]
There shall be within the Department a Division of Health, a Division of
Welfare, a Division of Human Services and a Division of Senior Citizen
Services.
§ 2-57. DIVISION OF HEALTH.
§ 2-57.1. Health Officer as Head of Division. [1999 Code § 2.28.030;
New]
The head of the Division of Health shall be the Municipal Health Officer as
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council as hereinafter set
forth, and he or she shall have supervision over all officers and employees
of the Division.
§ 2-57.2. Functions. [1999 Code § 8.44.040; New]
There is established the Division of Health of the Township, which the
Department of Health and Human Services shall maintain for the purpose
of administering the business connected with the enforcement of the
ordinances and regulations of the Department of Health and Human
Services and the laws of this State which relate to the public health,
the inspection and protection of the food supply, the investigation and
abatement of nuisances and conditions affecting the public health, the
investigation and enforcement of the sanitary conditions of public and
private buildings and premises, the collection and keeping of vital statistics
§ 2-47.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-57.2
AO:91
and the records of the Division of Health, and the dissemination of
information relating to public health matters.
§ 2-57.3. Duties of Health Officer. [1999 Code § 8.44.050; New]
The Mayor with the consent of the Council shall appoint a person to be
known as the Health Officer of the Township, who shall be the executive
officer and official representative of the Division of Health and whose
duties shall be to conduct the business of such Health Department, to
enforce all statutes, ordinances and regulations relating to the protection
and promotion of health, and to perform such other duties as the Board may
direct.
§ 2-57.4. Authority of Health Officer. [1999 Code § 8.44.060]
The Health Officer shall have all the powers and authority conferred by law.
§ 2-58. DIVISION OF WELFARE.
§ 2-58.1. Local Assistance Board. [1999 Code § 2.28.040A]
A Division of Welfare shall be the Local Assistance Board, consisting of three
(3) members. The term of one (1) member of the Local Assistance Board
shall be for one (1) year and such member shall be appointed from among
the membership of the Governing Body. The remaining two (2) memberships
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council.
The term of each member of the Board shall begin on the first day of
January, and each member shall continue in office until his or her successors
shall be appointed and shall qualify. Except for the member who is a Council
member, the terms of office shall be for two (2) years, each expiring in
alternate years.
§ 2-58.2. Functions of Division of Welfare. [1999 Code § 2.28.040B]
The Division of Welfare shall have the following functions:
a. Administer programs of assistance to needy persons in cooperation
with Federal, State, County and municipal agencies;
b. Grant public assistance on a budget deficit basis for living expenses,
medical services and supplies, hospitalization, convalescent and dental
care and boarding care for children;
c. Provide social services of family adjustment and rehabilitation,
preventive and protective;
d. Participate in general community welfare interests, such as local
unemployment, child care and prevention and delinquency;
e. Maintain complete social case records, comply with State regulations
and make such reports and analyses of welfare problems and grants as
are necessary or desirable.
§ 2-57.2 EDISON CODE § 2-59
AO:92
§ 2-59. DIVISION OF HUMAN SERVICES.
§ 2-59.1. Health Officer as Head; Functions. [1999 Code § 2.28.050;
Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 8]
§ 2-60. DIVISION OF SENIOR CITIZEN SERVICES.
§ 2-60.1. Supervisor of Senior Citizen Services; Functions. [1999
Code § 2.28.060]
a. The head of the Division of Human Services shall be the Municipal
Health Officer who will serve as a source of information or expertise as
refers to the following.
b. The Division of Human Services shall have the following functions:
1. Assist in the relocation of persons displaced by local governmental
action;
2. Assist the needy who require medical attention or extended care
facilities;
3. Assist in the providing of transportation for the young, disabled and
senior citizens when no other means of transportation is available;
4. Assist charitable agencies in the distribution of food, toys and
clothing;
5. Provide counseling for referral purposes to persons in need, i.e.,
mental and physical;
6. Assist residents whenever and wherever possible in preserving the
health of the individual.
7. Support and house the Edison Municipal Alliance, established May
23, 1990 via resolution, whose mission is to fight against
alcoholism, drug abuse and violence.
a. The head of the Division of Senior Citizen Services shall be the
Supervisor of Senior Citizen Services.
b. The Division of Senior Citizen Services shall have the following
functions:
1. To plan, schedule and administer programs for the recreational,
cultural, informational, educational and social needs of the elderly
residents of the Township with special emphasis on identified
special target groups, including but not limited to the minority and
impoverished elderly;
2. To coordinate the scheduling of programs offered by other
organizational units of government where such programs are of
special interest to the elderly residents of Edison Township;
§ 2-59 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-60.1
AO:93
§ 2-61. HEALTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-61.1. Established; Functions. [1999 Code § 2.28.070]
§ 2-62. through § 2-70. (RESERVED)
3. To sponsor and administer senior programs and activities in
cooperation with other public and private agencies and
organizations;
4. To provide outreach and transportation services to elderly
residents to ensure their access to programs of need and/or
interest;
5. To serve as coordinator between the Township and all other levels
of government for the procurement of public funds and technical
assistance relative to senior citizen programs, including the filing
of grant applications on behalf of the Township;
6. To operate the Township's senior citizen community centers in
conformance with established policy and budgetary appropriations.
a. There shall be a Health Advisory Committee consisting of seven
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. Each member shall serve a term of three (3) years or until a
successor is appointed, except that of the members first appointed,
three (3) shall serve for three (3) years, two (2) shall serve for two (2)
years and two shall serve for one (1) year. The Township Council shall
select one (1) of its members as a liaison to the Health Advisory
Committee. The council liaison shall be a nonvoting member of the
Committee.
b. The Health Advisory Committee shall organize annually and shall select
a chairperson from its membership. The Committee shall meet
regularly, but in no event less frequently than once each calendar
quarter.
c. The Health Advisory Committee shall be responsible to assist the Mayor
and the Director of Health in their efforts to:
1. Determine and define public health problems and needs;
2. Establish priorities for health programs based upon needs,
resources and demands;
3. Evaluate current programs periodically to determine progress,
need and necessary modifications.
d. The Department of Health shall provide materials and services
appropriate to the proper operation of the Health Advisory Committee,
including but not limited to secretarial support of meetings and minutes
of the Health Advisory Committee.
§ 2-60.1 EDISON CODE § 2-71
AO:94
§ 2-71. DEPARTMENT OF LAW.
§ 2-71.1. Township Attorney; Appointment; Term. [1999 Code
§ 2.32.010]
There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the
Township Attorney, who shall enforce all laws and act to protect the
interests of the Township. He or she shall represent the Township in all
judicial and administrative proceedings in which the Township or any of its
officers or agencies may be a party or have an interest as more particularly
set forth at length hereinafter. He or she shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, for a term of four (4) years and
until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. He or she shall
be an attorney at law authorized to practice in the State of New Jersey. Such
attorney shall receive a fixed salary established by ordinance and, for such
salary, he or she will be required to perform the powers and duties specified
in subsection 2-71.2.
§ 2-71.2. Township Attorney; Powers and Duties. [1999 Code
§ 2.32.020]
The Township Attorney shall:
a. Advise the Council. Advise the Council or its committees or any
Township Officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions
arising in the conduct of the Township's business;
b. Prepare Ordinances. Prepare and revise all ordinances of the Code
when so requested by the Council or any committee thereof;
c. Prepare Resolutions. Prepare or draft and revise all resolutions when so
requested by the Council or any committee or member thereof;
d. Render Opinions. Render his or her opinion on any legal matter or
question submitted to him or her by the Council or any of its
committees or by any Township officer, in writing or orally;
e. Prepare or Draft Legal Instruments. Prepare, draft and approve as to
form and sufficiency all legal documents, instruments, contracts and
deeds to which the Township is a party, including such instruments and
agreements with other municipalities, and approve also as to form all
bonds required to be submitted to the Township;
f. Attend Council Meetings. Attend Council meetings, including special
meetings and conference meetings, for the purpose of giving the
Council any legal advice requested by its members;
g. Bid Openings. Attend and advise the Council or any designated officer
of the Township in the opening and awarding of public bids;
h. Additional Attorneys and Technical Assistants. Supervise and direct the
work of such additional attorneys and technical and professional
§ 2-71 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-71.2
AO:95
§ 2-71.3. Nonsalaried Services of the Township Attorney. [1999
Code § 2.32.030]
All work performed by the Township Attorney outside the scope and spirit
of the above-mentioned services, including but not limited to services as
counsel in litigation, administrative or condemnation proceedings, except as
provided in subsection 2-71.2, shall be paid for by the municipality upon the
submission of reasonable bills for such services performed, supported by
the pertinent vouchers. All such nonsalaried services, prior to undertaking
by the Township Attorney, shall require a resolution by the Township
Council authorizing such services.
assistants as the Council may authorize for special or regular
employment in the Department of Law;
i. Tax Appeals. Represent the Township in all tax appeals to the County
Board of Taxation, except that when the assessed valuation is five
hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars or more, subsection 2-71.3
shall apply;
j. Bonding Ordinances. Perform all of the required legal services in the
preparation, submission and adoption of bonding ordinances
authorized by the Council in accordance with the applicable New Jersey
statutes and assist and furnish all the necessary information to any
special counsel hired for purposes of a particular bond issue;
k. Real Estate Acquisitions. Perform all the necessary legal services in
connection with all real estate acquisitions involving the Township,
except those where condemnation is required;
l. Make Reports.
1. Immediate Report of Decision. Immediately report to the
Administrator and Council the outcome of any litigation in which
the Township has an interest.
2. Annual Report of Pending Litigation. Make an annual report to the
Administrator and Council, by the first regular meeting of the year,
of all pending litigation in which the Township has an interest and
the condition thereof;
m. Keep Records.
1. Suits. Keep a complete record of all suits in which the Township
had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the court
where brought, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case
or its condition, if pending, and the briefs of counsel.
2. Opinions and Titles. Keep a complete record of all written opinions
furnished by him or her and of all certificates or abstracts of titles
furnished by him or her to the Township or any department or
official thereof.
§ 2-71.2 EDISON CODE § 2-71.4
AO:96
§ 2-71.4. Approval of Deeds and Contracts by the Township
Attorney. [1999 Code § 2.32.040]
No warrant shall be issued for the payment of any money from the Township
treasury in any matter where a deed is necessary or under any contract
to which the Township is a party, unless the Township Attorney shall have
endorsed thereon, in writing, his or her approval as to form and legality,
together with a statement of any liens or encumbrances affecting the
transaction.
§ 2-71.5. Township Attorney's Limitation on Power to Compromise.
[1999 Code § 2.32.050]
The Township Attorney shall not, without approval of the Council by
resolution, be empowered to compromise, settle or adjust any rights,
claims, demands or causes of action in favor of or against the Township, nor
to permit, offer or confess judgment against the Township, nor to accept
any offer or judgment in favor of the Township, provided that this section
shall not operate to limit or abridge the discretion of the Township Attorney
in regard to the proper conduct of the trial of any action or proceeding
or deprive him or her of the powers and privileges ordinarily exercised in
judicial proceedings by counsel acting for private clients.
§ 2-71.6. Special Counsel. [1999 Code § 2.32.060]
The Township Attorney is authorized, with the prior approval of the Mayor
and Council and within the available appropriations, to employ such
additional counsel to aid in the trial or argument of such causes or
proceedings of importance in which the Township may be a party or be
interested as he or she may deem necessary.
§ 2-71.7. Township Attorney's Duties Upon Leaving Office. [1999
Code § 2.32.070]
Upon the expiration of his or her term of office or his or her resignation
or removal therefrom, the Township Attorney shall surrender forthwith, to
the several Township officers charged with the custody thereof, all deeds,
leases, conveyances, obligations, bonds, contracts, agreements, reports and
all other papers in his or her hands belonging to the Township and shall
deliver to his or her successor in office all legal papers and documents
relating to the business of the Township, together with a written consent
of substitution of his or her successor in all actions then pending and
undetermined in which the Township is a party.
§ 2-72. PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-72.1. Appointments; Term. [1999 Code § 2.32.080A]
Within the department of law, there shall be two (2) legal assistants to serve
as Municipal Public Defenders in accordance with P.L. 1997, Chapter 256,
one (1) of whom shall be designated as the Chief Municipal Public Defender.
§ 2-71.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-72.1
AO:97
The Public Defenders shall be licensed to practice law in New Jersey and
shall serve for a term of one (1) year from the date of his or her appointment
and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor.
§ 2-72.2. Duties. [1999 Code § 2.32.080B]
§ 2-72.3. Eligibility for Services. [1999 Code § 2.32.080C]
Eligibility for services of the Municipal Public Defenders shall be
determined by the Municipal Court Judge on the basis of need of the
defendant. Need shall be measured according to N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-14 and
guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court. In the event that
a determination of eligibility cannot be made before the time when the first
services are to be rendered, or if an initial determination is found to be
erroneous, the Municipal Court shall refer the defendant to the Municipal
Public Defender provisionally, and if subsequently, it is determined that the
defendant is ineligible the Municipal Court shall inform the defendant, and
the defendant shall be obliged to engage his own counsel and to reimburse
the municipality for the cost of services rendered to that time.
§ 2-72.4. Fees. [1999 Code § 2.32.080D]
a. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Public Defenders to represent,
except in the case of temporary unavailability or conflict of interest, any
defendant charged with an offense in the Municipal Court who is an
indigent municipal defendant entitled to representation pursuant to P.L.
1997, Chapter 256.
b. The Public Defenders shall be responsible for handling all phases of the
defense, including but not limited to discovery, pretrial and post-trial
hearings, motions, removals to Federal District Court and other
collateral functions reasonably related to the defense. As used in this
sub-section, "post-trial hearing" shall not include de novo appeals to the
Superior Court.
c. The Municipal Public Defender shall represent an indigent charged in
Municipal Court with a crime as specified in N.J.S.A. 2B:12-18 or, if in
the opinion of the Municipal Court, there is a likelihood that the
defendant, if convicted of any other offense, will be subject to
imprisonment or other consequence of magnitude, the Municipal Public
Defender shall defend that indigent defendant.
a. A person applying for representation by the Municipal Public
Defenders, or court-approved, shall pay an application fee of two
hundred ($200.00) dollars. In accordance with guidelines promulgated
by the Supreme Court, the Municipal Court may waive any required
application fee, in whole or in part, only if the court determines, in its
discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by the applicant, that
the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking representation. The Municipal Court may permit a person to
§ 2-72.1 EDISON CODE § 2-72.4
AO:98
§ 2-72.5. Collection of Fees. [1999 Code § 2.32.080E]
pay the application fee over a specific period of time not to exceed four
(4) months.
b. Funds collected pursuant to paragraph a above shall be deposited in a
dedicated fund administration by the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township. Such funds shall be used exclusively to meet costs incurred
in providing the services of a Municipal Public Defender including,
when required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
a. The Director of Law, in the name of the Township, may do all things
necessary to collect any moneys due the Township by way of
reimbursement for services rendered by the Public Defender. The
Director of Law shall have all the remedies and proceedings available
for and upon the recovery of a judgment in a civil action and shall also
be permitted to collect counsel fees and costs from the defendant for
such collection action so that the same are not borne by the
municipality.
b. If the defendant has, or reasonably expects to have, a means to meet
some part, though not all of the costs of services rendered, the
defendant shall be required to reimburse the municipality, either by a
single payment or in an installment in such amounts as he or she can
reasonably be expected to pay; but no default or failure in making
payments shall affect or reduce the rendering of services.
c. The municipality shall have a lien on any property to which the
defendant shall have or acquire an interest for an amount equal to the
reasonable value of the services rendered to a defendant pursuant to
this act as calculated at the same rate as the office of the Public
Defender bills clients at that time.
d. To effectuate such a lien for the municipality, the Director of Law shall
file a notice setting forth services rendered to defendant and the
reasonable value thereof with the Clerk of the Superior Court. The filing
of the notice with the Clerk of the Superior Court shall constitute a lien
on the property for a period of ten (10) years from the date of filing,
unless discharged sooner, and except for such time limitations, shall
have the force and effect of a judgment. Within ten (10) days of the
filing of the notice, the Director of Law shall send, by certified mail, or
serve personally, a copy of the notice with a statement of the date of the
filing to or upon the defendant at the defendant's last-known address. If
the Director of Law shall fail to give notice, the lien is void.
e. The Director of Law is authorized to compromise and settle any claim
for services performed pursuant to this act whenever the financial
circumstances of the person receiving the services are such that, in the
judgment of the Director of Law, the best interests of the State will be
served by compromise and settlement.
§ 2-72.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-73
AO:99
§ 2-73. through § 2-74. (RESERVED)
§ 2-75. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
§ 2-75.1. Director. [1999 Code § 2.36.010]
There shall be a Department of Parks and Recreation, the head of which
shall be the Director. His or her compensation shall be such sum, annually,
as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-75.2. Functions of Department. [1999 Code § 2.36.020]
This Department shall:
§ 2-75.3. Division of Recreation; Division of Parks. [1999 Code
§ 2.36.030]
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be divided into two (2)
divisions. The divisions shall be under the authority of the Director of Parks
and Recreation. The divisions shall be as follows:
§ 2-76. (RESERVED)
§ 2-77. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-77.1. Director of Public Works. [1999 Code § 2.44.020; Ord. No.
O.1548-2007§ 13]
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director of Public Works. The Director shall, prior to his or her appointment,
be qualified by training or experience in the planning and execution of
public works and improvements and in responsible management of
technical personnel. His or her compensation shall be such sum, annually,
a. Supervise, coordinate and provide for the planning and implementation
of all municipally sponsored recreation activities;
b. Supervise the operation of all public parks and properties within the
Township.
a. Division of Recreation. The head of the Division of Recreation shall be
the Supervisor of Recreation. The Supervisor of Recreation shall
provide for the planning and implementation of all municipally
sponsored recreation activities.
b. Division of Parks. The Head of the Division of Parks shall be the
Supervisor of Parks. The Supervisor of Parks shall provide for the
maintenance of all public parks and properties within the limits of the
Township. The Supervisor of Parks shall also provide for the operation
of such athletic facilities which are provided for in a lease agreement
between the Township and the Board of Education.
§ 2-73 EDISON CODE § 2-77.1
AO:100
as shall be fixed by ordinance. The Director shall be certified pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6c et seq.
§ 2-77.2. Divisions; Duties of Director. [1999 Code § 2.44.02; Ord.
No. O.1548-2007§ 14; amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. O.2049-2019]
The Department of Public Works shall be organized into five divisions:
Streets, Sanitation, Public Buildings and Grounds, Parks and Shade Trees,
and Vehicle Maintenance. The Director of the Department, through such
divisions and otherwise, and among other things, shall:
§ 2-78. DIVISION OF STREETS.
§ 2-78.1. Supervisor of Streets. [1999 Code § 2.44.030; Ord. No.
O.1548-2007§ 15]
The head of the Division of Streets shall be the Supervisor of Streets. His
or her salary shall be set according to union contract or fixed by ordinance.
The Division of Streets under the supervision of the Supervisor of the
Division shall provide for street cleaning, constructing, reconstructing and
maintenance and repair of all public streets and storm drainage systems
within the Township and regulate the construction, maintenance, alteration
and repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters and encroachments by objects and
structures above and below such streets and sidewalks, including street
cleaning, and snow removal, in accordance with any of the ordinances of
the Township.
§ 2-79. DIVISION OF WATER SUPPLY. [1999 Code § 2.44.040; Ord.
No. O.1548-2007§ 16]
(Reserved for future use)
§ 2-80. DIVISION OF SOLID WASTE.
§ 2-80.1. Supervisor of Solid Waste; Duties of Division. [1999 Code
§ 2.44.050; Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 17]
The head of the Division of Solid Waste shall be the Supervisor of Solid
Waste. His or her salary shall be set according to union contract or fixed
by ordinance. The Division shall be responsible for refuse and garbage
collection and disposal and the operation of any Township-owned transfer
station. It shall also be responsible to assist in snow removal on all Township
streets if so assigned that function by the Director of Public Works.
a. Direct and supervise the preparation of plans and specifications and
performance of the contracts of all Township public works and
improvements;
b. Provide all mechanical services required by any department, office or
agency of the Township, except as otherwise directed by the Mayor or
Business Administrator.
§ 2-77.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-81
AO:101
§ 2-81. DIVISION OF SEWERS. [1999 Code § 2.44.060; Ord. No.
O.1548-2007§ 18; amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. O.2049-2019]
The Division of Sewers shall be incorporated into the Department of Water
and Sewer, as set forth in Chapter 27 herein.
§ 2-82. DIVISION OF PARKS AND SHADE TREES.
§ 2-82.1. Supervisor of Parks and Shade Trees; Duties. [Ord. No.
O.1548-2007§ 19]
The head of the Division of Parks and Shade Trees shall be the Supervisor
of Parks and Shade Trees. The Supervisor of Parks and Shade Trees shall
provide for the complete maintenance of all Township parks, recreational
facilities, and shade trees on Township property and street rights-of-way.
He or she shall also be responsible for the maintenance of such athletic
facilities as are provided for in any lease agreement between the Township
and the Board of Education. He or she shall also be responsible to assist
in snow removal on all Township streets if so assigned that function by the
Director of Public Works.
§ 2-83. DIVISION OF VEHICLE MAINTENANCE.
§ 2-83.1. Supervisor of Vehicle Maintenance; Duties. [Ord. No.
O.1548-2007§ 20]
The head of the Division of Vehicle Maintenance shall be the Supervisor of
the Division. His or her duties shall include the maintenance and repair of
all Township vehicles, other than police vehicles. His or her salary shall be
set according to union contract or fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-84. DIVISION OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
§ 2-84.1. Supervisor of Public Buildings and Grounds; Duties. [1999
Code § 2.44.090; Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 21]
The head of the Division of Public Buildings and Grounds shall be the
Supervisor of Public Buildings and Grounds. The Supervisor of Public
Buildings and Grounds shall provide for complete maintenance of the
Municipal Complex and extraordinary and emergency repairs on all other
Township buildings. The Division of Public Buildings and Grounds shall also
assist in snow removal on all Township streets, if so assigned that function
by the Director of Public Works.
§ 2-85. (RESERVED)
§ 2-86. DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND ENGINEERING.
§ 2-86.1. Office of the Township Engineer; Director of Planning and
Engineering; Duties. [Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 10]
§ 2-81 EDISON CODE § 2-86.1
AO:102
§ 2-86.2. Divisions. [Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 10]
The Department of Planning and Engineering shall be organized into the
following four (4) divisions: Engineering, Planning and Zoning, Housing
and Community Development and Construction Code Enforcement. The
Director of Planning and Engineering by and through the Department and
the Divisions shall:
a. There shall be a Department of Planning and Engineering, the head of
which shall be the Township Engineer who shall serve as the Director of
Planning and Engineering. His or her compensation shall be such sum
annually as fixed by ordinance.
b. The Director of Planning and Engineering shall, prior to his or her
appointment, be qualified by education, training, and/or experience in
the planning, coordination, and execution of diversified municipal
projects, programs, community services, and engineering
improvements, and in responsible management of professional and
technical personnel.
c. The Director of Planning and Engineering shall be responsible for the
administration, direction, coordination, supervision and control of all
divisional units, and committees, as may be assigned to the
Department.
d. There shall also be assigned to the Department, the statutory position
of Municipal Engineer who shall be appointed according to law. The
Municipal Engineer, as a minimum, shall perform these duties and
responsibilities required by law. Prior to appointment, the Municipal
Engineer shall possess a valid New Jersey Professional Engineer
license.
e. There shall be no prohibition against the Township Engineer
concurrently holding the statutory position of Municipal Engineer.
f. The Township Engineer shall serve as a liaison between the Township
and the County of Middlesex and other governmental entities and/or
agencies, on coordination of capital development projects.
g. The Township Engineer shall be responsible for the activities assigned
to the Department, whether accomplished by staff or outside consultant
services.
a. Develop and support all Township capital improvement programs;
b. Direct and supervise all engineering, planning, and community
development services required by any department, office or agency of
the Township, except as otherwise directed by the Mayor or Business
Administrator;
c. Direct and provide for the enforcement of all buildings codes and
zoning ordinances;
§ 2-86.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-86.2
AO:103
§ 2-87. ENGINEERING DUTIES.
§ 2-87.1. Engineering Devices. [Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 10]
d. Administer all private development applications before the Planning
Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
a. Duties. Under the direction of the Municipal Engineer, the Division
shall:
1. When directed, prepare all plans and technical specifications for
capital improvements undertaken by the Township by contract or
by force account;
2. Provide maps, plans and specifications, surveys and records with
respect to public property, works and facilities owned or operated
by the Township;
3. Provide engineering services to the various departments, boards
and agencies of the Township as directed by the Mayor or other
authorized authority;
4. Issue necessary certificates and approve bills for work performed
under his or her supervision;
5. Prepare and update real property tax maps on a current basis;
6. Render opinions on any engineering matter or question when
submitted to him or her;
7. Supervise and direct the work of such additional engineers and
technical assistants and personnel as may be necessary by
consultant contract or regular employment in the Department of
Planning and Engineering;
8. When directed by the Mayor or authorized authority, prepare plans,
maps, drawings, surveys, reports, certifications, engineering
documents or instruments and studies as may be required in order
to qualify for Federal, State or assistance programs;
9. Maintain a complete record of all engineering plans, specifications,
surveys, maps, current tax maps, reports, certifications,
documents, instruments and written advisory reports and opinions
furnished in which the Township had or has an interest.
b. Records of the Municipal Engineer. All maps, correspondence, profiles,
specifications, surveys, field notes and related documents done on
behalf of the Township shall be and remain the property of the
Township. If filed for convenience of the Municipal Engineer at a
private or Township office, they shall be furnished or returned upon
request. Upon the termination of employment of the Municipal
Engineer, such documents shall be delivered to the successor Municipal
§ 2-86.2 EDISON CODE § 2-87.1
AO:104
§ 2-88. DIVISION OF PLANNING AND ZONING.
§ 2-88.1. Township Planner.
Within the Department of Planning and Engineering, there shall be a
Division of Planning and Zoning, the head of which shall be the Township
Planner. Prior to appointment, the Township Planner shall have graduated
from a four-year college or university of recognized standing and shall have
completed a major course of study in land use planning or related field and
shall hold a valid license from the State of New Jersey as a Professional
Planner.
§ 2-88.2. Duties of Division; Organization. [Ord. No.
O.1548-2007§ 10]
Engineer or to the Township upon direction pursuant to the provisions
of this section.
a. The Division of Planning and Zoning shall have the following duties:
1. Undertake various planning activities, including the organizing,
promoting and making of planning surveys; collection and
compilation of planning data; conducting of investigations and
analyses of the data; drawing and drafting of maps and charts; and
the interpretation and transportation of statistical data into visual
form.
2. Supply planning services by staff and/or consultant contract to
various autonomous boards and elected and appointed officials of
the Township as directed by Director of Planning and Engineering.
3. The Zoning Officer and all such authorized staff members shall be
assigned to the Division of Planning and Zoning for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of the Zoning regulations of the Township.
4. The following autonomous statutory boards are assigned to the
Division for administrative purposes and staff performance
reporting, to which the Municipal Engineer may serve as the
administrative officer:
(a) The Planning Board;
(b) The Zoning Board of Adjustment;
(c) The Environmental Commission.
5. Periodically update the master plan and land development
ordinances in order to implement the recommendations of the
Planning Board and Municipal Council.
6. Other duties as assigned by the Director of Planning and
Engineering.
§ 2-87.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-89
AO:105
§ 2-89. DIVISION OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
§ 2-89.1. Coordinator of Community Development. [Ord. No.
O.1548-2007§ 10]
Within the Department of Planning and Engineering, there shall be a
Division of Housing and Community Development, the head of which shall
be the Coordinator of Community Development and he/she shall be qualified
based upon training and/or experience.
§ 2-89.2. Division Duties. [Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 10]
§ 2-90. DIVISION OF CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCEMENT.
§ 2-90.1. Construction Code Official. [Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 10]
Within the Department of Planning and Engineering, there shall be a
Division of Construction Code Enforcement, which Division shall be
comprised of the Edison Construction Enforcement Agency. The head of the
a. The Division shall have the following duties.
1. Plan, schedule and administer the following programs:
(a) Community Development Block Grant (CDBG);
(b) Affordable Housing (COAH);
(c) Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA);
(d) Affirmative action/equal employment opportunity;
(e) Human Relations.
2. Establish linkage with other Township entities, both public and
private, to promote and increase service delivery to those citizens
that require and are eligible for municipal services;
3. Administer housing programs that provide housing to eligible
persons of low and moderate income, pursuant to Federal and State
guidelines;
4. Administer the various Township programs established for the
purpose of programs;
5. Serve as liaison between the Township and other governmental
entities for the procurement of public funds and technical
assistance, including the filing of grant applications on behalf of the
Township;
6. Other duties as assigned by the Director of Planning and
Engineering.
§ 2-89 EDISON CODE § 2-90.1
AO:106
Division of Construction Code Enforcement shall be the Construction Code
Official.
§ 2-90.2. Division Duties. [Ord. No. O.1548-2007§ 10]
The Division of Construction Code Enforcement shall perform all duties
and responsibilities as required by the Uniform Construction Code, the
International Construction Code, the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, and laws pursuant to the New Jersey Construction Code, and follow
the requirements under the DCA (New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs), and other duties as may be assigned by the Director of Planning
and Engineering.
§ 2-91. TOWNSHIP EMPLOYEES; REORGANIZATION OF
TOWNSHIP LABOR FORCES. [Ord. No. O.1769-2011]
Before the reorganization or restructure of any Township department or
non-departmental unit of the Township takes effect, Council approval shall
be required. The Mayor shall submit any plan to reorganize or restructure
any Township department or work unit that includes the addition or
reduction of personnel. Any method to achieve immediate reductions in
personnel, including layoffs, demotions, the abolishment of positions shall
be included in a written plan developed by the Mayor and submitted to
Council for review.
The written plan shall provide Council with a clear rational basis for the
proposed reorganization. The plan shall include any job positions targeted
for reduction, layoff, demotion, or abolishment. The plan will also include a
detailed cost/benefit analysis comparing the proposed organization with the
current one. Detailed recommendations and opinions from each department
head regarding the impact such changes or reductions will have or are
likely to have on their respective departments or divisions or units will also
be included in the report.
The plan shall be approved by ordinance. The Mayor shall administer the
plan strictly in accordance with the approved plan's language; any deviation
from the actions described in the plan will require submittal of a written
supplemental plan explaining the need to deviate from the approved plan.
Explanations will provide such detail as to answer all questions and
concerns had by Council members. Any supplemental changes will be made
by ordinance.
The Mayor or any other municipal employee may be called upon by Council
to publicly clarify or explain any part of the plan or supplement plan during
any Council Committee meeting.
Once Council approves the plan by ordinance, any reductions or increases
will be conducted in accordance with procedures established in the
Township's Personnel policies or applicable collective bargaining
agreements.
§ 2-90.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-92
AO:107
§ 2-92. FURLOUGHS. [Ord. No. O.1794-2012§ 3]
Any furlough instituted by the Township of Edison shall be defined as: A
temporary layout encompassing the temporary cessation of an employer's
operation, or a portion of an employer's operation, for a definite period of
time in order to achieve a governmental economy or efficiency, and without
pay to the employees who are furloughed.
§ 2-93. (RESERVED)
§ 2-92 EDISON CODE § 2-93
AO:108
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Court
§ 2-94. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-94.1. Judge of the Municipal Court. [1999 Code § 2.48.020A]
There shall be a Municipal Court of the Township consisting of three (3)
judges, one (1) of whom shall be the presiding judge. He or she shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Municipal
Council and shall have the qualifications required by law. Each judge shall
serve for a term of three (3) years from the date of his or her appointment
or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The Municipal Court
and Judges thereof shall have, possess and exercise all the jurisdictions,
powers, functions and duties which are or may be conferred by law and the
applicable rules of the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
§ 2-94.2. Municipal Court Administrator. [1999 Code § 2.48.020B;
New]
The Municipal Court Administrator shall be appointed by the Judge for a
period of one (1) year. The Municipal Court Administrator shall be certified
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-10 et seq.
§ 2-94 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-94.2
AO:109

ARTICLE V
Boards, Commissions, Committees and Agencies
§ 2-95. HOUSING AUTHORITY.
§ 2-95.1. Functions and Duties. [1999 Code § 2.48.010]
There shall be a Housing Authority of the Township, as heretofore created
and established pursuant to the Local Housing Authorities Law of this State
(N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.), and such local Housing Authority shall act as
the redevelopment agency for slum clearance and urban rehabilitation in
the Township for the purpose of carrying out the functions and provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and all other functions, powers and duties
heretofore conferred with respect thereto are continued. All appointments
to the Housing Authority shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et
seq.
§ 2-96. LOCAL DEFENSE COUNCIL.
§ 2-96.1. Established. [1999 Code § 2.48.030]
There shall be a Local Defense Council of the Township as heretofore
established. It shall have all the functions, powers and duties conferred
upon it pursuant to general law or by any executive order or regulation
promulgated pursuant to law. It shall be created pursuant to N.J.S.A. App.
A:9-41.
§ 2-97. FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
§ 2-97.1. Board of Trustees Established. [1999 Code § 2.48.040]
There shall be a free public library operated by a Board of Trustees, said
board to consist of nine (9) members, one (1) of whom shall be the Mayor,
one (1) the local Superintendent of Schools and seven (7) citizens to be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the Governing Body. The Mayor,
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:54-9, may appoint an alternate to act in his or
her place and stead with authorization to attend all meetings of the Board
and in his or her absence to vote on all questions before the Board. The
Superintendent of Schools, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:54-9, may appoint
an alternate to act in his or her place and stead with authorization to attend
all meetings of the Board and in his or her absence to vote on all questions
before the Board. The Board shall have and perform all of the powers and
duties prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq. In conformance with N.J.S.A.
40:54-9, two (2) citizen board members added by this section shall serve
terms of five (5) years.
§ 2-98. SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING AGENCY.
§ 2-95 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-98.1
AO:111
§ 2-98.1. Created. [1999 Code § 2.52.010]
There is created a Senior Citizen Housing Agency (the "agency") of the
Township.
§ 2-98.2. Composition. [1999 Code § 2.52.020]
The agency shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the express consent and approval of the Township
Council. Failure of the Township Council to consent to any member within
forty-five (45) days of its receipt of the written appointment by the Mayor
shall result in said appointment's becoming effective. The membership of
the agency shall consist of the following:
§ 2-98.3. Terms. [1999 Code § 2.52.030]
§ 2-98.4. Chairperson. [1999 Code § 2.52.040]
The Mayor shall designate one (1) member, other than the Township Council
member, to serve as chairperson for a term of two (2) years.
§ 2-98.5. Quorum. [1999 Code § 2.52.050]
Attendance by three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. Passage of any
motion requires an affirmative vote of a majority of members present.
§ 2-98.6. Ex Officio Members; Director. [1999 Code § 2.52.060]
§ 2-98.7. Removal; Vacancies. [1999 Code § 2.52.070]
a. One (1) member shall be a member of the Township Council;
b. The remaining four (4) members shall be residents of the Township.
a. The Township Council member shall serve for a term of one (1) year.
b. The initial terms of office of the remaining agency members shall be one
(1) for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years and two (2) for three (3)
years, to be designated by the Township Committee in making the
appointments. Their terms shall thereafter be three (3) years.
a. The Mayor or Business Administrator, if so designated by the Mayor, the
President of the Township Council, the Chair of the Planning Board and
the Executive Director of the Edison Township Housing Authority shall
serve as ex officio members of the agency.
b. The Agency shall designate a Director of the Agency who shall be
responsible for its administrative functioning.
a. The Township Council may remove any member of the Agency for
cause. Written charges served upon the member shall be followed by a
§ 2-98.1 EDISON CODE § 2-98.7
AO:112
§ 2-98.8. Purposes, Powers and Duties. [1999 Code § 2.52.080]
The purposes, powers and duties of the Agency shall include the following:
hearing thereon, at which time the member shall be entitled to be heard
either in person or by counsel.
b. A vacancy in the membership of the Agency occurring otherwise than
by expiration of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as an original appointment.
a. To provide affordable housing for qualified Edison Township senior
citizens. In furtherance of this purpose, the agency shall look toward
planning, in conjunction with the Township, one or more congregate
senior citizen complexes, which shall include recreation, communal
health-care facilities and related on-site services;
b. To prepare and forward to the Township Council such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to implement the policies and goals of
this chapter, specifically, to ensure that housing units designated as
low- or moderate-income units, once constructed, shall remain
affordable to and occupied by qualified persons as defined herein. Such
rules shall be subject to review and modification by the Township
Council and must be adopted by the Township Council to be effective;
c. To determine maximum sale, resale and rental charges for qualified
units and to provide the Planning Board and developers with such
calculations;
d. To prequalify prospective owners and renters based upon income and
family size and to issue a certificate as to income eligibility status;
e. To require that a covenant be recorded with each deed, restricting the
resale of qualified units to qualified households;
f. To develop a formula for use in calculating the maximum resale price of
qualified units consistent with the provisions of this chapter;
g. To determine whether the cost or value of the installation of
improvements or amenities within or as a part of a qualified unit should
be included in the calculation of the resale price or rental charge of
such unit and to establish a procedure whereby homeowners can obtain
a determination in this regard prior to installing the improvement or
amenity;
h. To review and approve or disapprove the affirmative marketing plan
required of all developers of senior citizen housing covered by this
chapter;
i. To require developers to submit proofs of publication in accordance
with approved affirmative marketing plans and to monitor the
marketing practices of developers of income units to ensure that they
comply with the affirmative marketing requirements of this chapter.
§ 2-98.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-98.8
AO:113
§ 2-98.9. Appropriation of Funds. [1999 Code § 2.52.090]
The Township Council shall appropriate adequate moneys for the operation
of the Agency. The Agency may employ or contract for professional services
required to carry out its duties and responsibilities, subject to the amount
appropriated by the Township Council for its use. The Agency shall report
to the Township Council through the Township Administrator.
§ 2-99. (RESERVED)
§ 2-100. COMMISSION FOR THE DISABLED.
§ 2-100.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 2.56.010]
The Mayor and Township Council are desirous of rendering full civic
partnership to persons with disabilities. There is a need for the Township
government, with community involvement, to adopt existing and future
programs and services to bring all individuals into full civic partnership.
§ 2-100.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 2.56.020]
As used in this chapter:
DISABLED — Means an individual with a physical or mental impairment
that substantially limits one (1) or more of the major life activities of such
individual; a record of such an impairment or being regarded as having such
an impairment. An individual is considered to have a disability based on a
physical or mental impairment if he or she has:
j. To report quarterly to the Township Council on the status of qualified
units;
k. To bond and construct qualified units upon prior approval of the
Township Council, if authorized by law, or to otherwise assist the
Township or other appropriate entity in the bonding and/or
construction of such units;
l. To accept, in appropriate circumstances, moneys in lieu of construction
of low- or moderate-income units by developers of inclusionary
developments calculated at a per-unit rate to be determined by the
agency, which rate, however, shall not be less than the amount
acceptable to the Council on affordable housing in approved regional
contribution agreements.
Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or
anatomical loss affecting one (1) or more of the following body systems:
neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory
(including speech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive,
genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin and endocrine;
a.
§ 2-98.8 EDISON CODE § 2-100.2
AO:114
MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES — Means functions such as caring for one's self,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning and working. An individual is considered to have a record of a
physical or mental impairment if he or she has a history of, or has been
misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially
limits one (1) or more major life activities. An individual will be regarded as
having an impairment if he or she has:
§ 2-100.3. Commission Created. [1999 Code § 2.56.030]
There is created a Commission for the Disabled.
§ 2-100.4. Composition; Alternates; Vacancies. [1999 Code
§ 2.56.040]
Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific
learning disabilities; and/or
b.
Any contagious or noncontagious disease or condition, such as
orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impediments, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease,
diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, specific learning
disabilities, HIV disease (whether symptomatic or asymptomatic),
tuberculosis, drug addiction and alcoholism.
c.
A physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major
life activities but that is treated by a public entity as constituting such
a limitation;
a.
A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life
activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such
impairment; or
b.
No physical or mental impairments but is treated by a public entity as
having an impairment.
c.
a. Such commission shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2)
alternates who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Township Council. In addition, the Township's Americans
with Disabilities Act Coordinator shall be a nonvoting member of the
Commission. All members shall serve without compensation except that
the secretary of the Commission shall be paid a stipend not to exceed
fifty ($50.00) dollars per meeting to a maximum of ten (10) meetings
per year. Initially, two (2) members shall be appointed to serve three (3)
years, two (2) members shall be appointed to serve two (2) years and
three (3) members shall be appointed to serve one (1) year. Thereafter,
members of the Commission shall serve for terms of three (3) years.
b. Alternate members shall be designated Alternate No. 1 and Alternate
No. 2. Alternate members shall attend all meetings of the commission
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
§ 2-100.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-100.4
AO:115
§ 2-100.5. Quorum. [1999 Code § 2.56.050]
Quorum shall mean a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the voting members of the
Commission.
§ 2-100.6. Officers. [1999 Code § 2.56.060]
The Commission shall elect from its members a chairperson who shall serve
in that capacity for a one-year term. The Commission shall elect out of its
own membership the vice chair and secretary who shall serve for one-year
terms.
§ 2-100.7. Programs and Policies. [1999 Code § 2.56.070]
The chair of the Commission and any members so designated by the
Commission shall advise the Mayor and/or the Council Liaison of those
programs, grants, legislation, policies and practices they deem in the best
interest of fostering full civic partnership by individuals with disabilities.
§ 2-100.8. Review of Recommendations. [1999 Code § 2.56.080]
The Mayor and/or the Council Liaison shall review and evaluate all advice
and grant proposals from the Commission and recommend action to be
taken by the Township Council.
§ 2-101. through § 2-102. (RESERVED)
§ 2-103. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-103.1. Establishment. [1999 Code § 2.60.010]
There shall be an Environmental Commission in the Township, consisting
of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) members, established
for the protection, development and use of natural resources, including
water resources, located within the territorial limits of the Township. The
Commission shall be known as the "Environmental Commission of the
Township of Edison."
member. In the event of the absence or disqualification of a regular
member, Alternate No. 1 shall participate first and Alternate No. 2
second.
c. Initially, alternates will be appointed; one (1) alternate shall be
appointed to serve for three (3) years, and one (1) alternate shall be
appointed to serve for two (2) years. Thereafter, alternates shall serve
for three (3) years. Each member and alternate shall serve until such
person's successor is appointed.
d. Vacancies in the membership shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
§ 2-100.4 EDISON CODE § 2-103.2
AO:116
§ 2-103.2. Membership, Compensation, Terms, Removal and
Vacancies. [1999 Code § 2.60.020]
§ 2-103.3. Powers and Duties. [1999 Code § 2.60.030; Ord. No.
O.1659-2008§ 9]
The Environmental Commission shall:
a. The members of the Environmental Commission shall be appointed by
the Mayor. One (1) member shall be a member of the Planning Board,
and all shall be residents of the Township, and they shall serve without
compensation except as otherwise provided herein. The Mayor shall
designate one (1) of the members to serve as chair and presiding officer
of the Commission.
b. The commissioners first appointed shall serve for staggered one-, twoor
three-year terms.
c. The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission for cause, on
written charges served upon the member and after a hearing thereon at
which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
A vacancy on the Commission occurring other than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
a. Conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land areas
of the Township;
b. Coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes;
c. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purposes
within the limits of funds appropriated to the Commission;
d. Keep an index of all open areas publicly and privately owned, including
open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, and obtain information
on the proper use of such areas;
e. Recommend to the Planning Board from time to time plans and
programs for inclusion in the master plan of the Township for
development and use of such areas;
f. Do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and designed
to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission, including,
without limitation, the payment of such clerks and other employees as
the Commission may from time to time require, within the limits of the
funds appropriated to the Commission;
g. Keep records of the meetings and activities of the Commission and
make an annual report to the Council.
§ 2-103.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-103.3
AO:117
§ 2-103.4. Acquisition of Land. [1999 Code § 2.60.040]
Subject to the prior approval of the Planning Board and Council, the
Environmental Commission may acquire property, real and personal, in the
name of the Township, by gift, pledge, grant, bequest, devise or lease, for
any of the purposes of the Commission, and it shall administer the same for
such purposes subject to the terms of such conveyance or gift. The interest
so acquired may be the fee or any lesser interest, development right,
easement (including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual
right (including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or
reversions) as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect,
limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open
spaces and other land and water areas in the Township.
§ 2-104. HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION.
§ 2-104.1. Appointment of Members; Term. [1999 Code § 2.64.010]
The Human Relations Commission shall consist of up to fifteen (15)
members who shall either reside and/or work in the Township of Edison
and who shall serve without compensation. The Mayor shall appoint, with
the advice and consent of the Township Council, the members with no
consideration of political affiliation, and shall designate the chairperson
or co-chairpersons. In addition to the foregoing, the Township Council
shall appoint from among its members a liaison to the Human Rights
Commission. The aggregate membership of the Commission shall be
representative of the various racial, religious, national, cultural and other
social groups within the municipality. The appointment of one (1) or more
members younger than eighteen (18) years of age at the time of their
h. Prepare criteria, standards and guidelines for the use of the funds
collected in the Edison Tree Fund pursuant to the uses established
therefor as set forth in Section 25-13 of this Code.
i. Develop an inventory of trees needed to be planted throughout the
Township, and regularly update such inventory as to the removal of
trees by development and the replacement of same.
j. Prepare a quarterly report to the Township Council and the Planning
Board with regard to the appropriation and use of the funds collected in
the Edison Tree Fund, which shall include, without limitation, an
assessment of the Township's overall tree replacement needs, along
with the needs generated by the removal of trees within the Township,
and the effect of the removal of trees on a specific site, contributions to
the Fund in connection therewith, and the replacement and planting of
trees to mitigate such needs.
k. Make, keep and preserve minutes and records of its meetings and
activities, and shall make annual reports to the Township Council.
Copies of all minutes and records of its meetings and activities shall be
filed with the Township Clerk.
§ 2-103.3 EDISON CODE § 2-104.1
AO:118
appointment is permitted and, in fact, encouraged in order to promote a
broad spectrum of understanding between all age groups. The initial term
of all members of the Commission shall be staggered. Upon the expiration
of the initial term of appointment, all subsequent appointees shall serve for
a term of three (3) years.
§ 2-104.2. Powers and Duties; Purpose. [1999 Code § 2.64.020]
The Human Relations Commission is hereby empowered to make
recommendations to the Township Council for the development of policies
and procedures in general and for programs of formal and informal
education that will aid in eliminating all types of discrimination based on,
but not limited to, race, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability,
ethnicity, health, age, marital status, political affiliation, sexual orientation
or gender, or the perception of these qualities.
§ 2-104.3. Quorum. [1999 Code § 2.64.040]
Nine (9) members of the Human Relations Commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 2-105. through § 2-107. (RESERVED)
§ 2-108. MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE AND YOUTH SERVICES
COMMISSION.
§ 2-108.1. Commission Established. [Ord. No. O.1687-2009§ 1]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 17-40-2.6 and N.J.S.A. 13:90-2.4(d) and
13:90-2.9(a) (12), there is hereby established the Edison Municipal Alliance
and Youth Services Commission. The Edison Township Municipal Alliance
Committee ("EMA") was created on May 23, 1990 and its duties have been
expanded to include youth services. For purposes of this ordinance, the
Edison Township Municipal Alliance and Youth Services Commission shall
be collectively referred to as the EMA/YSC.
§ 2-108.2. Purpose and Functions. [Ord. No. O.1687-2009§ 1]
a. The purpose of the EMA/YSC shall be as follows:
1. To reduce and eliminate through prevention, education, and
innovative programs the causes and effects of drug and alcohol
abuse and other factors which adversely affect members of all age
groups of the community by promoting greater cooperation and
coordination among the members of the community, its various
organizations, and extra-community organizations and agencies.
2. To reduce and eliminate through prevention, education, and
alternative modes of behavior the causes and effects of juvenile
delinquency.
§ 2-104.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-108.2
AO:119
3. To serve the Township as the Municipal Alliance Committee Against
Drug and Alcohol Abuse (MACADA) and as the Municipal Youth
Services Commission (MYSC).
b. Functions of the EMA/YSC. The Department of Health and Human
Services will house and administratively support the functions of the
EMA/YSC which shall be as follows:
1. Create a coalition of community leaders, law enforcement, private
citizens, representatives of public and private education, and
health and human service agencies who will make a comprehensive
and coordinated effort to promote and support drug, alcohol and
delinquency prevention; education programs; and related
activities.
2. Develop and implement a municipal prevention planning process
utilizing evidence based practices in order to perform local
assessment, build local prevention capacity, plan and implement
effective evidence based community strategies and programs and
evaluate for outcomes.
(a) Conduct needs assessments, no less than every three (3) years,
of the community to determine the needs of the community in
relation to prevention issues.
(b) Identifying existing efforts and resources acting to prevent and
reduce alcoholism and drug abuse, teen pregnancy, school
drop-out, violence and juvenile delinquency.
(c) Prioritize the needs of the community using risk/protective
factors community assessment framework.
(d) Develop and implement evidence based programs, or practice
based programs proven to be effective.
(e) Develop an evaluation process to measure the impact of
programs and practices in order to understand their
effectiveness, need for change, and use the outcome evaluation
for future planning and decision-making.
(f) Conduct related research studies to better monitor and
evaluate programs and current needs of the community.
3. Mobilize, organize, and coordinate efforts involving school, law
enforcement, business, community, and religious groups, etc., for
the purposes of achieving its stated goals and objectives, as
modified using a continuous quality improvement model.
4. Develop programs utilizing the risk/protective factor model that
seek to:
(a) Prevent alcohol and drug abuse among all age groups.
§ 2-108.2 EDISON CODE § 2-108.2
AO:120
§ 2-108.3. Reorganization. [Ord. No. O.1687-2009§ 1]
EMA/YSC reorganization shall occur at a full membership meeting held in
September every three (3) years.
§ 2-108.4. Full Membership Meeting Frequency. [Ord. No.
O.1687-2009§ 1]
The full membership of the EMA/YSC shall meet monthly but no less than 8
times a year.
§ 2-108.5. EMA/YSC Officers. [Ord. No. O.1687-2009§ 1]
The officers of EMA/YSC shall be a Chair, Vice-Chair, Treasurer and
Secretary. The current officers shall serve as the officers of the Joint
Commission until June 30, 2010. The officers positions of Chair and Vice-
Chair shall be elected from among members of the Joint Commission and
shall serve for the length of appointment. The Treasurer shall be the
Director of Health and Human Services unless designated otherwise by the
Mayor. The Secretary shall be chosen from among members of the Joint
Commission; in the event no one desires to serve as Secretary, the position
shall be filed by an EMA/YSC staff member.
(b) Provide education and alternatives to drug and alcohol abuse
for persons of all age groups.
(c) Prevent juvenile delinquency.
(d) Prevent crimes against juveniles.
(e) Foster better relations between members of the different age
groups within the community and to help eliminate the
"generation gap."
(f) Address the various causes of dysfunctional families.
(g) Promote greater awareness of alcohol and drug abuse within
the community.
(h) Promote greater awareness of issues affecting young people
and families within the community.
5. Assist the Municipality in acquiring funds for EMA/YSC programs
relating to drug and alcohol abuse and juvenile delinquency.
6. Cooperate and coordinate the EMA/YSC's efforts with those of
related County and State agencies and organizations in the
furtherance of the stated objectives.
7. Conduct periodic assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the
aforementioned programs.
8. Report annually to the Mayor and the Township Council.
§ 2-108.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-108.5
AO:121
a. Chairperson Duties:
1. Presiding over all meetings.
2. Serve as an ex-officio member of all committees of the EMA/YSC.
3. Appointing all members of ad-hoc committees.
4. Deciding points of order.
5. Signing documents and correspondence as necessary on behalf of
the EMA/YSC.
6. Calling upon any member or members of the EMA/YSC for
assistance or instruction regarding Committee business.
7. Performing any and all duties deemed necessary to accomplish the
mission of the EMA/YSC.
b. Vice Chair Duties:
1. Assuming the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Chair in
his/her absence.
2. Shall perform any and all duties as deemed necessary and as
prescribed by the Chairperson(s) or by the EMA/YSC.
c. Secretary Duties:
1. The recording of minutes of all meetings.
2. Rendering reports of the minutes of the previous meeting at the
regularly scheduled meeting.
3. Retaining and reporting on all communications received by the
EMA/YSC.
4. Provide adequate notice of all meetings of the EMA/YSC.
5. Performing any and all such duties as deemed necessary.
d. Treasurer Duties:
1. Keeping a record of all monies received and expended on behalf of
the EMA/YSC.
2. Rendering a report to the membership at each regular meeting.
3. Rendering a financial report on the status of the grant(s).
4. Signing any documents as required with the Chairperson of the
EMA/YSC.
5. Performing any and all duties as may be deemed necessary.
§ 2-108.5 EDISON CODE § 2-108.5
AO:122
§ 2-108.6. Appointment of Members. [Ord. No. O.1687-2009§ 1]
The EMA/YSC shall include broad representation within the Township of
Edison, whereby at least fifty (50%) percent of the membership shall reside
within the Township.
e. The Edison Municipal Alliance Coordinator serving as of the date this
section is adopted and becomes effective2 shall be retained as the EMA/
YSC Coordinator.
a. The Mayor shall appoint twenty-two (22) persons, including himself or
herself or designee to serve as voting members of the EMA/YSC. The
Township Council shall appoint a liaison to serve as a nonvoting
member of the EMA/YSC. The appointments include but are not limited
to the following persons:
1. The Mayor or his or her designee.
2. The Chief of Police or his or her designee.
3. Community Policing Representative.
4. A representative from the local Juvenile Conference Committee.
5. A member of the Board of Education or his or her designee.
6. The Superintendent of Schools or his or her designee.
7. A student assistance coordinator.
8. A representative of the PTA or PTO.
9. A representative of the Edison Township Teachers union.
10. A representative of the Edison Township Chamber of Commerce.
11. A representative of organized labor.
12. A representative from the Edison Township Municipal Court.
13. A representative of a local civic organization.
14. A representative of a local treatment provider agency.
15. A representative of a local religious organization.
16. A youth representative (individuals, student bodies, youth councils,
peer leaders).
17. Parents and private citizens with interest or experience in issues
concerning addiction and juvenile delinquency.
18. A representative of a local senior citizens group
2. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. O.1687-2009, codified herein as Section 2-108, was adopted
February 25, 2009.
§ 2-108.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-108.6
AO:123
§ 2-108.7. Committees. [Ord. No. O.1687-2009§ 1]
The EMA/YSC Chairperson shall have the power to create ad-hoc
committees for specific purposes as deemed necessary. All committees shall
come under the direction of the EMA/YSC Chairperson.
§ 2-108.8. EMA/YSC Coordinator. [Ord. No. O.1687-2009§ 1]
EMA/YSC shall have a full-time coordinator employed by the Township of
Edison to oversee its daily operations.
19. Individuals who have been impacted by alcoholism and/or drug
abuse, including individuals who have been directly affected by
their own, or family's member's abuse or addictions.
20. Representatives of the local media.
21. A representative of the Recreation Department.
22. A representative from the Department of Health and Human
Services.
23. A member of the Township Council to serve as its liaison in a
nonvoting member status.
b. The aforementioned mayoral appointments reflect the MACADA
requirements.
c. The Mayor may also appoint up to ten (10) persons at large to serve as
non-voting members of the EMA/YSC.
d. A member may be removed by the Mayor upon the recommendation of
the EMAIYSC Officers for cause such as lack of attendance, unethical
conduct or engages in conduct which conflicts with the stated mission
of the EMAIYSC.
a. Committee Chairperson(s) shall be elected from among the members
serving on the particular committee at the committee reorganization
meeting.
b. Committee Chairperson(s) and committee members shall serve on a
committee for a term of one (1) year or until successors are appointed.
c. The EMA/YSC current standing committees shall consist of (i)
Nomination and Membership, (ii) Fundraising and Events and (iii)
Evaluation. The EMA/YSC shall have the power to create other standing
committees as it deems necessary.
a. The EMA/YSC Coordinator shall be recommended by the EMA/YSC and
Director of Health and Human Services and approved by the Mayor.
b. The duties and responsibilities of the EMA/YSC Coordinator shall be as
follows:
§ 2-108.6 EDISON CODE § 2-108.8
AO:124
§ 2-109. CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-109.1. Committee Established. [1999 Code § 2.68.010]
1. Maintenance of all EMA/YSC accounts.
2. Oversight of fund-raising activities.
3. Preparation of grant applications.
4. Coordination of daily operations and programs.
5. Manager of EMA/YSC paid and volunteer support personnel.
6. Serve as the primary media and public relations contact person.
7. Develop programs to support and achieve the stated mission of the
EMA/YSC.
8. All other duties as described in and approved by the EMA/YSC for
the Program Coordinator's Job Description.
9. Perform other duties relating to the mission EMA/YSC.
c. The EMA/YSC Coordinator may delegate responsibilities and duties in
accordance with Township policies and procedures to accomplish the
EMA/YSC's stated goals/objectives.
d. The EMA/YSC Coordinator shall report directly to the Director of
Health and Human Services.
a. There is established within the Township the Cable Television Advisory
Committee which shall be solely comprised of eleven (11) Edison
Township residents.
All members shall serve on a staggered basis for a term of three
(3) years. Each of the present members currently serving on the
Committee shall continue without need for reappointment until
expiration of their respective current term.
b. All members shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed with the
advice and consent of the Township Council. Council Liaison shall be
annually designated at the reorganization meeting of the Township by
the members of Township Council and shall serve ex officio, but without
vote. Vacancies other than by the expiration of the term shall be filled in
the manner prescribed herein but only for the balance of the unexpired
term.
c. All committee members will be selected from the following areas:
1. A representative recommended by the youth council;
2. A representative recommended by the board of education;
§ 2-108.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-109.1
AO:125
§ 2-109.2. Terms, Organization and Meetings. [1999 Code
§ 2.68.020]
§ 2-109.3. Duties and Responsibilities. [1999 Code § 2.68.030]
The Committee shall:
3. A representative recommended by the Township administration;
4. A representative recommended by the Township Council;
5. A representative recommended by the Township library board;
6. A representative recommended by the Township senior citizens
clubs;
7. Four representatives from the general public;
8. A member of the Township television production staff.
a. Members of the Cable Television Advisory Committee shall serve for a
term of three (3) years, or until their successors are appointed, with the
exception that the terms of the existing and new members shall be so
constituted as to provide that three (3) members are replaced or
reappointed each year.
b. All members shall serve without financial compensation.
c. The members of the Committee shall organize annually and adopt
bylaws and regulations for the conduct of the business of the
Committee. The Committee shall elect members as chair and such other
officers as it is deemed advisable for a one (1) year term.
d. The Committee shall meet once a month, or no less than eight (8) times
in a calendar year, and at such other times as the presiding officers, as
or a two-thirds vote (five) of the committee members, shall direct.
e. A clerk or secretary may be appointed by the Committee, compensation
at a sum to be determined by the Township Council.
a. Have the power to establish, amend and supplement its own bylaws, to
govern its structure, operations and activities to the extent not
inconsistent with this chapter, or any other local, State or Federal
regulation or law. The Committee shall make recommendation to the
Mayor and Council and to other Township agencies with respect to any
manners relating to cable television or telecommunication and video
facilities within the Township or County of Middlesex. The Committee
shall make an annual report of its activities with recommendations to
the Township Council and, at such times as the Township Council shall
request or the Committee shall deem desirable. The Committee shall
act as liaison between the Township Council and other entities involved
in cable or telecommunications in the community;
§ 2-109.1 EDISON CODE § 2-109.3
AO:126
§ 2-110. CITIZEN'S AWARD COMMITTEE.
§ 2-110.1. Committee Established. [1999 Code § 2.70.010,
O.1607-2008 § 7]
There is hereby created the Citizen's Award Committee which shall consist
from year to year of four (4) members, namely, the Mayor or his designee,
b. Review the CATV system franchise in the Township and see to the
compliance thereof by the franchise holder;
c. Encourage and promote the full utilization of the CATV system
resources by various public bodies, citizen organizations and the
general public;
d. Encourage and coordinate the use of all available technical equipment
and expertise needed by the public and private organizations and
private individuals to produce CATV programs;
e. Examine all possible means of attracting public and private funding
which would enhance the public's opportunity to fully benefit from the
use of the CATV system;
f. Apply for and receive public and private funds for the purpose of
performing responsibilities under this section. The Committee may
disburse, with advice and consent of the Township Council, such
stipulated funds as may be donated to the Township for the
advancement of specific projects or the general purpose of the
Committee;
g. Propose appropriate procedures to the CATV franchise holder
regarding the scheduling and programming of public access, municipal
government and educational channels. Any procedures should be so
designated as to facilitate the free and open use of these channels, and
shall not be in conflict with any existing or future local, State or Federal
regulations regarding the public use of the CATV system;
h. Serve as an advisory body to the Township Council and to the CATV
system franchise holder in resolving disputes and citizen complaints
relating to the service and the use of public access, municipal or
educational channels of the CATV system;
i. Prepare an annual operation report to the Township Council in
cooperation with the franchise holder as to the status and progress of
the CATV system for the previous twelve (12) months;
j. Recommend any changes and improvements in the franchise
ordinances, provided that such changes are acceptable to the Township
Council, as well as the franchise holder;
k. Report regularly to the Mayor and Township Council regarding the
committee's performance of its responsibilities.
§ 2-109.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-110.1
AO:127
the Chief of Police, Director of Health and a member of the Township
Council chosen by the Council.
§ 2-110.2. Purpose and Function. [1999 Code § 2.70.020]
The purpose and function of the Citizen's Award Committee is to tangibly
recognize the efforts made by the members of the public at large in law
enforcement efforts, specifically the control of illegal dumping and water
and air pollution.
§ 2-110.3. Meetings. [1999 Code § 2.70.030]
The Citizen's Award Committee shall meet not less than four (4) times
a year to review applications and nominations for recognition of citizen
participation in a law enforcement effort.
§ 2-110.4. Eligibility. [1999 Code § 2.70.040]
Any citizen providing information leading to the successful apprehension
and prosecution of any person, partnership or corporation for a violation
of the graffiti, anti-pollution, sanitation, anti-dumping or littering statutes,
ordinances, rules or regulations of the Federal, State, County or municipal
government units shall be eligible for recognition by the citizen's award
committee.
§ 2-110.5. Awards. [1999 Code § 2.70.050]
Awards voted by the Citizen's Award Committee shall be paid from
appropriations made for that purpose, and shall not exceed fifty (50%)
percent of the fine or penalty collected, taking into account the seriousness
of the offense detected, the difficulty in the apprehension of the violator, the
consequences of the offense or prevention thereof, and such other factors
as may be appropriate.
No award shall be made to any individual until a successful prosecution has
been completed. For purposes of this section, successful prosecution shall
include a voluntary plea of guilty to the offenses charged and the collection
of any fine or penalties imposed.
§ 2-111. SENIOR CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-111.1. Committee Established. [1999 Code § 2.72.010; Ord. No.
O.1552-2007]
There shall be a Senior Citizen Advisory Committee consisting of sixteen
(16) members. Eight (8) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and the remaining eight (8) members
shall be appointed, one (1) each, by the following eight (8) senior citizen
clubs: Bonhamtown Club, Clara Barton Club, Edisonites Club, Lindeneau
Club, Edison Line Dancers, Oak Tree Club, Stelton Club and the Indo-
American Council of Seniors of Edison Club. Each member shall serve for
§ 2-110.1 EDISON CODE § 2-111.1
AO:128
a term of two (2) years or until a successor is appointed. Three (3) of the
Mayor's appointees and the representatives of the Lindeneau Club, Oak
Tree Club and Edisonites Club shall serve for one-year terms.
§ 2-111.2. Organization. [1999 Code § 2.72.020]
The Senior Citizen Advisory Committee shall organize annually and shall
select a chairperson from its membership.
§ 2-111.3. Meeting Requirements. [1999 Code § 2.72.030]
The Senior Citizen Advisory Committee shall meet regularly, but in no event
less frequently than once each calendar quarter. A majority of the members
shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-111.4. Duties; Responsibilities. [1999 Code § 2.72.040; Ord. No.
O.1552-2007]
The Senior Citizen Advisory Committee shall be responsible for advising
the Mayor and the Director of Senior Citizen Services regarding existing
functions of the Division of Senior Citizen Services and for making
recommendations for additions, deletions or modifications of the existing
scope of services.
§ 2-111.5. Materials and Services Provided. [1999 Code § 2.72.050]
The Division of Senior Citizen Services shall provide materials and services
appropriate to the proper operation of the Senior Citizen Advisory
Committee, including but not limited to secretarial support for meetings
and minutes of the Senior Citizen Advisory Committee.
§ 2-112. TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-112.1. Committee Established. [1999 Code § 2.76.010]
§ 2-112.2. Meeting Requirements. [1999 Code § 2.76.020]
The Transportation Advisory Committee shall meet on a regular basis but
in no event less frequently than once each calendar quarter. The majority of
the membership constitute a quorum.
a. There shall be a Transportation Advisory Committee consisting of nine
(9) members. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and shall serve for terms of two (2)
years.
b. The Transportation Advisory Committee shall organize and shall select
from its membership a chair.
§ 2-111.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-112.3
AO:129
§ 2-112.3. Duties; Responsibility. [1999 Code § 2.76.030]
The Transportation Advisory Committee shall be responsible for advising
the Mayor and the Township Council on transportation issues involving the
Township. The Committee may, as it deems appropriate, advise the Council
on pending matters affecting the transportation systems that are pending
before the Planning Board or Zoning Board or other municipal agencies, as
well as other significant transportation projects or issues which may, from
time to time, occur within the Township.
§ 2-112.4. Materials and Services Provided. [1999 Code § 2.76.040]
The Township shall provide for materials and services appropriate to the
proper operation of the Transportation Advisory Committee, including but
not limited to, secretary support for the meetings and minutes of the
Transportation Advisory Committee, and where appropriate the retention of
engineering or other experts to assist the Committee in its duties.
§ 2-113. ABILITIES ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-113.1. Creation. [Ord. No. O.1749-2010§ I]
The Edison Township Abilities Advisory Committee is hereby established.
§ 2-113.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1749-2010§ I]
The Advisory Committee is established for the purpose of assisting the
Township, Mayor and Council, in ensuring that all disabled citizens of the
Township are afforded the benefits of the Americans with Disabilities Act,
including making recommendations as to how the Township and businesses
operating within the Township may better implement the Act.
§ 2-113.3. Members; Compensation; Terms; Vacancies. [Ord. No.
O.1749-2010§ I]
The Advisory Committee shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the
Mayor. All of the members shall be residents of the Township of Edison.
At least one-half (1/2) of the members shall be disabled citizens; one (1)
member shall also be a member of the Township Council; the members shall
serve without compensation except as hereinafter provided. The Advisory
Committee shall designate a member to serve as Chairman and presiding
officer of the Advisory Committee. The initial terms of the members shall be
for one (1), two (2) or three (3) years. The initial appointments shall be made
in such a manner so that the terms of one-third (1/3) of the members shall
expire each year. A vacancy on the Advisory Committee occurring otherwise
than expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
§ 2-112.3 EDISON CODE § 2-113.4
AO:130
§ 2-113.4. Appropriations. [Ord. No. O.1749-2010§ I]
The Advisory Committee may incur such expenses as it may from time to
time require, after approval by the Business Administrator, providing the
same shall be within the limits of funds, if any, appropriated to it by the
Township Council or otherwise available to it, and there shall be established
in the municipal budget a line item for this Advisory Committee.
§ 2-113.5. Records and Annual Reports; Meetings. [Ord. No.
O.1749-2010§ I]
The Edison Township Abilities Advisory Committee shall keep records of its
meetings and activities and report to the Mayor and Township Council as
the Advisory Committee deems advisable and/or as the Mayor and Township
Council shall request. The meetings of the Edison Township Abilities
Advisory Committee shall be open to the public.
§ 2-114. through § 2-121. (RESERVED)
§ 2-113.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-114
AO:131

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Policies and Procedures
§ 2-122. INSURANCE.
§ 2-122.1. Declaration of Policy. [1999 Code § 2.100.010]
It is determined by the Township Council that:
§ 2-122.2. Insurance Fund; Establishment; Purpose. [1999 Code
§ 2.100.020; Ord. No. O.1896-2015]
There is established an insurance fund in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6, and for the reasons set forth therein, and to:
a. State Statutes (N.J.S.A. 40A:10-1 et seq.) permit a local unit of local
government to provide for insurance against loss by either insuring
with any insurance company authorized to do business in the State of
New Jersey or through the creation of various insurance funds;
b. A combination of both methods results in the best opportunity to
provide coverage at the lowest cost to the Township of Edison; and
c. Said statutes referenced above require the establishment of insurance
funds where coverages are to be retained and administered by the local
unit of government.
a. Insure against any loss or damage, however caused, to any property,
motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by it or owned by or
under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or
commissions;
b. Insure against liability resulting from the use or operation of motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by or controlled by it or owned
by or under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or
commissions;
c. Insure against liability for its negligence and that of its officers,
employees and servants, whether or not compensated or part-time, who
are authorized to perform any act or services, but not including an
independent contractor within the limitations of the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.).
d. Provide contributory or noncontributory self-funded, or partially selffunded,
health benefits to employees or their dependents, or both, in
accordance with rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 2-122 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-122.3
AO:133
§ 2-122.3. Insurance Fund; Maximum or Minimum Amount;
Disposition of Excess. [1999 Code § 2.100.030]
The Municipal Council may designate the maximum or minimum amount of
the insurance fund and, from time to time, provide for the disposition of
any excess over and above the maximum amount fixed or of the interest or
profits arising therefrom when the fund shall have reached the maximum
limit.
§ 2-122.4. Insurance Fund Commission. [1999 Code § 2.100.040]
§ 2-122.5. Power and Authority of Commissioners. [1999 Code
§ 2.100.050]
a. There is established an Insurance Fund Commission consisting of three
(3) commissioners.
1. The Commissioners shall be officials of the Township and shall hold
office for periods of two (2) years or for the remainder of their
terms of office as officials, whichever shall be less, and until their
successors have been duly appointed and qualified. To the extent
that any Commissioner serves for a lesser period of time, an interim
appointment shall be made for the balance of that Commissioner's
term.
2. The Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
3. The Mayor shall appoint the Commissioners.
b. The Commission shall elect a chairperson and shall promulgate such
rules and regulations as it deems necessary to carry out its function.
c. Commission Secretary.
1. There shall be established the position of secretary to the Board of
Insurance Commissioners. The secretary shall be appointed by the
Commission and shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. The
Commission secretary shall have the obligation to take and
maintain accurate minutes of Commission meetings and to
maintain accurate records of each and every claim filed against the
Township, whether a general liability claim or a worker's
compensation claim.
2. The annual salary of the Commission secretary shall be established
by ordinance.
a. The Commissioners shall have the following powers and authority:
1. Employ necessary clerical assistants, whose compensation shall be
fixed and paid by the Governing Body of the local unit in the same
manner as is that of other employees of the municipality;
§ 2-122.3 EDISON CODE § 2-122.5
AO:134
§ 2-122.6. Administrating Agency and Risk Manager. [1999 Code
§ 2.100.060]
2. Invest the fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such
securities as they shall deem best suited for the purpose of this
chapter;
3. Adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the
fund;
4. Keep on hand at all times sufficient money, or have the same
invested in such securities as can be immediately sold for cash, for
the payment of losses to any buildings or property of the local unit,
or liability resulting from the operation of publicly owned motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus;
5. Fix reasonable rates of premium for all insurance carried by the
insurance fund and shall effect all insurance in the insurance fund
or with any insurance company or companies authorized to do
business in this State. All group insurance as authorized by N.J.S.A.
40A:10-16 et seq. for employees of the Township shall be placed
and effected by the Commissioners subject to the approval of the
Township of any contracts in accordance with the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
b. Premiums for insurance, whether carried in the insurance fund or
placed with insurance companies, shall be paid to the Commissioners
by the board, commission, department, committee or officer having
charge or control of the property insured.
c. All insurance upon property owned or controlled by a local unit or any
of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions shall be placed
and effected by the Commissioners.
d. If provided by the rules and regulations of the Commission, the
secretary to the Insurance Fund Commission shall be entrusted with
the daily operation of the insurance fund and shall submit a report to
the Commissioners at least once a month.
a. There shall be established the title of administering agency and risk
manager for the purpose of handling liability and workers'
compensation claims filed against the Township. The administrating
agency and risk manager shall be designated from time to time by the
Township and shall serve and be compensated in accordance with a
written contract with terms and conditions mutually agreed upon by the
parties and, in any event, to be subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:5-17 and as otherwise set forth herein. Any such contract shall be
negotiated by the Mayor and presented to the Commission for its
approval prior to the granting of final approval by the Council. In no
event shall any one (1) contract with the administering agency or the
risk manager be for more than a three-year period, although any given
§ 2-122.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-122.6
AO:135
§ 2-122.7. Submission and Payment of Claims. [1999 Code
§ 2.100.070]
§ 2-122.8. Worker's Compensation Fund. [1999 Code § 2.100.080]
Pursuant to the discretionary authority contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:10-12 et
seq., the worker's compensation insurance fund is established.
§ 2-123. TAX LIENS ON FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTIES.
§ 2-123.1. Payment of Fire Insurance Proceeds. [Ord. No.
O.1690-2009§ I]
No insurance company shall pay any claim in excess of two thousand five
hundred ($2,500.00) dollars for fire damages on any real property located
within Edison Township pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or
renewed after the adoption of this section and its filing with the State
Commissioner of Insurance, except as follows:
contract may be extended for additional periods not to exceed three (3)
years per extension.
b. The risk manager shall have the sole right of approval as to any claim
not to exceed an amount to be fixed by the Commission on an annual
basis.
a. The risk manager shall submit a voucher on the form prescribed by the
Township on all claims, of whatever amount, and will, by signature,
approve all vouchers and countersign said vouchers in the same
manner as any other department head of the Township. With respect to
all other claims exceeding the amount established pursuant to the
terms of subsection 2-122.6b, said claims are to be submitted by the
risk manager to the Insurance Commission for approval, together with
the appropriate voucher on a monthly bill list. Payments will be made
on all vouchers by checks signed by the appropriate signatory of the
Township, countersigned by the designee of the risk manager.
b. In determining claim amounts, when dealing with weekly temporary
disability benefits and/or medical payments in workers compensation
claims, each said claim is to be construed as a separate claim in
determining whether or not the same equals or exceeds the dollar limit
hereinabove referred to in subsection 2-122.6b.
a. The insured individual or entity submits an official certificate of search
for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens or charges, levied and assessed
and due and payable against said property have been paid in full; and
b. The insured person or entity has submitted a certification
acknowledged by a notary public commissioned in the State of New
§ 2-122.6 EDISON CODE § 2-123.1
AO:136
§ 2-123.2. Request for Official Certificate of Search. [Ord. No.
O.1690-2009§ I]
Any request for an official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant
to this Section shall specify that the search concerns fire-damaged property.
§ 2-123.3. Priority of Municipal Claim. [Ord. No. O.1690-2009§ I]
The Township's claim made in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance
policy. However, notwithstanding the provisions of this section, an
insurance company may pay proceeds of a fire insurance policy to a holder
of a purchase money mortgage held as a first mortgage or an institutional
lender which is a holder of a mortgage on the fire damaged property, where
the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee as
a holder of an insurable interest; provided the payment may not be in an
amount which exceeds that due and payable to the mortgagee under the
mortgage contract.
§ 2-123.4. Appeals. [Ord. No. O.1690-2009§ I]
In the event that an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal based upon the assessed valuation of real property
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company issues a draft payable
to the court of record, to be held by the court in an interest bearing
escrow account in a banking institution or savings and loan association in
New Jersey, in an amount totaling seventy-five (75%) percent of the full
amount of the lien or charge being contested but not to exceed the proceeds
payable under its insurance policy, and the insurance company shall issue
a draft payable to the municipality for the remaining twenty-five (25%)
percent of the lien or charge being contested, with the full amount paid
by the insurance company to the court and the municipality not to exceed
the proceeds payable under its insurance policy pending termination of all
proceedings.
§ 2-123.5. Validation. [Ord. No. O.1690-2009§ I]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or Federal
or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed
Jersey that all demolition costs have been paid or that demolition is not
required; or
c. The Township provides the insurer with a certified Resolution pursuant
to which the Township has entered into an agreement with the owner of
the fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 for the redemption of any tax sale lien by installment
payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65, et seq., or the payment by
installment of any anticipated costs of demolition.
§ 2-123.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-123.5
AO:137
a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 2-124. GOVERNMENT-PRIVATE ENERGY AGGREGATION
PROGRAM. [Ord. No. O.1866-2014]
§ 2-125. through § 2-126. (RESERVED)
§ 2-127. MARRIAGE OR CIVIL UNION CEREMONIES PERFORMED
BY THE MAYOR. [Ord. No. O.1854-2014]
The Municipal Council hereby authorizes the Mayor to request from such
persons about to lawfully enter into the matrimonial relation or civil union,
at a ceremony presided by the Mayor, a voluntary contribution of two
hundred ($200.00) dollars to be paid directly to a recognized 501(c)(3) taxexempt
charity of such persons' choosing. The contribution solicited shall
be entirely voluntary, and the performance by the Mayor of officiating duties
shall not be contingent upon the payment of a voluntary contribution.
§ 2-128. ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
a. Authorization. The Township of Edison is authorized to become a
Government Aggregator of electric generation service and electric
service for residential and nonresidential customer's electric power on
behalf of its residential and nonresidential citizens.
b. Township to Use Option Two. The Township will follow the Government-
Private Aggregator Option Two of the BPU Government-Private
Aggregator Program pursuant to the rules and regulations of the New
Jersey State Board of Public Utilities.
c. Submission of Documentation. The Mayor and Chief of Staff are hereby
authorized to take any and all steps to submit the necessary
documentation to the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and to
provide any and all notices to residential customers to opt-out of the
Program and to nonresidential customers to opt-in to the Program.
d. Selection of Energy Provider. The Township is a member of the
Middlesex Regional Education Services Commission and the
Commission has followed the Fair and Open process to select an energy
service provider, Good Energy, L.P., to perform the New Jersey BPU
aggregation program adopted by N.J.A.C. 14:4-6 et seq., for the
Commission and its members.
e. Extension of Service Agreement. The term of the agreement shall
require the Municipal Council to approve by resolution the extension of
the service agreement annually up to no more than five (5) renewals.
§ 2-123.5 EDISON CODE § 2-128.1
AO:138
§ 2-128.1. Collection of Fees. [1999 Code § 2.84.010]
All fees authorized by this chapter shall be collected by the Division of
Revenue and Collection of the Department of Finance.
§ 2-128.2. Fees Established. [1999 Code § 2.84.020; Ord. No.
O.1536-2006; Ord. No. O.1646-2008§ I; Ord. No. O.1647-2008§ I;
Ord. No. O.1662-2008§ I; Ord. No. O.1756-2010; Ord. No.
O.2004-2018]
The following fees are established:
a. Use of Police Department pistol ranges (indoor and outdoor ranges)
and training/safety course instruction:
1. Training fees with certified instructor to meet New Jersey carry
permit mandates:
(a) Retired Law Enforcement Officers: fifty ($50.00) dollars per
session.
(b) Retired Edison Division of Police: Free of charge.
2. The fee for the use of the range by any law enforcement agency
other than Edison Township shall be two hundred fifty ($250.00)
dollars per session.
3. Fees for Firearms Familiarization and Safety Course(s) for Edison
Township residents only:
(a) Twenty ($20.00) dollars per adult per session.
(b) Five ($5.00) dollars per child per session.
4. All persons (other than active officers in the Edison Division of
Police) using the pistol range shall, prior to such use, execute an
indemnification agreement in the form approved by the Township
Attorney and the Township's insurer.
b. Edison Light Transit [Not to exceed per trip]
1. Pre-paid per ride $1.50
2. Cash per ride $3.00
c. 1. Parks Liquor $25.00
2. Parks and Recreation Facility Usage Varies
d. Division of Engineering Services.
1. Floodplain certification letters $15.00
2. Site plan copies (per sheet) $9.00
3. Maps [large] $4.50
4. Maps [small] $2.00
5. Filed maps, size 30" x 42" or smaller
(per sheet)
$3.00
§ 2-128.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-128.2
AO:139
6. Filed maps, larger than 30" x 42"(per
sheet)
$9.00
e. Police Department.
1. Firearms ID/purchase--State Fee $49.00
2. Re-issue ID/name only record check--
State fee
$15.00
3. Accident/police reports (in person)
1-10 pages [per page] $0.75
11-20 pages [per page] $0.50
21 pages and up [per page] $0.25
4. Accident reports
1-3 pages by mail and not part of
discovery
$5.00
Each additional page after 3 $1.00
5. Police reports
1-3 pages by mail and not part of
discovery
$5.00
Each additional page after 3 $1.00
6. Municipal Court Discovery
1-10 pages $0.75 per page
11-20 pages $0.50 per page
Over 20 $0.25 per page
Request by mail $0.25 plus actual
postage
7. Letter of good conduct [residents] $25.00
8. Letter of good conduct [nonresidents] $30.00
9. (a) Fingerprinting (resident up to 2
cards)
$12.00
Each additional card [resident] $5.00
(b) Fingerprinting (nonresident up to
2 cards)
$25.00
Each additional card [nonresident] $7.00
10. (a) Photographs [B&W] $15.00
(b) Photographs [Color (Polaroid)] $20.00
(c) Photographs copied to CD $30.00
11. Handicapped parking (motor vehicle
fee)
$4.00
§ 2-128.2 EDISON CODE § 2-128.2
AO:140
f. General Fees. Unless fees are otherwise specified in this chapter or
State statute, all Township departments of the Township of Edison
shall be authorized to charge for making available to the public
copies of all other public records at the following rate:
1. The public records of the Township of Edison shall be accessible
for examination and copying in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1
et seq., upon the terms and conditions herein provided. Such
inspection shall be made only at reasonable times during the
business hours and without interference with the conduct of the
affairs of the office or other place where such records are kept or
maintained.
2. Prior to allowing access to any government record, the custodian
thereof shall redact from that record any information which
discloses the social security number, credit card number, unlisted
telephone number, or driver's license number of any person, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 and redact any personal
information or information otherwise protected by law.
3. A copy or copies of a government record may be purchased by any
person upon payment of the following fees:
$0.05 per letter size page or smaller
$0.07 per legal size page or larger
4. If the Township can demonstrate that its actual costs for
duplication of a government record exceed the foregoing rates,
the Township shall be permitted to charge the actual cost of
duplicating the record. The actual cost of duplicating the record,
upon which all copy fees are based, shall be the cost of materials
and supplies used to make a copy of the record, but shall not
include the cost of labor or other overhead expenses associated
with making the copy except for a special service charge as
provided herein, if applicable.
5. Special Service Charges. Whenever the nature, format, manner of
collation, or volume of a government record embodied in the form
of printed matter to be inspected, examined, or copied pursuant
to this subsection is such that the record cannot be reproduced
by ordinary document copying equipment in ordinary business
size or involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to
accommodate the request, the Township may charge, in addition
to the actual cost of duplicating the record, a special service
charge of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per hour. A deposit of the
estimated special service charge shall be required prior to the
request being processed and the full amount of the actual special
service charge shall be paid prior to the release of the documents.
The requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to
the estimated special service charge prior to it being incurred.
6. Mailing charges for any of said items shall be the actual postage
charge incurred by the Township.
§ 2-128.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-128.2
AO:141
7. Access to electronic records and nonprinted materials shall be
provided free of charge, but the public agency may charge for the
actual costs of any needed supplies such as computer discs.
g. Handling of Tax Sale Certificates.
1. Discharge or Cancellation of Record of Tax Sale Certificates.
Upon redemption of a Tax Sale Certificate, the Tax Collector
shall send the certificate to the Middlesex County Clerk for
cancellation of record. The Township shall impose a charge of
thirty dollars ($30.00) to handle, process and mail the cancelled
certificate to the County. The Tax Collector shall collect the
charge for each Tax Sale Certificate redeemed or when service
requested at any time after the redemption occurred.
2. Certificate of Redemption. In the event that an original redeemed
Tax Sale Certificate, already signed for cancellation by the Lien
Holder, is lost and needed to be replaced to prove payment, and/
or for processing of cancellation of record, the Tax Collector shall
issue a notarized certificate of redemption and impose a charge of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) due upon the issuing.
h. Returned Checks.
1. A service charge fee in the amount of twenty ($20.00) dollars
shall be charged to any resident, corporation, group, nonprofit
group or other legal entity ("payor") who tenders a check or
other written instrument and it is returned to the Township for
insufficient funds. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:5-18(b), the Tax
Collector is authorized to include the twenty ($20.00) dollar
charge onto the Township's Tax Sale list for any taxpayer who is
delinquent in paying property taxes or special tax assessments.
2. Any payor who has tendered insufficient funds to the Township
will be required, in the Director of Finance's discretion, to make
any and all future payments to the Township either cash, certified
or cashier's check.
3. Township volunteers, Township sponsored organizations and
senior citizens are not exempt from the provisions of this section.
§ 2-128.3. Fee Waiver. [1999 Code § 2.84.030; Ord. No.
O.1643-2008]
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance to the contrary, the
following defined residents of the Township shall not be required to pay
any municipal fee established by the Township:
1. Any resident of the Township who shall have attained the age of
sixty-five (65) years old; or
2. Any resident of the Township who is an active member of the
following volunteer first aid squads:
§ 2-128.2 EDISON CODE § 2-128.3
AO:142
(a) Edison First Aid Squad No. 1,
(b) Edison First Aid Squad No. 2,
(c) Clara Barton First Aid Squad,
(d) Raritan Engine Company No. 1,
(e) Edison Volunteer Fire Company No. 1,
(f) Raritan Engine Company No. 2,
(g) H.K. Volunteer Fire Company and
(h) Oak Tree Volunteer Fire Company.
3. Any resident of the Township of Edison who is an active member of
the Edison police auxiliary.
4. Disabled persons as defined in Chapter XIV, Building and
Construction, of the Code of the Township of Edison.
5. The spouse or dependent children of a Township resident serving
on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States as defined
in N.J.S.A. 38A:1-1.
b. The Director of Finance shall promulgate rules and regulations to
effectuate the purpose of this section and shall file with the Township
Clerk, and post within the Municipal Complex, a list of fees to which
this section shall apply.
c. The waiver of Township fees provided in this section is subject to the
following general restrictions and conditions:
1. Fees for group activities are waived for groups which include only
residents who are the subject of this fee chapter.
2. No fee imposed in connection with a penalty enforcement or
judicial proceeding shall be waived.
3. This section shall not apply to any bond or surety required to
ensure the faithful performance of a public obligation or repair to a
public facility.
4. This section shall not apply to any commercial or business activity.
5. This section shall not apply to any land use or development fee
imposed in conjunction with a Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment application or any construction code fee under Section
14-1.10 of this Code for the construction of a new dwelling, except
with regards to the alteration of any existing residence within the
Township occupied by a resident covered by this section.
6. For the purpose of this section, the term "active member" shall be
those members who:
§ 2-128.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-128.3
AO:143
§ 2-128.4. Vital Statistic Fees. [1999 Code § 8.140.080]
Vital statistic fees shall be as follows:
Vital Statistic Fee
a. 1. One certified copy of a vital record, birth, death,
fetal death or marriage
$25.00
2. Each copy ordered at the same time $20.00
b. Correction(s) of original certificates filed3 $50.00
c. 1. Record search (first year) $1.00
2. Each additional year $1.00
(a) Provide services on an ambulance at least one (1) night a week
or an equivalent forty (40) hours a month during weekdays or
weekends;
(b) Attend at least fifty (50%) percent of all regularly scheduled
and special drills/training exercises (not less than twelve (12) a
year) averaging two (2) hours each;
(c) Recertify every other year for CPR;
(d) Complete forty-eight (48) hours of New Jersey State approved
continuing education credits every three (3) years;
(e) Attend annual refresher courses in hazardous material,
infectious disease control and ambulance safety;
(f) Attend an EMT-D refresher course every two (2) years;
(g) Attend at least twenty-five (25%) percent of all regularly
scheduled and special meetings of the squad, missing no more
than three (3) in a row.
d. All individuals covered by this section shall be entitled to obtain an
Edison Township identification card which shall be presented at the
time of payment to validate the entitlement to the fee waiver. The
identification card shall remain the property of the Township and shall
be subject to forfeiture in the event it is used or attempted to be used
for any purpose in violation of this section. It shall be the responsibility
of each of the first aid squads listed in this section to supply, on or about
January 1st of each year and from time to time with any changes, a
certified list of all active members in their respective first aid squads.
3. Editor's Note: These corrections will require two (2) weeks.
§ 2-128.3 EDISON CODE § 2-128.4
AO:144
Chapter 3
(RESERVED)
Chapter 4
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 4-1. CURRENT AND FORMER ELECTED OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES.
§ 4-1.1. Restrictions on Current and Former Employees. [1999 Code
§ 2.04.030]
a. Findings. In order to maintain public confidence in the operation of
local government at the highest possible level and to avoid even the
appearance of impropriety, certain restrictions should be placed upon
former elected officers and critical employees of the Township to
govern their dealings with the Township in areas where they may have
had knowledge of or access to information not generally available to the
public.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, critical employee means any
employee of the Township who holds the position of director of a
department or supervisor of a division or who is licensed by the State of
New Jersey to perform the services performed for the Township.
c. Restricted Activities. No elected official or critical employee or former
elected official or former critical employee of the Township shall, for a
period of one (1) year next subsequent to termination of office or
employment with the Township:
1. Appear for or negotiate on behalf of any other party before any
board, agency, body or department of the Township;
2. Provide any merchandise, materials or service to any board,
agency, body or department of the township except under a
contract publicly bid according to the Local Public Contracts Law;
or
3. Be employed for compensation by the Township, except pursuant to
open competitive examination except that this provision shall not
apply to any member of a recognized bargaining unit who is rehired
according to terms of an existing labor agreement.
d. Applicability. This section shall not apply to members of a Township
board or commission who serve the Township without compensation,
except that no such person shall represent or appear on behalf of any
person or entity before the board or commission on which he or she
served, for a period of one (1) year after termination of service thereon.
§ 2-128.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.2
AO:145
§ 4-1.2. Immediate Family Disclosure Statement. [1999 Code
§ 2.04.040]
§ 4-1.3. Report of Contributions. [1999 Code § 2.04.050]
a. All officers of the Township who are required to file a financial
disclosure statement in accordance with subsection 4-2.6 of this
chapter shall be required to file in accordance with the provisions of
this subsection, under oath, within thirty (30) days of their taking office,
a statement listing the names of all members of their immediate family
employed on a full-time or part-time basis, by the following
governmental entities:
1. The State of New Jersey;
2. Any County in the State of New Jersey;
3. The Township of Edison;
4. Edison Board of Education.
b. Members of the immediate family, as used in this subsection, shall mean
the spouse, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, stepparent,
stepbrother, stepsister or child of the Township officer.
c. The disclosure statement required under this subsection shall be filed
annually with the Township Clerk, but no later than the thirtieth of
April.
d. Penalty. Failure to file a disclosure statement in accordance with the
terms of this subsection within thirty (30) days of taking office or within
thirty (30) days of the date upon which the annual statement must be
filed, or any willful and knowing misrepresentation or concealment of
the required and relevant information, if made with the intent to
conceal or misrepresent the information required to be disclosed under
this subsection, shall result in a fine of not more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars
e. The Township Clerk shall have the exclusive authority to institute and
file a complaint in the Municipal Court of Edison against any person
found violating any provision of this subsection.
a. Whenever the Mayor or any member of the Municipal Council shall be
required by State law to file with the Election Law Enforcement
Commission (ELEC) a report of contributions received by them or on
their behalf, a copy of the report shall simultaneously be filed with the
Township Clerk.
b. Any reports required to be filed in accordance with this subsection shall
be kept by the clerk and made available for public inspection.
§ 4-1.2 EDISON CODE § 4-1.3
AO:146
§ 4-2. CODE OF ETHICS.
§ 4-2.1. Short Title. [1999 Code § 2.80.010]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Edison Township Code
of Ethics."
§ 4-2.2. Findings. [1999 Code § 2.80.020]
The Township Council finds and declares that:
§ 4-2.3. Purpose and Authority. [1999 Code § 2.80.030]
c. Penalty. Failure to file a copy of any report in accordance with the terms
of this subsection within thirty (30) days of its filing with the ELEC shall
result in a fine of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars; and
d. The Township Clerk shall have the exclusive authority to institute and
file a complaint in the Municipal Court of the Township against any
person found violating any provision of this subsection.
a. Public office and employment are a public trust;
b. The vitality and stability of representative democracy depend on the
public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives;
c. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private interests
and the public duties of a government officer or employee, that
confidence is imperiled; and
d. Governments have the duty both to provide their citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are
being faithfully performed, and to apprise their officers and employees
of the behavior which is expected of them while conducting their public
duties.
a. It is the purpose of this section to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the Township shall be clear, consistent,
uniform in their application, enforceable, and to provide those officers
or employees with advice and information concerning possible conflicts
of interest which might arise in the conduct of their public duties.
b. It is the further purpose of this section to implement the provisions of
the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991 c. 29, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et
seq.
c. This section is enacted under the authority of the Local Government
Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., and under further authority
granted to the Township under the provisions of Title 40 and 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes.
§ 4-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.4
AO:147
§ 4-2.4. Definitions. [1999 Code § 2.80.040]
As used in this section:
AGENCY — Means any agency, board, Governing Body, Mayor, office,
commission or other instrumentality within the Township, and any
independent local authority created by or appointed under the authority
of the Township, which performs functions other than of a purely advisory
nature.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Means any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
EMPLOYEE — Means any person, whether compensated or not, whether
part-time or full-time, employed by or serving on a Township agency who is
not a local government officer.
INTEREST — Means the ownership or control of more than ten (10%)
percent of the profits, assets or stock of a business organization but shall
not include the control of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Means the spouse or dependent child
of an officer or employee residing in the same household.
OFFICER — Means any person, whether compensated or not, whether parttime
or full-time, who:
§ 4-2.5. Applicability. [1999 Code § 2.80.050]
The provisions of this section shall apply to all employees, elected officials
and appointed officials of the Township.
§ 4-2.6. Financial Disclosure Statements. [1999 Code § 2.80.060]
Serves on a local government agency which has the authority to
approve development applications or grant zoning variances;
a.
b. Is a member of an independent municipal authority; or
Is a managerial, executive or confidential employee of the Township, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3.
c.
a. All officers of the Township, as defined in subsection 4-2.4, shall
annually file a financial disclosure statement. A list of all such officers
by title shall be prepared by the Business Administrator and adopted
annually by resolution of the Council no later than its second meeting of
the year. All financial disclosure statements shall include the following
information which shall specify, where applicable, the name and
address of each source and the officer's job title:
1. Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding two
thousand ($2,000.00) dollars received by the officer or a member of
his or her immediate family during the preceding calendar year.
Individual client fees, customer receipts or commissions on
§ 4-2.4 EDISON CODE § 4-2.6
AO:148
§ 4-2.7. Edison Township Ethics Board. [1999 Code § 2.80.070]
transactions received through a business organization need not be
separately reported unless the local government officer or member
of his or her immediate family has an interest in the business
organization;
2. Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars from any single
source for personal appearances, speeches or writings received by
the local government officer or a member of his or her immediate
family during the preceding calendar year;
3. Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having
an aggregate value exceeding four hundred ($400.00) dollars from
any single source, excluding relatives, received by the local
government officer or a member of his or her immediate family
during the preceding calendar year;
4. The name and address of all business organizations in which the
local government officer or a member of his or her immediate
family held an interest during the preceding calendar year; and
5. The address and brief description of all real property in the state in
which the local government officer or a member of his or her
immediate family held an interest during the preceding calendar
year.
b. The Township Ethics Board shall prescribe a financial disclosure
statement form for filing purposes. If a financial disclosure statement
form has been promulgated by the New Jersey Local Finance Board, in
accordance with the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law, then
that form shall be used. The Ethics Board shall make the forms
available to the officers and employees required to file a financial
disclosure statement.
c. The original statement shall be filed with the Township Clerk within
ninety (90) days after the effective date of this section or the effective
date of the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law, whichever shall
first occur. All subsequent statements shall be filed on or before April
30th of each year. A copy of the statement shall be filed with the Edison
Township Ethics Board.
d. All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public records.
a. There shall be established the Edison Township Ethics Board consisting
of six (6) members who shall be residents of the Township. The
members of the Board shall be appointed by the Township Council. The
members shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent
reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government
affairs. No more than three (3) members of the board shall be of the
same political party. No one may be appointed a member if he or she
§ 4-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.7
AO:149
§ 4-2.8. Adoption of a Code of Ethics. [1999 Code § 2.80.080; New]
Officers and employees serving a Township independent authority shall be
deemed to be serving the Township for purposes of this section. The Edison
Township Ethics Board shall adopt a code of ethics, the provisions set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., shall serve as the code of ethics.
§ 4-2.9. Powers of the Edison Township Ethics Board. [1999 Code
§ 2.80.090]
The Edison Township Ethics Board shall have the following powers:
has been a county committee person during a twenty (20) month period
prior to appointment.
b. The members of the Edison Township Ethics Board shall annually elect
a chairperson from among the membership.
c. The members shall serve for a term of five (5) years; except that of the
members initially appointed, two (2) of the public members shall be
appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years, one (1) member shall be
appointed to serve for a term of four (4) years, and the remaining
members shall be appointed to serve for a term of three (3) years. Each
member shall serve until his or her successor has been appointed and
qualified. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
unexpired term.
d. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties under this section.
e. All hearings required pursuant to this section shall be conducted in
conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a state agency in contested cases
under the Administrative Procedures Act, N.J.S.A. 52-14B-1 et seq.
f. In the event a hearing is to be held, the officer or employee charged
with violation of this section shall be accorded due process of law,
including but not limited to the following:
1. Right to counsel;
2. Right to pre-hearing discovery;
3. Right to take sworn oral and written testimony from any person;
4. Reasonable notice of hearing;
5. Right to subpoena persons and documents;
6. Right to make stenographic record of the hearing;
7. Right of examination and cross-examination.
§ 4-2.7 EDISON CODE § 4-2.9
AO:150
§ 4-2.10. Advisory Opinions. [1999 Code § 2.80.100]
§ 4-2.11. Complaints. [1999 Code § 2.80.110]
a. To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings with
regard to possible violations of municipal code of ethics or financial
disclosure requirements by local government officers or employees
serving the Township;
b. To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the attendance
of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any complaint or to the
holding of a hearing;
c. To forward to the county prosecutor or the attorney general or other
governmental body any information concerning violations of the code of
ethics or financial disclosure requirements by officers or employees
serving the Township which may become the subject of criminal
prosecution or which may warrant the institution of other legal
proceedings by the attorney general;
d. To render advisory opinions to local officers or employees serving the
Township as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of the code of ethics or financial
disclosure requirements;
e. To enforce the provisions of the code of ethics and financial disclosure
requirements with regard to officers or employees serving the
Township and to impose penalties for the violation thereof as are
authorized by this section; and
f. To adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are necessary
to implement the purposes of this section.
a. An officer or employee of the Township may request and obtain from the
Edison Township Ethics Board an advisory opinion as to whether any
proposed activity or conduct would in its opinion constitute a violation
of the code of ethics or any financial disclosure requirements.
b. Advisory opinions shall not be made public, except when the Board by
the vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of its members directs that the opinion
be made public.
c. Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the officer or
employee requesting the opinion unless the Board in directing that the
opinion be made public so determines.
a. The Edison Township Ethics Board, upon receipt of a signed written
complaint by any person alleging that the conduct of any officer or
employee of the Township serving the Township is in conflict with the
code of ethics or financial disclosure requirements, shall acknowledge
receipt of the complaint within thirty (30) days of receipt and initiate an
§ 4-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.11
AO:151
§ 4-2.12. Facilities and Staff. [1999 Code § 2.80.120]
investigation concerning the facts and circumstances set forth in the
complaint.
b. The Board shall make a determination as to whether the complaint is
within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable factual
basis.
c. If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is outside its jurisdiction,
frivolous or without factual basis, it shall reduce that conclusion to
writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the complainant and to the
officer or employee of the Township against whom the complaint was
filed.
d. If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its jurisdiction
and has at least a minimal factual basis, the Board shall notify the
officer or employee of the Township against whom the complaint was
filed of the nature of the complaint and the facts and circumstances set
forth therein.
e. The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to present the Board
with any statement or information concerning the complaint which he
or she wishes.
f. Thereafter, if the Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to
whether the officer or employee of the Township is in compliance with
the municipal code of ethics or any financial disclosure requirements,
the Board shall conduct a hearing concerning the possible violation and
any other facts and circumstances which may have come to the
attention of the Board with respect to the conduct of the officer or
employee.
g. The Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of the
officer or employee is in conflict with the code of ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements. This decision shall be made by no less than
two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Board. The Board shall notify in
writing the complainant and the officer or employee within thirty (30)
days of its decision.
h. If the Board determines that the officer or employee is in conflict with
the code or any financial disclosure requirements, it may impose any
penalties which it believes appropriate within the limits of this section.
a. The Mayor shall provide the Township Ethics Board with the facilities
needed for the conduct of its business and the preservation of its
records, and shall supply equipment and supplies as may be necessary
and as may be provided for in the annual municipal budget.
b. All necessary expenses incurred by the Township Ethics Board and its
members shall be paid, upon certification of the chairperson of the
Board, by the Township Director of Finance within the limits of funds
§ 4-2.11 EDISON CODE § 4-2.12
AO:152
§ 4-2.13. Records of the Edison Township Ethics Board. [1999 Code
§ 2.80.130]
All statements, complaints, requests or other written materials filed
pursuant to this section, and any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts,
or other official papers prepared pursuant to this section shall be preserved
for a period of five (5) years from the date of filing or preparation, as the
case may be.
§ 4-2.14. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 2.80.140]
§ 4-3. PERSONNEL REGULATIONS; AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
appropriated in the annual budget or by emergency appropriations for
those purposes.
c. The Township Ethics Board may request and receive assistance from
Township officers and employees, including the Township Clerk and the
Township Attorney and may appoint employees, including independent
counsel, and clerical staff as are necessary to carry out the provisions of
this section within the limits of funds appropriated by the Township
Council for those purposes in the annual budget.
a. An appointed officer or employee of the Township found guilty by the
Edison Township Ethics Board of the violation of any provision of this
section or any code of ethics in effect pursuant to this section, shall be
fined not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than five
hundred ($500.00) dollars, which penalty may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq. The Edison Township Ethics Board shall report its
findings to the office or agency having the power of removal or
discipline of the appointed officer or employer and may recommend
that further disciplinary action be taken.
b. An officer or employee of the Township found guilty by the Edison
Township Ethics Board of the violation of any provision of this section or
of any code of ethics in effect pursuant to this section, shall be fined not
less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars, which penalty may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.).
c. The finding by the Edison Township Ethics Board that an appointed
officer or employee of the Township is guilty of the violation of the
provisions of this section, or of any code of ethics in effect pursuant to
this section, shall be sufficient cause for his or her removal, suspension,
demotion or other disciplinary action by the officer or agency having
the power of removal or discipline.
§ 4-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.1
AO:153
§ 4-3.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 2.92.010]
The purpose of this plan is to ensure the fair and equal treatment of
all residents and employees of the Township. This plan shall apply to all
employees within the municipal government of the Township. The Business
Administrator or his or her designee shall act as the affirmative action
officer and shall supervise the operation of this plan. Through the Business
Administrator, all department heads and supervisors shall be responsible
for the plan's implementation.
§ 4-3.2. Affirmative Action Committee. [1999 Code § 2.92.020]
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, may appoint a
committee, with no more than five (5) members, to assist and advise the
administration and affirmative action officer in the establishment and
implementation of the community outreach policies provided for in
subsection 4-3.5. One (1) member of this committee shall be a member of
the Municipal Council appointed by the Council President.
§ 4-3.3. Department of Administration; Administration of Plan.
[1999 Code § 2.92.030]
The Department of Administration shall monitor all hiring and training
practices in the Township. The Business Administrator may designate such
other Township officer or employee to implement any part of this plan he
or she deems appropriate. The Department of Administration shall perform
the following duties:
a. Advise and counsel all employees upon request. All discussions are to
remain strictly confidential;
b. Maintain a skills bank to identify those employees who may qualify for
promotion;
c. Review the employee grievance procedure and, when necessary,
recommend improvement therein;
d. Review all promotional procedures and requirements to eliminate all
discriminatory practices over which the Township has control;
e. Ensure that all fringe benefits continue to be made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis;
f. Review all transfer applications to ascertain whether discrimination
factors were involved in such transfers;
g. Interview all Township employees who shall leave Township
employment to ascertain whether discrimination was a factor in the
termination of such employment;
h. Make an annual review to determine if any pattern of discrimination
exists;
§ 4-3.1 EDISON CODE § 4-3.3
AO:154
§ 4-3.4. Distribution of Plan and Statement Policy. [1999 Code
§ 2.92.040]
The statement of policy and of this plan shall be distributed to all
employees. It shall appear in the employee handbook and all other
appropriate publications. It shall be distributed at new employee orientation
programs, be made available to all Township employee representatives and
be posted in all areas where applications are received. The statement of the
plan shall be distributed to all Township departments and divisions.
§ 4-3.5. Recruitment. [1999 Code § 2.92.050]
A recruitment program shall be designed to effectuate this plan. The
program shall include recruitment and outreach policies designed to attract
those segments of the population represented heretofore. The recruitment
procedures shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
§ 4-3.6. Hiring of Applicants. [1999 Code § 2.92.060; Ord. No.
O.1793-2012 § 1]
i. Conduct seminars to ensure that all department heads and supervisors
have knowledge of the plan and are aware of their responsibilities
under the equal opportunity laws;
j. Review selection procedures to eliminate non-job related factors over
which the Township has control;
k. Promote the use of minority contractors in the contract procurement
and purchase policies of the Township.
a. Open posting of all employment opportunities on bulletin boards within
the municipal government agencies;
b. Appropriate public communications, including speaking before any
interested groups to provide information on existing employment
opportunities;
c. Establishing a continuous line of communication with minority and
women's organizations as employment recruiters;
d. Utilizing, where possible, minority and women's organizations as
employment recruiters;
e. Advertising employment opportunities in local newspapers and
publications directed toward specific minority groups;
f. Inclusion of the statement of "Equal Opportunity Employer" in all
newspaper advertisements and notices of employment.
a. All persons desirous of employment with the Township shall be given
the opportunity to submit applications. After completion of such
applications, all applicants may discuss with the affirmative action
§ 4-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.6
AO:155
officer or his or her designee, the availability of present and future
employment.
b. All applications shall remain active for the period of one year (1) and for
six (6) months thereafter upon the request of the applicant. All
applicants shall be notified by the Division of Personnel when their
applications are under present consideration, and the disposition of
same.
c. Background Checks. Any applicant for employment with the Township
prior to being hired shall be required to submit to the following,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.4:
1. A criminal background check; and
2. A fingerprint check in accordance with applicable State and
Federal laws, rules and regulations.
(a) The Business Administrator, or his designee, shall be
authorized to exchange fingerprint data with and receive
criminal history information from the State Bureau of
Identification (SBI) in the Division of State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(b) In order to obtain criminal history record information under
this subsection, the Business Administrator, or his designee,
shall submit fingerprint data and the applicable fee to the State
Bureau of Identification. The SBI shall receive all criminal
history record information from the Federal Bureau of
Identification and shall disseminate that information to the
Business Administrator or his designee.
3. No person shall be hired by the Township of Edison without
successfully completing a background check in accordance with
this subsection.
d. Drug and Alcohol Test. Any applicant for employment with the
Township prior to being hired shall be subject to a pre-employment
testing in accordance with the provisions of the Township Drug and
Alcohol Policy. No person shall be hired by the Township of Edison
without passing the pre-employment drug and alcohol test.
e. Credit Check. Any applicant for employment with the Township prior to
being hired shall be required to submit to a credit check, if the position
the person will be obtaining is in the Finance Department, the Tax
Collector's office and/or involves the handling of cash, checks or money
of any kind or involves access to or control over any of the Township's
bank accounts.
§ 4-3.6 EDISON CODE § 4-3.7
AO:156
§ 4-3.7. Training and Promotion of Employees. [1999 Code
§ 2.92.070]
The Township shall make every reasonable effort to make training and
educational experience, which are necessary for promotion to higher level
positions, available to all interested and qualified employees. The
affirmative action officer shall review the effectiveness of training and
education experience and the evaluation of all promotion requirements
to eliminate wherever possible all restrictions on age, sex, physical
characteristics and experience, unless job related, and conducting of
workshops in human relations.
§ 4-3.8. Employee Grievance Procedures. [1999 Code § 2.92.080]
§ 4-3.9. Union Contracts. [1999 Code § 2.92.090]
Any agreement hereinafter entered into between the Township and
Township employees shall contain an affirmative representation that the
provisions of the contract do not violate the provisions of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, as amended by the Equal Employment Opportunities Act of
1972, and the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination as set forth in N.J.S.A.
10:5-1 et seq.
§ 4-3.10. Objectives and Timetables of the Plan. [1999 Code
§ 2.92.100]
a. Any employee who believes that he or she has been the subject of
discrimination for any reason whatsoever may present a grievance in
the manner prescribed in the Township's code or in accordance with the
applicable collective bargaining agreement.
b. If this procedure is complied with and an employee's grievance is still
unresolved, the employee may notify the State of New Jersey Division of
Civil Rights at the following locations:
1100 Raymond Boulevard 436 State Street
Newark, New Jersey 07102 Trenton, New Jersey 08609
(201) 648-2700 (609) 292-4605
c. The procedures outlined are available to employees on a voluntary
basis. A claim of discrimination may be filed with the State of New
Jersey, Division of Civil Rights, at any time.
a. Communication of the Plan. A copy of this plan shall be tendered to all
employees of the Township, employees' representatives, department
heads and other interested parties by the Department of
Administration.
b. Review of Employment Procedures. The affirmative action officer and
each department shall review any employment structure of their
department to eliminate any vestiges of discrimination. The first of
§ 4-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.10
AO:157
§ 4-4. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT SYSTEM ("DCRP").
§ 4-4.1. Eligibility/Participation in DCRP. [Ord. No. O.1691-2009 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43-15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the DCRP:
these reviews shall be made within ninety (90) days of the adoption of
the plan and then annually thereafter.
c. Ensuring Equal Consideration of All Qualified Applicants. The
affirmative action officer and Division of Personnel shall review all
interviewing and recruiting procedures to ensure that all provisions
outlined herein shall be strictly complied with and that all employment
advertisements contain the statement "Equal Opportunity Employer."
To this end, a form shall be developed by the affirmative action officer
which shall be completed when any application is received, but
employment not offered at that time. Copies of this form shall be kept
on file in the Division of Personnel.
d. Maintaining Discrimination-Free Selection, Appointment and
Procedures. All procedures outlined herein shall be strictly complied
with and, in addition, all new employees not previously interviewed by
the Division of Personnel shall be interviewed.
e. Offering of Training and Educational Programs on a Nondiscriminatory
Basis. In addition to compliance with all procedures outlined herein, the
affirmative action officer shall conduct workshops and seminars for
supervisory personnel to familiarize them with all phases of the plan.
The seminars and workshops shall also be made available whenever
possible for all interested employees.
f. Utilization of the Department of Administration. The Department of
Administration shall have an expanded role in the employment process.
It shall counsel and interview all employees on the commencement,
transfer and termination of their employment, review all aspects of
fringe benefits and create a job skills bank. The skills bank shall
commence to function no later than ninety (90) days after the adoption
of the plan.
a. Business Administrator
b. Township Council Members
c. Director of Finance
d. Director of Recreation
e. Director of Planning and Engineering
f. Director of Health and Human Services
g. Director of Public Works
§ 4-3.10 EDISON CODE § 4-4.1
AO:158
§ 4-4.2. Excuse from DCRP Membership. [Ord. No. O.1691-2009 § 1]
Individuals that are otherwise required to join the DCRP are excused from
membership if that individual:
§ 4-4.3. Exemption from DCRP Membership. [Ord. No. O.1691-2009
§ 1]
Individuals holding a professional license or certificate to perform services
in any of the following positions are exempt from DCRP membership,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, and are qualified to join or remain in the
PERS:
h. Director of Law
i. Municipal Prosecutors
j. Municipal Judges
a. Is a Public Employees Retirement System ("PERS") member prior to
July 1, 2007 and continuously thereafter. "Continuously" means that a
period of no more than two (2) years has elapsed from the time the
individual left employment in a PERS position to the time the person
was unemployed; or
b. Is eligible for membership or enrolled in another pension program; or
c. Is retired and receiving benefits from another State pension plan; or
d. Is otherwise ineligible to join PERS; or
e. Receives a salary which is less than one thousand five hundred
($1,500.00) dollars per fiscal year.
a. Certified Health Officers
b. Tax Collector
c. Court Administrator
d. Chief Financial Officer
e. Construction Code Official
f. Qualified Purchasing Agent
g. Tax Assessor
h. Municipal Planner
i. Registered Municipal Clerk
j. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector
§ 4-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.3
AO:159
§ 4-4.4. Additional Exemptions. [Ord. No. O.1691-2009 § 1]
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in subsection 4-4.1
and the individual is not serving in a position as described in subsection
4-4.3 above, the Township's Pension Certifying Officer may determine that
the individual is not required to join the DCRP if that individual:
§ 4-4.5. Salary Less Than $5,000.00; Membership Effective. [Ord.
No. O.1691-2009 § 1]
§ 4-5. through § 4-6. (RESERVED)
§ 4-7. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES.
§ 4-7.1. Findings. [1999 Code § 2.88.010]
The Township Council finds as follows:
k. Certified Public Works Manager (also known as Principal Public Works
Manager)
a. Was an active participant in the PERS on July 1, 2007 and continuously
since that time; or
b. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
c. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring State Certification as set forth in subsection 4-4.3 herein, and
is in pursuit of the required certification; or
d. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
a. An individual earning less than five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars per
fiscal year who is eligible for DCRP membership can decide to waive
participation in the DCRP. This decision is irrevocable for elected
officials.
b. Membership in the DCRP shall be effective as of July 1, 2007 based
upon the above criteria.
a. The State of New Jersey, through the passage of the Tort Claims Act, as
amended and supplemented from time to time (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.),
has determined the circumstances under which claims may be made
against public entities and their officials, employees and servants.
b. The Tort Claims Act also specifies under what circumstances a public
entity may defend and indemnify its officials, employees and servants.
§ 4-4.3 EDISON CODE § 4-7.1
AO:160
§ 4-7.2. Indemnification. [1999 Code § 2.88.020]
§ 4-7.3. Limit of Obligation. [1999 Code § 2.88.030]
The obligation of the Township to defend and indemnify its employees for
acts or omissions arising out of or in the course of the performance of the
duties of that person shall be limited to those circumstances under which
the acts of its employees were within the scope of the responsibilities of the
officer or employee.
§ 4-8. PUBLIC CONTRACTS TO CERTAIN CONTRIBUTORS.
§ 4-8.1. Prohibition on Awarding Public Contracts to Certain
Contributors. [1999 Code § 2.81.010]
c. The Township Council wishes to provide under certain circumstances
for defense and indemnification of its officers, employees and servants
in the proper performance of their duties and responsibilities.
d. Such defenses and indemnification are especially appropriate for
members of appointed boards who serve the township without
monetary compensation.
a. Whenever a civil action shall be brought against any person holding an
office, position or employment with the Township for any action or
omission arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties
of such office, position or employment, the Township shall provide
payment of that portion of any compensatory damage award otherwise
covered by a policy of insurance which has not been paid because of a
deductible provision in said policy.
b. Whenever a civil action shall be brought against any person holding an
office, position or employment with the Township for any action or
omission arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties
of such office, position or employment, the Township shall provide
payment of that portion of any costs of defense of said action not
covered by a policy of insurance which costs have not been paid solely
because of a deductible provision of said policy.
a. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
municipality or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure professional, banking,
insurance coverage services or any other consulting services, from any
professional business entity, if that entity has solicited or made any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any Edison Township municipal candidate or holder of
the public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of
contract, or campaign committee supporting such candidate or
officeholder, or to any Edison Township or Middlesex County party
committee, or to any political action committee that regularly engages
§ 4-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.1
AO:161
in the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties (PAC)
in excess of the thresholds specified in paragraph c. within one (1)
calendar year immediately preceding the date of the contract or
agreement.
b. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contract or agreement with the municipality or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage services or
any other consulting service shall solicit or make any contribution of
money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to
any Edison Township municipal candidate or holder of the public office
having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or
campaign committee supporting such candidate of officeholder, or to
any Edison Township or Middlesex County party committee, or to any
PAC that regularly engages in the support of municipal elections and/or
municipal parties between the time of first communications between
that business entity and the Township regarding a specific professional
services agreement and the later of the termination of negotiations or
the completion of the contract or agreement.
c. 1. Subject to the limitations in 2, any entity meeting the definition of
"professional business entity" under this section may annually
contribute a maximum of four hundred ($400.00) dollars for any
purpose to each candidate, for Mayor or Council, and five hundred
($500.00) dollars to each Edison Township or Middlesex County
party committees, or to a PAC referenced in this section, without
violating paragraph a.
2. However, any entity meeting the definition of "professional
business entity" under this section, including such principals,
partners, and officers of the entity in the aggregate, may not
annually contribute for any purpose in excess of a total of two
thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars to all Edison Township
candidates and officeholders with ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract and all Edison Township of Middlesex County
political parties and PACs referenced in this section combined,
without violating paragraph a.
d. For purposes of this section, a "professional business entity" is an entity
seeking or performing a public contract for professional, banking or
insurance coverage services or any other consulting services and which
may be an individual including the individual's spouse, if any, and any
child living at home; a person; firm; corporation; professional
corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The definition of
a business entity includes all principals who own five (5%) percent or
more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and
officers in the aggregate employed by the entity as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
§ 4-8.1 EDISON CODE § 4-8.1
AO:162
§ 4-8.2. Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. [1999 Code
§ 2.81.020]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Council, or municipal or County party committee or
PAC referenced in this section shall be deemed a violation of this section,
nor shall an agreement for property, goods, or services, of any kind
whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the
professional business entity prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 4-8.3. Contribution Statement by Professional Business Entity.
[1999 Code § 2.81.030]
§ 4-8.4. Return of Excess Contributions. [1999 Code § 2.81.040]
A professional business entity or Township candidate or officeholder or
municipal or county party committee or PAC referenced in this section
may cure a violation of subsection 4-8.1, if, within sixty (60) days after
the contribution, the professional business entity notifies the Township
Council in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution
from the Township candidate or municipal or County political party or PAC
referenced in this section.
§ 4-8.5. Penalty. [1999 Code § 2.81.050]
e. For the purpose of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
1. The Township of Edison Council and the Mayor of the Township of
Edison, if the contract requires approval or appropriation from the
Council.
2. The Mayor of the Township of Edison, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of the contract is appointed by the Mayor.
a. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services, or banking or insurance coverage services or any other
consulting services, with any professional business entity, the township
or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall
receive a sworn statement from the professional business entity made
under penalty of perjury that the bidder or offer or has not made a
contribution in violation of subsection 4-8.1.
b. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this section that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this section
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Township and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
§ 4-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.5
AO:163
§ 4-9. POLITICAL FUNDRAISING ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
§ 4-9.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 2.82.010]
This section bans the use of government buildings and equipment for
political fund raising.
§ 4-9.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 2.82.020]
As used in this section:
CANDIDATE — Means a. any individual seeking election to a public office
of the Federal, State, County or municipal government, or school district or
political party, and b. any individual who shall have been elected or failed of
election to any such office.
MUNICIPALITY — Means the government of the municipality, including any
officer, department, board, commission or agency thereof.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Means any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board or office
thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time, compensated or
uncompensated, and any employee of municipal government or of any
municipal agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether the position
is full-time or part-time.
a. It shall be a breach of the terms of the Edison Township professional
service agreement for a business entity to 1. make or solicit a
contribution in violation of this section; 2. knowingly conceal or
misrepresent a contribution given or received; 3. make or solicit
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution; 4. make or solicit any
contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be
contributed to campaign committee of any candidate or holder of the
public office of Edison Township; 5. engage or employ a lobbyist or
consultant with the intent or understanding that such lobbyist or
consultant would make or solicit any contribution, which if made or
solicited by the business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this section; 6. fund contributions made by third parties,
including consultants, attorneys, family members, and employees; 7.
engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent of this
section; or 8. directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or
means, do any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this section.
b. Furthermore, any professional business entity who violates paragraph
a. above shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Edison Township
contracts for a period of four (4) calendar years from the date of the
violation.
§ 4-8.5 EDISON CODE § 4-9.2
AO:164
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Means any loans and transfers of money or
other things of value to any candidate, elected official, or representative of
any political organization, or other commitments or assumptions of liability
to make any such transfer. Political contributions shall be deemed to have
been made upon the date when such commitment is made or liability
assumed.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Means any two (2) or more persons acting
jointly, or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or
unincorporated association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote
the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for
Federal, State, County, municipal or school board office or political party
office. Political organization includes, but is not limited to, organizations
defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a "political committee," "joint candidates
committee," "continuing political committee," "political party committee,"
"candidate committee" or "legislative leadership committee."
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Means all personal property owned, leased or
controlled by the municipal government, including but not limited to
vehicles, phones, fax machines, computers, stationery including municipal
letterhead, postage and other office equipment.
SOLICIT — Means to ask for, by oral or written communication, a
contribution as that term is defined herein.
§ 4-9.3. Prohibited Conduct; Exceptions; Penalty. [1999 Code
§ 2.82.030]
a. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contributions in
rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of public duties. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while in any
room or building occupied in the discharge of official municipal
business. This subsection shall include solicitation or acceptance of
political contributions made over a private cell phone or by use of a
private computer, if the person soliciting or accepting the political
contribution, is in any room or building occupied in the discharge of
official municipal business.
b. Prohibition against use of public property for political fundraising. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization, while
utilizing public property.
c. Exception. In the event public facilities are made available to any group
for non-governmental use, as a meeting facility, this prohibition shall
not be deemed to prevent fundraising of any sort among members of
such groups during the time such groups have reserved exclusive use of
the meeting facility.
§ 4-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.3
AO:165
§ 4-10. FUNDRAISING BY UNIONS.
§ 4-10.1. Notification Required. [1999 Code § 2.83.010]
Whenever any designated collective bargaining representative or union
representing employees of the Township of Edison engages in fund raising
activities which includes solicitation from persons or businesses located
within Edison Township they shall, before beginning the fund raising
activity, notify the Township Clerk of the following:
§ 4-11. REDEVELOPMENT PAY-TO-PLAY REFORM.
§ 4-11.1. Prohibition of Entering into or Amending Redevelopment
Agreements with Certain Contributors. [Ord. No. O.1513-2006
§ 2.82.010]
d. Violation. Violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by
a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days or
imprisonment in the County jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90)
days or a fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
a. The nature and duration of the fund raising activity and the manner in
which it is being conducted;
b. The name, address and phone number of any third party who is
participating in the fund raising process.
a. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township of Edison or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those
of its independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into
an agreement, amend an agreement, or otherwise contract with any
redeveloper for the planning, replanning, construction or undertaking
of any redevelopment project, including the acquisition or leasing of
any public property in conjunction with the redevelopment of any area
within the Township of Edison pursuant to the Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law, if that redeveloper has made any contribution of
money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions,
during the applicable time period as specified below, to a campaign
committee of any Edison Township candidate or holder of public office
within the Township of Edison having responsibility for arranging,
entering into, or approving the redevelopment agreement, or for
appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the
Township of Edison or; to any municipal political campaign committee,
or to any County party committee, or to any political action committee
which regularly engages in the support of municipal elections and/or
municipal parties or which engages in the support of Edison Township
municipal campaigns (PAC). For purposes of this section, the
"applicable time period" shall be defined as the time period between the
date that the property which is the subject of the redevelopment project
has been included in a memorializing resolution adopted by the
§ 4-9.3 EDISON CODE § 4-11.1
AO:166
Governing Body directing the Planning Board to conduct a preliminary
investigation to determine if the site is in need of redevelopment
pursuant to and in accordance with the New Jersey Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq., and the
date of entering into the redevelopment agreement, or the twelve (12)
months prior to entering into the agreement, whichever is shorter.
b. All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by
the Township of Edison shall contain a provision prohibiting
redevelopers as defined in paragraph c. to solicit or make any
contribution of money or pledge of a contribution including in-kind
contributions, to any Edison Township candidate or holder of public
office within the Township of Edison having responsibility for
arranging, entering into, or approving the redevelopment agreement,
or for appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the
Township of Edison or; to any Edison Township political campaign
committee, or to any Edison Township or Middlesex County Party
Committee, or to any political action committee which regularly
engages in the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties
or which engages in the support of Edison Township municipal
campaigns (PAC), between the time of first communication between
that redeveloper and the municipality regarding a redevelopment
project and the later of the termination of negotiations or the
completion of all matters specified in the redevelopment agreement.
c. As defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, a "redeveloper" means any person,
firm, corporation or public body that shall enter into or propose to enter
into a contract with a municipality or other redevelopment entity for the
redevelopment or rehabilitation of an area in need of redevelopment, or
an area in need of rehabilitation, or any part thereof, under the
provisions of this section, or for any construction or other work forming
part of a redevelopment or rehabilitation project. For the purposes of
this section the definition of a redeveloper includes all principals who
own ten (10%) percent or more of the equity in the corporation or
business trust, partners and officers in the aggregate employed by the
provider as well as any affiliates or subsidiaries directly controlled by
the redeveloper. Spouses and adult children at home shall also be
included.
d. For the purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
responsibility for arranging and entering into the redevelopment
agreement under the Act shall be:
1. The Township of Edison Council if the redevelopment agreement
requires approval or appropriation from the Council or a public
officer who is responsible for arranging and entering into the
redevelopment agreement if that public officer is appointed by
Council; or
2. The Mayor of Edison Township if the redevelopment agreement
requires the approval of the Mayor or a public officer who is
§ 4-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11.1
AO:167
§ 4-11.2. Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. [Ord. No.
O.1513-2006 § 2.82.020]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to any Edison Township candidate for
Mayor or Edison Township Council or Edison Township political campaign
committee shall be deemed a violation of this section nor shall an
agreement for redevelopment projects of any kind whatsoever be
disqualified thereby if that contribution or agreement was made by the
redeveloper prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 4-11.3. Notice Given by Municipality; Sworn Statement of
Redeveloper. [Ord. No. O.1513-2006 § 2.82.020]
§ 4-11.4. Contribution Restrictions and Disclosure Requirement;
Applicability to Consultants. [Ord. No. O.1513-2006 § 2.82.040]
responsible for arranging and entering into the redevelopment
agreement if that public officer is appointed by the Mayor; or
3. A designated redevelopment entity, if the redevelopment
agreement requires the approval of the redevelopment entity.
a. It shall be the municipality's continuing responsibility to give notice of
this section when the municipality gives notice of redevelopment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 and when the municipality adopts a
resolution directing the Planning Board to prepare a redevelopment
plan and at the time that the municipality adopts the ordinance to
implement the redevelopment plan.
b. Prior to arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement with
any redeveloper, the Township of Edison or any of its purchasing agents
or agencies or independent authorities, as the case may be, shall
receive a sworn statement from the redeveloper that the redeveloper
has not made any contribution in violation of subsection 4-11.1a above.
Furthermore, the redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this section that may occur while arranging and
entering into the redevelopment agreement, and until all specified
terms of the agreement have been completed. The sworn statement
required under this section shall be made prior to entry into the
agreement with the municipality and shall be in addition to any other
certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
a. The contribution and disclosure requirements in this section shall apply
to all redevelopers as well as professionals, consultants or lobbyists
contracted or employed by the business entity ultimately designated as
the redeveloper to provide services related to the:
1. Lobbying of government officials in connection with the
examination of an area and its designation as an area in need of
§ 4-11.1 EDISON CODE § 4-11.4
AO:168
§ 4-11.5. Return of Excess Contributions. [Ord. No. O.1513-2006
§ 2.82.050]
A redeveloper or municipal candidate or officeholder or municipal or County
party committee or PAC referenced in this section may cure a violation
of subsection 4-11.1 and deemed not to be in breach, if, within thirty
(30) days after the cited violation, the redeveloper notifies the Municipal
Council in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution
from the municipal candidate or municipal or County political party or PAC
referenced in this section.
§ 4-11.6. Penalty. [Ord. No. O.1513-2006 § 2.82.060]
redevelopment or in connection with the preparation, consultation
and adoption of the redevelopment plan;
2. Obtaining the designation or appointment as redeveloper;
3. Negotiating the terms of a redevelopment agreement or any
amendments or modifications thereof; and/or
4. Performing the terms of a redevelopment agreement.
b. It shall be a breach of the consultant's contract, and shall require
immediate termination, for a consultant to violate the contribution
limits and/or disclosure requirements in this section.
c. A redeveloper who participates in, or facilitates, the circumvention of
the contribution restrictions through consultants or professionals shall
be deemed to be in breach.
a. It shall be a breach of the terms of the Township of Edison
redevelopment agreement for a redeveloper to: 1. make or solicit a
contribution in violation of this section; 2. knowingly conceal or
misrepresent a contribution given or received; 3. make or solicit
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution; 4. make or solicit any
contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be
contributed to a campaign committee of any candidate or holder of the
public office of Edison Township; 5. engage or employ a lobbyist or
consultant with the intent or understanding that such lobbyist or
consultant would make or solicit any contribution, which if made or
solicited by the redeveloper itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this section; 6. fund contributions made by third parties,
including consultants, attorneys, family members, and employees; 7.
engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent of this
section; or 8. directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or
means, do any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this section.
b. Furthermore, any redeveloper who violates paragraph a1 through a8
above shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Edison Township
§ 4-11.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11.6
AO:169
§ 4-12. USE OF TOWNSHIP VEHICLES.
§ 4-12.1. Restrictions on Use of Township Vehicles. [Ord. No.
O.1658-2008 ]
Township vehicles shall be prohibited from use outside the Township except
for the Mayor, Police Chief, Fire Chief and Office of Emergency
Management Coordination (OEM Coordinator). This restriction shall not
apply to passing through neighboring communities on official business.
Chapter 5
REVENUE AND FINANCE
§ 5-1. TAX EXEMPTION FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY.
§ 5-1.1. Acknowledgement of Designation. [1999 Code § 3.08.010]
The Township acknowledges having been duly designated as a "qualified
municipality" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3(b).
§ 5-1.2. Eligibility. [1999 Code § 3.08.020]
The entire Township is designated as the area in which dwelling units may
be eligible for tax exemption pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 5-1.3. Applicability; Exemption; Time Period. [1999 Code
§ 3.08.030]
There should be an exemption from taxation of improvements to dwellings
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-5 and the Tax Assessor shall, in
determining the value of the real property, regard the first twenty-five
thousand ($25,000.00) dollars in assessor's full and true value of
improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by any
improvement as not increasing the value of the property for a period of
five (5) years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
improvements are made is increased thereby. During the exemption period,
the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvement, unless there is
damage to the dwelling through actions of the elements sufficient to
warrant a reduction.
redevelopment agreements for a period of four (4) calendar years from
the date of the violation.
§ 4-11.6 EDISON CODE § 5-1.4
AO:170
§ 5-1.4. Exemptions Subject to Statute and Additional Regulations.
[1999 Code § 3.08.040]
No exemption of improvements from taxation shall be allowed except
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., and to duly promulgated regulations
of the Department of Community Affairs and the Division of Revenue.
§ 5-1.5. Implementation. [1999 Code § 3.08.050]
The Tax Assessor of the Township shall implement this chapter and the
abatement granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 in the Township and shall
accept or receive applications pursuant to the statute for exemption of
improvements from taxation and shall record such applications and retain
them as a permanent part of the municipal record.
§ 5-1.6. Public Notice of Program. [1999 Code § 3.08.060]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-20, the Tax Collector shall include the
appropriate notice concerning the tax exemption program, in a form
described by the Department of Community Affairs to all owners of
dwellings within the Township during the first year following adoption of
the ordinance codified in this chapter.
§ 5-2. TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ABATEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS
TO COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES.
§ 5-2.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 3.12.010]
As used in this section:
THE ACT — Means the Five Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq., enacted into law on or about January 18, 1992.
THE TOWNSHIP — Means the Township of Edison.
§ 5-2.2. Power to Enter Into Agreements. [1999 Code § 3.12.020]
a. The Township may enter into agreements with developers and/or
owners of property that are in areas in need of redevelopment or
rehabilitation within the Township, as determined by the Council in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., providing tax abatements
and/or exemptions for the construction of commercial or industrial
structures within the Township pursuant to the Act. This power to enter
into tax abatement/exemption agreements shall be subject to all
definitions set forth within Section 3 of the Act, incorporated herein as
if set forth herein at length.
b. All projects subject to a tax abatement/exemption agreement, as
provided for herein and in the Act, shall be subject to all applicable
Federal, State and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited
to pollution control, workers safety, discrimination in employment,
housing provision, zoning, planning and building code requirements.
§ 5-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.2
AO:171
§ 5-2.3. Procedure. [1999 Code § 3.12.030]
c. An abatement and/or exemption of real property taxes, pursuant to the
Act and this section, shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal
purposes, school purposes, county government purposes and for the
purposes of funding any other property tax exemptions or abatements.
a. Applicants for tax abatement and/or exemption shall submit an
application setting forth:
1. A general description of the project for which abatement and/or
exemption is sought;
2. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
3. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Township to demonstrate the structure and design of the proposed
project;
4. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two (2) years of completion of
the project;
5. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement and/or
exemption on the project and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant if a tax abatement/exemption is granted;
6. Estimates of the cost of completing the project;
7. A statement showing:
(a) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project
site,
(b) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following
termination of the tax abatement/exemption, and
(c) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant
on the project during the first full year following termination of
the tax abatement/exemption agreement;
8. A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
proposed users of the project and a history and description of the
users' business; and
9. Such other pertinent information as may be required by the
Township.
b. Applicants shall submit applications for abatements to the Township
Business Administrator. Following receipt of a completed application as
set forth above, the Township shall review same to determine whether
an abatement and/or exemption for new construction shall be granted
following an individual review and evaluation of each application
§ 5-2.2 EDISON CODE § 5-2.3
AO:172
§ 5-2.4. Authorization; Terms. [1999 Code § 3.12.040]
§ 5-2.5. Additional Improvement or Construction. [1999 Code
§ 3.12.050]
Any ordinance approving a tax abatement/exemption agreement for a
specific project pursuant to the Act and this section, may provide that an
additional improvement or construction, completed on property previously
submitted to the Township. The Business Administrator shall forward a
copy of the completed application to the Township Council within thirty
(30) days of his receipt of same.
c. No abatement and/or exemption shall be granted pursuant to the Act
except upon written application by an applicant filed with the Business
Administrator, and subsequent review and approval of the tax
abatement agreement by the Mayor and Township Council. The tax
abatement/exemption agreement itself, shall be recorded and made a
permanent part of the official tax records of the Township, which
records shall contain a notice of termination date thereof.
a. The authorization to enter into a tax abatement/exemption agreement
must be granted by ordinance. Any tax abatement/exemption
agreement shall contain those terms required by the Act, including:
1. Any tax abatement/exemption agreement entered into between the
Township and an applicant shall provide for the applicant to pay to
the municipality, in lieu of full property tax payments, an amount
annually to be computed by one, but in no case a combination of the
"Cost Basis Formula," "Gross Revenue Basis Formula," or "Tax
Phase-In Basis Formula," all as defined in the Act and incorporated
by reference herein as if set forth fully.
2. All tax abatements/exemptions applied for and granted pursuant to
the Act and this section shall be in effect for a period of no more
than five (5) full years following the date of completion of the
project.
b. No abatement and/or exemption shall be granted, or tax abatement/
exemption agreement entered into pursuant to this Act or this section,
with respect to any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are
currently then due and owing.
c. No abatement and/or exemption shall be effective until the applicant
has complied with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-16.
d. Within thirty (30) days following execution of a tax abatement/
exemption agreement, pursuant to the Act and this section, the
Township shall forward a copy of the agreement to the Director of the
Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 5-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.5
AO:173
granted an abatement and/or exemption, may qualify for an additional
abatement and/or exemption, as if said property had not received a previous
abatement and/or exemption. In this event, the additional improvement or
construction shall be considered separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements pursuant to the Act, except that the assessed
value of any previous improvement or construction shall be added to the
assessed valuation as it was prior to that improvement or construction for
the purpose of determining the assessed valuation of the property from
which any additional abatement is to be subtracted.
§ 5-2.6. Termination. [1999 Code § 3.12.060]
Upon termination of a tax abatement/exemption agreement referenced
hereunder, a project shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes as
provided by State law and regulation, as well as local ordinances. However,
nothing herein shall prohibit a project, upon termination of a tax abatement/
exemption agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full benefits of
any other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 5-2.7. Notification of Adoption of Ordinance. [1999 Code
§ 3.12.070]
Pursuant to the Act, during the first year following adoption of the
ordinance codified in this section, the Township shall include an appropriate
notice of the adoption of said ordinance in the mailing of annual property
tax bills to each owner of property located in an area in which abatements
and/or exemptions may be allowed.
§ 5-3. MUNICIPAL HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
§ 5-3.1. Purpose of Tax. [1999 Code § 3.14.010]
It is the purpose of this section to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48F-1 et seq., which authorizes the Governing Body a municipality to
adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to
exceed one (1%) percent on charges of rent for every occupancy on or
after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed three (3%)
percent on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of
a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 5-3.2. Establishment of Tax. [1999 Code § 3.14.020]
a. There is hereby established a Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax in
the Township of Edison which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage
rate of one (1%) percent on charges of rent for every occupancy of a
hotel or motel room in the Township of Edison on or after July 1, 2003,
but before July 1, 2004, and three (3%) percent on charges of rent for
§ 5-2.5 EDISON CODE § 5-3.2
AO:174
§ 5-3.3. Collection of Tax. [1999 Code § 3.14.030]
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 5-4. MUNICIPAL OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION TRUST FUND.
§ 5-4.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 3.16.010]
As used in this section:
ACQUISITION — Means the securing of a fee simple or a lesser interest in
land, including but not limited to an easement restriction development, by
gift, purchase, installment purchase agreement, devise or condemnation.
FUND — Means the Municipal Open Space Preservation Trust Fund.
every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the Township of Edison on
or after July 1, 2002, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3.
b. The Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or
resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel
room.
c. In accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq.:
1. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
2. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this
section.
3. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any
person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor,
that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the
customer, or that the tax will be refunded to the customer.
4. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be
deemed a separate offense, and each representation or
advertisement by a vendor for each day that the representation or
advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
5. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be one
thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for each offense.
§ 5-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.1
AO:175
LAND or LANDS — Means real property, including improvements thereof or
thereon, rights-of-way, water, lakes or riparian and other rights, easements,
privileges and all other rights or interest of any kind or description in,
related or connected with real property.
OPEN SPACE — Means any land acquired, developed or maintained for
recreation or conservation purposes.
RECREATION AND CONSERVATION PURPOSES — Means the use of lands
for parks, natural areas, ecological and biological study, forest, water
reserves, wildlife preserves, fishing, camping, boating, sports or other
similar uses for either public recreation or conservation of natural
resources, or both.
RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE INVENTORY (ROSI) — Means the list of
recreational areas and open space held by the municipality for recreation or
conservation purposes, as required by the Green Acres program.
§ 5-4.2. Fund Established. [1999 Code § 3.16.020]
There is established a reserve in the general trust fund which shall be
noted and designated as the Municipal Open Space Preservation Trust
Fund which trust fund shall be dedicated by rider to the municipal budget
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39. The fund shall be utilized for the
following purposes:
§ 5-4.3. Revenue Generated for the Fund. [1999 Code § 3.16.030]
There shall be deposited into the fund all revenue received by the Township
from the sale of any Township owned land, less expenses of the transaction,
all funds received through the imposition of a special tax levied pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7 et seq., and such other funds as shall be deposited or
appropriated from time to time.
§ 5-4.4. Expenditures from the Fund. [1999 Code § 3.16.040]
The moneys accumulated within the fund shall be utilized for the purposes
described in subsection 5-4.2, including the acquisition of lands. In
connection with such acquisition, the fund may be utilized for appraisals,
and other items of expense permitted by law in connection with the
a. Acquisition of lands for recreation and conservation;
b. Payment of debt service on indebtedness issued or incurred by the
Township for the purposes set forth above;
c. To assist other agencies in acquiring lands located within the Township
for the purposes stated in this section, provided that suitable
arrangements are made to assure that: such lands are made subject to
restrictions substantially similar to those imposed by this section; and if
such lands are sold, the net proceeds of the disposition will be paid over
to the fund in the same proportion that the Township's contribution
bore to the original purchase price.
§ 5-4.1 EDISON CODE § 5-4.4
AO:176
acquisition, or as a down payment for the debt service. In no eventuality
shall the Township pay more than fair market value for the land to be
acquired.
§ 5-4.5. Sale of Lands. [1999 Code § 3.16.050]
All lands acquired using the fund shall be added to the Township recreation
and open space inventory.
No lands acquired with moneys from the fund shall be conveyed through
sale, exchange, transfer, lease or other disposition unless, after at least one
public hearing, it is determined that the land is required for another public
use or that the purposes stated in subsection 5-4.2 would be better served
by the conveyance. If such conveyance is made, the Township shall place
the moneys received from the conveyance into the fund. The deed of any
property acquired wholly or partly with moneys from the fund shall contain
a specific notation reflecting that the property was acquired with moneys
from the municipal open space preservation trust fund.
§ 5-4.6. Review of Provisions. [1999 Code § 3.16.060]
When this section has been in effect for a period of ten (10) years, then
the Township Council shall conduct a review and, if it deems appropriate,
issue a report with recommendations and conclusions concerning the
continuation of the fund.
§ 5-4.7. Open Space Plan. [1999 Code § 3.16.070]
The Mayor, with the assistance of the Environmental Commission, shall
prepare and submit to the Township Council an open space plan for the
Township. The plan shall include an inventory of open space within the
Township. The plan shall also include an evaluation and priority ranking of
each such open space.
§ 5-5. SPORTS ORGANIZATION FUNDING.
§ 5-5.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 3.20.010]
As used in this section:
SPORTS ORGANIZATION — Means those organizations established
pursuant to the not-for-profit laws of the State of New Jersey for the
purpose of promoting a particular sport for its participants, whether child,
teenager or adult. Specifically, the following shall constitute the "sports
organizations" under this section:
a. Clara Barton American Legion No. 324;
b. Edison Angels;
c. Edison Boys Baseball;
§ 5-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.1
AO:177
§ 5-5.2. Intent. [1999 Code § 3.20.020]
The sports organizations identified in subsection 5-5.1 promote the public
health and welfare of their participants and provide an outlet for such
participants which would not otherwise be available without such sports
organizations. It is, therefore, in the best interest of the Township to provide
financial support for said sports organizations. This section is enacted
pursuant to necessary and proper authority of municipalities set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
§ 5-5.3. Donations. [1999 Code § 3.20.030]
Any and all Township donations to the sports organizations identified in
subsection 5-5.1 shall be made by and through the budget of the
Department of Parks and Recreation. Commencing in calendar year 1993
and continuing each year thereafter, donations to sports organizations shall
be based upon a formula to be established by resolution of the Township
Council and implemented by the Department of Administration and the
Department of Parks and Recreation. Such formula shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following criteria:
d. Edison Jets;
e. Edison Youth Basketball;
f. Father and Son American Legion No. 435;
g. Fords/Clara Barton Little League;
h. Fords/Clara Barton Soccer League;
i. Light Towers Wrestling;
j. Metuchen/Edison Soccer;
k. Little Eagles Wrestling;
l. Midtown Little League;
m. North Edison Little League;
n. North Edison Shamrocks;
o. Edison Buddy Ball.
a. Types of playing fields;
b. Field lighting;
c. Liability insurance;
d. Sports equipment;
e. Umpire fees;
§ 5-5.1 EDISON CODE § 5-5.3
AO:178
§ 5-5.4. Regulations; Contract Required. [1999 Code § 3.20.040]
The Department of Administration, in concert with the Department of Parks
and Recreation, shall have the right to promulgate such regulations as
are necessary to effectuate this chapter. Specifically, the Department of
Administration and the Department of Parks and Recreation shall, as a
condition precedent to the receipt by any sports organization of any
Township funds, require a sports organization to execute a contract with the
Township to ensure that the funds donated are being used for the intended
purpose. The contract with the sports organization shall be in such form as
approved by the Department of Law and the Business Administrator.
§ 5-5.5. Roster and Financial Disclosure by Sports Organizations
Receiving Funds From the Township. [1999 Code § 3.20.050]
§ 5-6. PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION.
f. Utilities;
g. Uniforms.
a. All sports organizations which receive appropriations in any calendar
year from the Township in exchange for the rendering of service to the
community shall be required to file a profit and loss statement and a
balance sheet with the Director of Parks and Recreation. The filed
documents shall be certified by the executive officer of the sports
organization, shall be prepared based upon sound acceptable
accounting methods, as determined by the Director of Finance, and
shall reflect the cash flow of the organization. All such documents shall
be filed annually, on or before March 31st, unless the sports
organization shall obtain an extension of time from the Director of
Parks and Recreation for good cause, such extension not to exceed sixty
(60) days. Good cause shown shall include difficulties in preparing
required documents due to a newly formed sports organization,
difficulty preparing documents based upon the sports organization's
fiscal year and similar considerations. If any sports organization
required to comply with this paragraph and paragraph b. below shall
fail to comply with either of these subsections, the Township Council,
upon receiving advice from the Director of Parks and Recreation, may
withhold payments of the appropriation for the current and subsequent
years.
b. Contemporaneous with the filing of the profit and loss statement
required by paragraph a., the Department of Parks and Recreation shall
certify the number of participants contained on their roster broken
down by Edison residents and nonresidents. An accurate roster shall at
all times be maintained by the sports organization and shall be subject
to, at any time, inspection by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 5-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.1
AO:179
§ 5-6.1. Tangible Household Personal Property Exemption. [1999
Code § 3.04.010]
§ 5-7. TOTALLY DISABLED VETERAN'S TAX EXEMPTIONS. [Ord.
No. O.1584-2007§ 2]
a. Exemption Cited. All tangible household personal property and
personal effects located within the Township shall not be assessed and
taxed.
b. Applicability of Provisions. This section shall apply to taxes on tangible
household personal property and personal effects due and payable in
the year 1962 and thereafter so long as this section shall be in effect,
and shall not affect the obligation, lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest
or penalties which have accrued or may accrue by virtue of any
assessment made or which may be made with respect to taxes levied for
any year prior to January 1, 1962; nor shall this article affect the legal
authority to assess and collect taxes which may be or have been due
and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such interest and
penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions of law
amended or repealed hereby; nor shall this section invalidate any
assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof
pending upon the effective date of this section or upon January 1, 1962,
or during the period between said dates.
c. Filing of Certified Copies. A certified copy of this section shall be filed
with the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury of the
State of New Jersey, and with the County Board of Taxation of
Middlesex County.
a. The Township will allow for either a veteran or surviving spouse of a
veteran to obtain municipal property tax relief upon proper claim. An
eligible veteran shall be defined as a member of the armed forces who
was either honorably discharged or released under honorable
circumstances from active service in the time of war or has been
declared by the United States Veterans Administration to be one
hundred (100%) percent permanently disabled.
b. In order to qualify for the municipal tax exemption, the veteran or
someone on his/her behalf under oath must file a written claim with the
Tax Assessor's office. The Tax Assessor's office will supply the applicant
with the appropriate paperwork and the applicant will be required to
provide the Tax Assessor's office with the following information:
1. Reason for the exemption;
2. A description of the property for which the exemption is claimed;
3. A certificate of claimant's honorable discharge or release under
honorable circumstances from active service, in time of war and a
certificate/letter from the United States Veteran's Administration
or its successors, certifying to a service-connected disability.
§ 5-6.1 EDISON CODE § 5-7
AO:180
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
Editor's Note: Laws concerning alcoholic beverage control are
contained in Title 33 of the New Jersey Statutes. All ordinances must
be in conformity with these provisions and approved by the Director
of Alcoholic Beverage Control, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40. State law prescribes
the types of licenses that may be issued, their number, permissible
license fees and the regulation of licensed premises, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
c. In order for a surviving spouse of a veteran to qualify for the municipal
tax exemption, the spouse under oath, must file a written claim with the
Tax Assessor's office. The Tax Assessor's office will supply the surviving
spouse with the appropriate paperwork and the applicant will be
required to provide the Tax Assessor's office with the following
information:
1. Proof to establish that the spouse is the owner of legal title to the
premises on which the exemption is made;
2. That the claimant occupies the dwelling house on said premises as
the claimant's legal resident in the State of New Jersey;
3. That the veteran has been declared by the United States Veterans
Administration to have a service-connected disability or that the
veteran shall have been declared to have died in active service in
time of war;
4. That the veteran is or would have been entitled to exemption at the
time of death;
5. The claimant is a resident of the State of New Jersey who has not
remarried.
d. In determining an award for a municipal tax exemption, the Township
has determined that the Township will only return municipal property
taxes for the current year and prior year but not greater than for a
twenty-four (24) month period in the aggregate since retroactive
refunds have a financial impact upon the Township which must be
compensated for by nonexempt taxpayers. In the event that the
Veteran's Administration determines that a veteran's disability date is
greater than twenty-four (24) months from the date the applicant
submits his/her application with the Tax Assessor's office, the Township
will only be obligated to return taxes for a period of no greater than
twenty-four (24) months from receipt of a completed application to the
Tax Assessor. All applicants providing the requisite proof under this
section will be granted a lifetime tax exemption on their Township
owned property.
§ 5-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-1
AO:181
§ 6-1. PURPOSE; STATUTORY AUTHORITY. [1999 Code § 5.08.010]
This chapter is for the purpose of regulating the sale and transportation
of alcoholic beverages in the Township, in the County of Middlesex, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act of the Legislature entitled "An
Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," being Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and in accordance with the rules
and regulations issued or to be promulgated by the State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable thereto.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
As used in this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the same
meanings as they have in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in the rules and
regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1999 Code § 5.08.020]
All applications for licenses under this chapter and all licenses issued
thereunder and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to
said Act referred to in Section 6-1 and said rules and regulations of the
State Commissioner or Alcoholic Beverage Control of New Jersey applicable
thereto, and shall be subject to any other statutes of New Jersey or of
the United States now existing or hereafter enacted affecting said subject
matters.
§ 6-3.2. Administrative Authority. [1999 Code § 5.08.030]
The Municipal Council of the Township, being the Governing Body of the
municipality, shall constitute the authority for the administration of the
issuance of licenses under this chapter, and shall report the issuance of all
such licenses to the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [1999 Code § 5.08.040]
It is unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the Township, in the
County of Middlesex, without a license previously applied for and granted
pursuant to the provisions of the Act referred to in Section 6-1.
§ 6-3.4. Plenary Retail Consumption Licenses. [1999 Code
§ 5.08.050; Ord. No. O.1601-2007; Ord. No. O.1884-2014]
a. The annual license fee and maximum number of licenses for plenary
retail consumption licenses shall be as follows:
§ 6-1 EDISON CODE § 6-3.4
AO:182
§ 6-3.5. Plenary Retail Distribution Licenses. [1999 Code
§ 5.08.070; Ord. No. O.1601-2007; Ord. No. O.1876-2014]
Class of License Annual License Fee No. of Licenses
Plenary Retail
Consumption
$2,400.00 (2008/
2009)
$2,500.00 (2009/
2010—2013-2014)
Up to maximum
allowed under N.J.S.A.
33:1-12.14
b. The holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and
regulations, to sell for consumption on the licensed premises any
alcoholic beverage by the glass or other open receptacle, and also to
sell all alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off
the licensed premises. Such license shall not permit the sale of
alcoholic beverages in or on any premises in which a grocery,
delicatessen, drugstore or other mercantile purpose is carried on,
except the keeping of a hotel or restaurant or the sale of cigars and
cigarettes at retail as an accommodation to patrons or the retail sale of
nonalcoholic beverages as accessory beverages to alcoholic beverages.
c. Plenary retail consumption licenses issued and outstanding in the
Township shall not exceed the number established in paragraph a.
above, but this limitation upon the number of plenary retail
consumption licenses shall not prevent the granting of a new such
license to a person operating a hotel or motel containing at least one
hundred (100) sleeping rooms; provided, however, that there shall be
no renewal or transfer of a license issued pursuant to this section
except for or to premises operated by the licensee as a hotel or motel
containing at least one hundred (100) sleeping rooms.
a. The annual license fee and maximum number of licenses for plenary
retail distribution license shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual License Fee No. of Licenses
Plenary Retail
Distribution
$1,157.06 (2008/2009)
$1,388.47 (2009/2010)
$1,666.16 (2010/2011)
$1,999.39 (2011/2012)
$2,399.26 (2012/2013)
$2,500.00 (2013/2014)
Up to maximum allowed
under N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14
b. The holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and
regulations, to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the
premises, but only in original containers.
§ 6-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.6
AO:183
§ 6-3.6. Club Licenses. [1999 Code § 5.08.080; Ord. No.
O.1601-2007]
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1999 Code § 5.08.150]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, consumed or delivered to a
licensed premises from Monday through Thursday between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., nor on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., nor on other Sundays between the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon. Except the sales shall be permitted beginning at 10:00
a.m. on the following dates:
§ 6-4.2. New Year's Day. [1999 Code § 5.08.150]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, nor allow the consumption of
any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on New Year's Day, when it
is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, sales being
permissible at any time on New Year's Day when it is a weekday.
a. The annual license fee for a club license shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual License Fee
Club $150.00 (2008/2009—2013/2014)
b. The holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and
regulations, to sell only to bona fide club members and their guests
alcoholic beverages intended for immediate consumption on the
licensed premises. Club licenses shall be issued only to such
corporations, associations and organizations as are operated solely for
benevolent, charitable, fraternal, social, religious, recreational, athletic
and similar purposes, and not for private gain, and such licenses shall
be subject to the qualifications, conditions and restrictions imposed by
the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Each
application for a club license shall set forth the names and addresses of
all officers, trustees, directors or other governing officials, together
with the names and addresses of all the members of the applying club,
corporation or association.
a. The Sunday preceding Christmas;
b. The Sunday preceding New Year's Day;
c. July 4th;
d. The Sunday preceding July 4th.
§ 6-3.6 EDISON CODE § 6-4.3
AO:184
§ 6-4.3. Closing Provisions. [1999 Code § 5.08.150]
During the hours sales are prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall
also be closed, but this subsection shall not apply to restaurants as defined
in N.J.R.S. 33:1-1, clubs as set forth in paragraph 5 of N.J.R.S. 33:1-12 or
other establishments where the principal business is other than the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.4. Required Floor Space. [1999 Code § 5.08.090]
No premises shall be licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail,
to be consumed on the premises, which shall contain less than four hundred
(400) square feet of floor space.
§ 6-4.5. Contents of License Applications. [1999 Code § 5.08.100]
All applications for licenses shall set forth, in full, answers to questions
prescribed by the aforesaid Act and by the rules and regulations of the State
Commissioner, and shall include declarations called for by said provisions.
§ 6-4.6. Qualifications for Licenses. [1999 Code § 5.08.110; Ord. No.
O.1655-2008 § 1]
No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation, group or
partnership not fully qualified under the provisions of the Act and the rules
and regulations of the State Commissioner.
§ 6-4.7. Voluntary Surrender of License and Proration of Fee. [1999
Code § 5.08.120]
All licenses shall be for a term of one (1) year from the first day of July in
each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance upon presentation of the
application; provided, however, that any licensee, except a seasonal retail
consumption licensee, who shall voluntarily surrender his or her license,
who shall not have committed any violation of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation, and who shall have paid all taxes, setoffs or counter-claims that
may have become due to the State of New Jersey or to the Township shall
be entitled, after deduction of fifty (50%) percent of the fee as a surrender
fee, to the prorated fee for the unexpired term.
§ 6-4.8. Required Distance of Premises From Schools and Churches.
[1999 Code § 5.08.180]
No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within two
hundred (200) feet of any church or public school or private schoolhouse
not conducted for pecuniary profit, except to manufacturers, wholesalers,
hotels, clubs and fraternal organizations which own or are actually in
possession of the licensed premises at the time of the effectiveness of the
Act, and the two hundred (200) feet shall be measured in the normal way
that a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest entrance of said
church or school to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to be
§ 6-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.8
AO:185
licensed; provided, however, that this prohibition may be waived at the
issuance and renewal of such license by the duly authorized Governing Body
or authority of such school or church, and such waiver shall be effective
until the date of the next renewal of such license, and provided also that
this prohibition shall not apply to the renewal of any license where no
such school or church was located within said prohibited distance of said
licensed premises at the time of the issuance of such license or as otherwise
excepted by the provisions of the Act.
§ 6-4.9. Service in Rooms Not Open to General Public. [1999 Code
§ 5.08.170]
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally, except that guests may be served in public
dining rooms and, provided also that this prohibition shall not apply to club
licenses.
§ 6-4.10. Screening or Use of Curtains. [1999 Code § 5.08.140]
Every licensed premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall admit a
view of the interior from the entrance of the licensed premises; provided,
however, that curtains or other means of screening may be used on the
windows or doors of the premises to the height of five (5) feet from the floor
of the premises, provided that the same does not prevent an examination of
the interior from the entrance by a police officer, inspector or other officer
of the law.
§ 6-5. VIOLATIONS; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
[1999 Code § 5.08.130]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules and regulations of the State Director
of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five (5) day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-6. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Presence of Persons Under the Legal Age Prohibited. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age, with exceptions as
provided by law, to enter any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to
him any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-4.8 EDISON CODE § 6-6.2
AO:186
§ 6-6.2. Consumption and Purchase Unlawful. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to consume any
alcoholic beverage on premises so licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase
for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-6.3. Purchase By or for a Person Under the Legal Age
Prohibited. [New]
No person over the legal age shall procure or purchase or attempt to
procure or purchase any alcoholic beverage for the purpose of distributing
the same to any person under the legal age, nor shall any person over the
legal age supply any person under the legal age with any alcoholic beverage
or beverages. This section shall not apply as between parent and child
within the confines of the home or either parent or child.
§ 6-6.4. Misrepresenting Age. [New]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to misrepresent
or misstate his/her age for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee or
any employee of any retail licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic
beverage to him/her.
§ 6-6.5. Presumption. [New]
Any parent or guardian who accompanies a person under the legal age into
a premises in which alcoholic beverages are served and who permits the
minor to possess or consume alcoholic beverages shall be presumed to have
misrepresented the age of the person under the legal age.
§ 6-6.6. Possession. [New]
No person under the legal age shall possess, transport, deliver, serve, sell
or consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place within the Township.
§ 6-6.7. Penalty. [New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred ($500.00)
dollars. In addition, the Court shall suspend the person's license to operate
a motor vehicle for six (6) months or prohibit the person from obtaining a
license to operate a motor vehicle in this State for six (6) months beginning
on the date he/she becomes eligible to obtain a license or on the date of
conviction, whichever is later. In addition to the general penalty prescribed
for an offense, the Court may require any person under the legal age to
purchase alcoholic beverages, who violates this Act, to participate in an
alcohol education or treatment program authorized by the Department of
Health for a period not to exceed the maximum period of confinement
§ 6-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.7
AO:187
prescribed by law for the offense for which the individual has been
convicted. (N.J.S.A. 33:1-81)
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [New]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [1999
Code 10.08.210; Ord. No. O.1607-2008; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of that vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
a. The Chief of Police or his designee, is hereby authorized to provide by
regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor
vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any day or
days whenever he/she finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with paragraph a above shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty ($50.00) dollars.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall not become
effective unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 6-6.7 EDISON CODE § 7-4
AO:188
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [New]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute or in
this chapter, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than fifty ($50.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen
(15) days or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [New]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [New]
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Edison are hereby repealed,
and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this
repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby
repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET
AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION
AND ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. (Municipal Roads Only)
§ 7-7.1. Controls Established for Construction Zone. [New]
The Governing Body hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur and traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safety and expeditious movement of traffic
through construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the
work force performing these operations.
The Township of Edison, in the County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 7-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.2
AO:189
§ 7-7.2. Preconstruction Meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under a public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Police
Department of the Township in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting
in order to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period
of construction work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Police Department is in violation of this section.
§ 7-7.3. Emergency Contact Telephone Numbers. [New]
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two (2) emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case
of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to
the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be
reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call
from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency service by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor, or utility for such condition.
§ 7-7.4. Hours. [New]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. by the Officer in charge of the Township Police Department. If it
is determined by the Officer in charge that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-7.5. Road Closing and Detours. [New]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Township Police Department.
§ 7-7.6. Traffic Directors. [New]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Township Police Department that same is
necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-7.7. Stop Work. [New]
The Township Police Department shall have the authority to stop work,
including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within
the street right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related
§ 7-7.2 EDISON CODE § 7-7.7
AO:190
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this section.
§ 7-7.8. Site Preparation. [New]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment
are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 7-7.9. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less
than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than five hundred ($500.00)
dollars and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days. For a second offense, the person, contractor or utility shall,
upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than two hundred and fifty
($250.00) dollars and/or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not
exceeding ninety (90) days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-8. PARKING.
§ 7-8.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [1999 Code § 10.08.010]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-9. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
[1999 Code § 10.08.210; 1999 Code § 10.08.220; Ord. No.
O.1607-2008 § 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or his/her designee, in
his/her absence, the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING
signs when weather conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or
public celebrations dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other
conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that
EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be
given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked
prior to the posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 7-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9
AO:191
§ 7-10. TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION FOR SNOW
PLOWING AND REMOVAL. [1999 Code § 10.08.200; Ord. No.
O.1858-2014]
§ 7-11. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1999 Code § 10.08.070; Ord. No.
O.1762-2010]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described, except where other parking regulations have been
provided for.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Amboy Avenue (CR
#501)
Both All Between Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514) and
Dartmouth Street
Amboy Avenue (CR
#501)
Both All Between Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514) and
Gold Street
Amboy Avenue (CR
#501)
North All Aldrich Drive to a point
110 feet west
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicles shall be
parked on public streets or highways within the boundaries of Edison
Township.
The parking prohibitions listed above shall remain in effect after the
snow has ceased, until the streets have been plowed sufficiently, and to
the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
Name of Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-9 EDISON CODE § 7-11
AO:192
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Amboy Avenue (CR
#501)
North All Aldrich Drive to a point
115 feet east
Amboy Avenue (CR
#501)
South All Between Madison Avenue
and Wiley Avenue
Cambridge Road North All Winthrop Road to the
easterly boundary of 13
Cambridge Road
Cambridge Road South All Winthrop Road to the
easterly boundary of 10
Cambridge Road
Carter Drive Both All Entire length
Clearview Avenue Both All From King George Post
Road to Industrial Avenue
Ethel Road Both All North side of the road
from Talmadge Road to
New Brooklyn Road
Ethel Road Both All South side of the road
from Talmadge Road to
Taylor Road
Fourth Street West All From Amboy Avenue (CR
# 501) to dead end
Grandview Avenue (CR
#630)
Northwest
All From a point 147 feet
northwest Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514) to
Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514)
Grove Avenue Both All From a point 300 feet
north of Oak Tree Road
(CR #604) to a point 300
feet south to Oak Tree
Road (CR #604)
Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
Both All Entire length from
Woodbridge Township line
to Old Raritan Road (CR
#509)
Kate Place Both All Allison Court to Inman
Avenue (CR #602)
Leo Street Both All From Route US 1 (NB) to
a point 325 feet east [Ord.
No. O.1478-2005]
§ 7-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11
AO:193
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Lyle Place South All Between Wintergreen
Avenue East and Beaver
Place [Ord. No.
O-1458-2005]
McGaw Drive Both All Entire length
Meadow Road North All Between Edison Boat
Basin and Executive
Avenue
Mill Road (CR #667) West All Between Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514) and
Candy Court
New Dover Road Both All From Oak Tree Road (CR
#604) to Lund Avenue
New Dover Road Both All From Stacey Street to
Stratford Circle
New Durham Road (CR
#501)
Both All Between New Brooklyn
Road and Durham Avenue
Oakland Street West All From Jefferson Boulevard
to the first boundary line
of 110 Oakland Avenue
Oakwood Avenue (CR
#657)
Both All From Parsonage Road (CR
#630) to a point 300 feet
west thereof
Oakwood Avenue (CR
#657)
Both All From Parsonage Road (CR
#630) to a point 300 feet
east thereof
Park Avenue (CR #531) Both All From the intersection of
Plainfield Road (CR #661)
to a point 250 feet west
Parsonage Road (CR
#630)
Both All From Oakwood Avenue
(CR #657) to a point 350
feet south thereof
Parsonage Road (CR
#630)
Both All From Oakwood Avenue
(CR #657) to a point 350
feet north thereof
Plainfield Avenue (CR
#529)
Both All Between Central Avenue
and Kilmer Road
Plainfield Road (CR
#531)
East All From the intersection of
Park Avenue (CR #531)
for a distance of 250 feet
south
§ 7-11 EDISON CODE § 7-11
AO:194
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Plainfield Road (CR
#531)
East All From the intersection of
Renee Court for a distance
of 100 feet south and 425
feet north
Plainfield Road (CR
#531)
West All From the intersection of
Park Avenue (CR #531)
for a distance of 300 feet
north
Riverview Avenue Both All From Route US 1 (NB)
east to its end at Kathleen
Street [Ord. No.
O.1478-2005]
Whitman Avenue South All From Vineyard Road to
Wilshire Road
Wildwood Avenue Southeast All From a point 90 feet
southeast of Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514) to
Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514)
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
North All From a point 87 feet west
of Grandview Avenue (CR
#660) to Grandview
Avenue (CR #660)
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
North All From a point 90 feet east
of Grandview Avenue (CR
#660) to Grandview
Avenue (CR #660)
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
South All From a point 105 feet
west to Wildwood Avenue
to Wildwood Avenue
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
South All From a point 230 feet east
of Wildwood Avenue to
Wildwood Avenue
§ 7-12. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1999
Code §§ 10.08.040, 10.08.050]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described, except where other parking
regulations have been provided for.
§ 7-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:195
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Amboy
Avenue (CR
#501)
South 30 min. All times Beginning 35 feet
west of King Georges
Road for a distance of
110 feet west thereof
Central
Avenue
East 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
From Stony Road
West to the end of
Central Avenue
(North)
Division
Street
Both 2 hrs. All times From the intersection
of Eardley Road to the
first driveway of
Thomas Jefferson
School
Division
Street
Both 2 hrs. All times From the second
driveway of Thomas
Jefferson School to
Plainfield Avenue (CR
#529)
Fielding Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
From Plainfield Road
(CR #531) to
Remington Drive
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [New]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [1999 Code § 10.08.020; Ord. No. O.1768-2011; Ord. No.
O.1780-2011; Ord. No. O.1822-2013; Ord. No. O.1901-2015; Ord. No.
O.1917-2015; Ord. No. O.1983-2017]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described, except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of Street Sides Location
Amboy Avenue (CR
#501)
South From Coral Street to Maple Avenue
Belmont Avenue East From NJ Route #27 to Duley Avenue
Boulevard of Eagles Both From Winthrop Road to Old Post Road
§ 7-12 EDISON CODE § 7-14
AO:196
Name of Street Sides Location
Brunswick Avenue Both From Taylor Road to high tension wires
Campbell Avenue Both From NJ Route 27 to the length of the
westerly side of Block 81, Lot 1 and the
easterly side of Block 78, Lot 1 (To be
measured by the Township Engineer.)
[Ord. No. O.1583-2007 § 1]
Central Avenue North From projected curbline on easterly
side line of Plainfield Avenue (CR #529)
east 80 feet on Central Avenue
Central Avenue North From projected curbline on westerly
side line of Plainfield Avenue (CR #529)
west 125 feet on Central Avenue
Central Avenue South From projected curbline on easterly
side line of Plainfield Avenue (CR #529)
east 50 feet on Central Avenue
Central Avenue South From projected curbline on westerly
side line on Plainfield Avenue (CR #529)
west to the easterly side line of Reed
Street
Christie Street Northeast From Tower Road to Middlesex Avenue
Cinder Road East From Oak Tree Road (CR #604) to its
northerly terminus
Coolidge Avenue West From Amboy Avenue (CR #501) to a
point 210 feet southerly thereof
Corporation Row West Entire length [Ord. No. O.1917-2015]
Corporation Row East From the at-grade railroad crossing
(approximately 430 feet north of
Executive Avenue) south to the southern
terminus of the road [Ord. No.
O.1917-2015]
Craig Street Both From Plainfield Avenue (CR #529) to
Larson Avenue
Crestwood Avenue Both Within fifty (50) feet of Woodbridge
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1983-2017]
Crosby Avenue East From Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) to
Fern Street
Dey Place South From Wilson Avenue to 240 feet before
Prospect Avenue
Distribution
Boulevard
North From Mill Road (CR #667) west to
Corporation Row [Ord. No.
O.1917-2015]
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:197
Name of Street Sides Location
Distribution
Boulevard
South From Mill Road (CR #667) west a
distance of 400 feet [Ord. No.
O.1917-2015]
Distribution
Boulevard
Both From Corporation Row west to the
western terminus of the road [Ord. No.
O.1917-2015]
Division Street South 100 feet west of Eardley Road
Duclos Lane (CR
#676)
Both From NJ Route #27 to a point 100 feet
southerly thereof
East Side Avenue North From Old Post Road to U.S. Route #1
East Side Avenue North From U.S. Route #1 to Magnolia Street
Executive Avenue North Entire length [Ord. No. O.1917-2015]
Executive Avenue South From Meadow Road east to Corporation
Row [Ord. No. O.1917-2015]
Fitch Road East From NJ Route #27 to the intersection
of Winthrop Road
Ford Avenue Northwest 120 feet back from crosswalk at
intersection of Ford Avenue and Amboy
Avenue (CR #501)
Franklin Avenue Both From Amboy Avenue (CR #501) 200
feet north on Franklin Avenue
Greenwood Avenue South From Sheppard Place to Prospect
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1701-2009 § I]
Grove Avenue Both From Oak Tree Road (CR #604) to a
point 300 feet north thereof
Grove Avenue Both From Oak Tree Road (CR #604) to a
point 300 feet south thereof
Grove Avenue East From New Dover Road to Inman Avenue
(CR #602)
Harding Avenue West From Regal Road to a point 1,500 feet
northerly thereof (94 Harding Avenue)
Hollywood Street Both Entire length
Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
North From Rahway Road to Conrail Railroad
James Street Both NJ Route #27 from the easterly curbline
to Mundy Street
Jeff Street West From Winslow Street to Lodi Avenue
Kellogg Court Both From Brunswick Avenue to its northerly
terminus
§ 7-14 EDISON CODE § 7-14
AO:198
Name of Street Sides Location
Kilmer Road North From Plainfield Avenue (CR #529) west
to the Borough of Highland Park border
Kilmer Road South From Plainfield Avenue (CR #529) west
to the Borough of Highland Park border
[Ord. No. O.1780.2011]
Lafayette Avenue East From Parsonage Road (CR #630) to a
point 400 feet east thereof
Lafayette Avenue Both From Parsonage Road (CR #630) to
Menlo Park Drive
LaFayette Road Both From Parsonage Road (CR #630) to
Woodbridge Township line
Larson Avenue West From Pacific Street to Craig Street
Loring Avenue East From a point 200 feet from the
intersection of NJ Route #27 and Loring
Avenue on the southeast side of Loring
Avenue
Mack Drive North From Talmadge Road to its easterly
terminus
Mack Drive South From Talmadge Road to its easterly
terminus
Main Street Both Entire length
Marion Street West From the entrance of the Oak Tree
School to Maryland Avenue
Maryland Avenue Both Entire length
Mason Street East From Parsonage Road (CR #630) to
Judson Street
Mill Road (CR #667) Both From Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514)
south to the intersection of Distribution
Boulevard
Mill Road (local
road)
West From Distribution Boulevard south to
the southern terminus of the road [Ord.
No. O.1917-2015]
Mill Road (local
road)
East From Distribution Boulevard south to a
distance 50 feet south of Heller Park
Lane [Ord. No. O.1917-2015]
Monroe Avenue Both From Jamaica Street to Bank Place
Municipal Boulevard Both From NJ Route #27 to Municipal
Complex
Myrtle Avenue West Entire length
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:199
Name of Street Sides Location
New Dove Road Both From Oak Tree Road (CR #604) to a
point 1,000 feet northerly thereof
Norwood Place Both Within fifty (50) feet of Woodbridge
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1983-2017]
Oak Tree Road (CR
#604)
Both Entire length
Ovington Avenue Both From Hillcrest Avenue to Plainfield
Avenue (CR #529)
Ovington Avenue East From Plainfield Avenue (CR #529) to
Schuyler Drive
Pacific Street North From Larson Street to Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
Both From the Metuchen corporate line
north to Fielding Avenue
Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
East From Jefferson Boulevard to Pacific
Street
Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
East From Ovington Avenue to Jefferson
Boulevard
Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
East From Pacific Street to Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514)
Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
East From the Piscataway Township line to
Ovington Avenue
Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
West Entire length
Prince Street Both From U.S. Route #1 to a point 125 feet
north thereof
Prospect Avenue Both From NJ Route #27 to Greenwood
Avenue
Riverside Drive West From the convergence of Parkway Place
Extension with Riverside Drive to a
point 1,000 feet southward on Riverside
Drive from the convergence point [Ord.
No. O.1822-2013]
Saw Mill Pond Road North Entire length [Ord. No. O.1917-2015]
Sheppard Place East Entire length [Ord. No. O.1701-2009
§ I]
Sheppard Place West From NJ Route #27 to Lahiere Avenue
Stony Road Both From NJ Route #27 to Lester Road
Stony Road West Both From Lahiere Avenue to NJ Route #27
§ 7-14 EDISON CODE § 7-14
AO:200
Name of Street Sides Location
Sturgis Road Both From NJ Route #27 to Idlewild Road
Suttons Lane Both From NJ Route #27 to a point 100 feet
north thereof
Suydam Avenue East From NJ Route #27 to Duley Avenue
Taft Avenue East From NJ Route #27 to Duley Avenue
Talmadge Road Both From New Durham Road (CR #501) to
Suttons Place
Talmadge Road Both From NJ Route #27 to New Durham
Road (CR #501)
Talmadge Road Both From Suttons Lane to Park Avenue (CR
#531)
Taylor Road Both From New Brunswick Avenue to a point
300 feet thereof
Thornall Street (CR
#657)
Both Beginning at the intersection of
Thornall Street (CR #657) and Wood
Avenue (CR #649) down the easterly
curbline 1,200 feet on Thornall Street
(CR #657), also beginning at the same
intersection down the westerly curbline
430 feet on Thornall Street (CR #657)
Thornall Street (CR
#657)
Both From Wood Avenue (CR #649) to
Evergreen Road (CR #657)
Tower Road Both From Christie Street to Frederic
Trenton Avenue Both Within fifty (50) feet of Woodbridge
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1983-2017]
Truman Drive South
[Ord. No.
O.1901-2015]
Both From Yosko Drive to Kilmer Road
Vineyard Road Both Entire length
Walsh Avenue West From Amboy Avenue (CR #501) to
Safran Avenue
Wood Avenue (CR
#649)
West From a point 150 feet west of the
westerly curbline of NJ Route #27 to
Thornall Street (CR #657)
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
North From Amboy Avenue (CR #501) to a
point 225 feet west of Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529)
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
North From Riverview Avenue to Duclos Lane
(CR #676)
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:201
Name of Street Sides Location
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
South From a point 226 feet west of Plainfield
Avenue (CR #529) to the Woodbridge
Township line
Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514) Overpass
Both From Silverlake Avenue to Duclos Lane
(CR #676), including all ramps leading
to and from the overpass
Woodland Avenue Edison
side
From King Arthur's Court to Old Raritan
Road (CR #509) and from Old Raritan
Road (CR #509) to the Scotch Plains
Township line
§ 7-15. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [1999 Code § 10.08.030; Ord. No. O.1609-2008;
Ord. No. O.1620-2008; Ord. No. O.1635-2008; Ord. No. O.1706-2009;
Ord. No. O.1917-2015]
No person shall park or stand a vehicle between the hours specified any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours/Days Location
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
From Maple Avenue to
Bloomfield Avenue
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
North 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
From Maple Avenue to
Ford Avenue
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Carlton Street
South to Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514)
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Maple Avenue to
Coral Street
Barlow Street
West
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
Entire length
Blossom Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
From Jefferson
Boulevard to the west
end of the Board of
Education property at
the Lindeneau School
Broad Avenue North 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-14 EDISON CODE § 7-15
AO:202
Name of
Street Sides Hours/Days Location
Brookville
Road
Both 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
For a distance of 1,000
feet in both directions
from the entrance to the
Lincoln School
Cedar Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m. excluding
Saturday, Sunday
and holidays
From NJ Route #27 to
Tower Road
Cedar Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m. excluding
Saturday, Sunday
and holidays
From Tower Road to
Union Avenue
Cinder Lane Both 4:00 p.m. to 12:00
midnight
Entire length
Corporation
Row
East 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
From Distribution
Boulevard south to the
at-grade railroad
crossing (approximately
430 feet north of
Executive Avenue) [Ord.
No. O.1917-2015]
Country Lane Both 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. Sundays
Entire length
Darwin
Boulevard
Both 7:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m. Tuesday only
From New Dover Road
to Curtis Avenue
Denver
Boulevard
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Tuesday only
Between New Dover
Road and McKinley
Avenue
Distribution
Boulevard
South 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
From Corporation Row
east to a point 400 feet
west of Mill Road [Ord.
No. O.1917-2015]
Division Street West 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m. school days
240 feet in front of
Thomas Jefferson School
Executive
Avenue
South 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
From Corporation Row
east to Mill Road [Ord.
No. O.1917-2015]
Farmhaven
Avenue
Both 4:00 p.m. to 12:00
midnight
Entire length
§ 7-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-15
AO:203
Name of
Street Sides Hours/Days Location
Floyd Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
Entire length
Gaskill Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
Entire length
Germantown
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
From School House Lane
to Thomasine Street
Glenville Road North 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
From Boulevard of
Eagles to a point 300
feet east thereof
Gloria Avenue North 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Entire length
Gold Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Amboy Avenue (CR
#501) to Safran Avenue
Grove Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. during school
hours
From New Dover Road
to Laura Avenue
Hector Avenue
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
O.1635-2008
§ I]
Hillside Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Entire length
Hillside Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529) to Poll Place
310 Hoover
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m. excluding
Saturday, Sunday
and holidays.
Approximately 302 feet
east of Lafayette Avenue
to 322 feet east of
Lafayette Avenue. [Ord.
No. O.1706-2009 § I]
Jamaica
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m. Monday to
Friday
From Turner Avenue to
Monroe Avenue
Kimble Street Both 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
From Redwood Street to
Oakland Avenue
King Arthur's
Court
Both 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. Sundays
Entire length
Manor
Boulevard
North 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-15 EDISON CODE § 7-15
AO:204
Name of
Street Sides Hours/Days Location
Maple Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
From Amboy Avenue (CR
#501) to a point 250 feet
north thereof
Meeker Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m. weekdays
From Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514) to its
terminus at U.S. Route
#1
Middlesex
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m. excluding
Saturday, Sunday
and holidays
Entire length to Phillips
Road
Mill Road
(local road)
East 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
From a distance 50 feet
south of Heller Park
Lane south to the
southern terminus of the
road [Ord. No.
O.1917-2015]
Monmouth
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m. excluding
Saturday, Sunday
and holidays
Entire length from
Phillips Road
Monroe
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
Jamaica Avenue easterly
to its terminus [Ord.
O.1620-2008 § 1]
New Dover
Road
East 24 hours a day
except Saturdays,
Sundays, holidays
From Darwin Boulevard
to Wood Acres Drive
Old Post Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From its northern
intersection with U.S.
Route #1 to its southern
intersection with U.S.
Route #1
Paley Place
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
O.1635-2008
§ I]
Philip Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length to Union
Avenue
§ 7-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-15
AO:205
Name of
Street Sides Hours/Days Location
Preston Street
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
O.1635-2008
§ I]
Preston Street
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
O.1635-2008
§ I]
Progress
Street
Both 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Entire length
Revere
Boulevard
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Tuesday only
Between New Dover
Road and McKinley
Avenue
Saw Mill Pond
Road
South 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Entire length [Ord. No.
O.1917-2015]
School House
Lane
Both 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
Entire length
Stratford
Circle
Northeast
2:30 p.m. to 3:30
p.m.
From Whittier Street to
Tennyson Street
Tower Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m. excluding
Saturday, Sunday
and holidays
Entire length from
Phillips Road
Velikan Place
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
O.1609-2008
§ I]
Winthrop Road South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
From Cambridge Road
East to Washington Park
School property line
Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
South 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
From School House Lane
to Thomasine Street
Woodland
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. Sundays
From Oak Tree Road (CR
#604) to King Arthur's
Court [Ord. No.
O.1917-2015]
§ 7-15 EDISON CODE § 7-16
AO:206
§ 7-16. PARKING OF CERTAIN TRUCKS, VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
PROHIBITED. [1999 Code § 10.08.060]
No person shall park a truck or vehicle over four (4) tons gross vehicle
weight (GVW), a school bus, any other type of bus, recreational vehicle,
camper, boat or trailer between the hours specified upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All Streets in
Residential Zones
Both 10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-17. RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING. [Ord. No. O.1701-2009
§ II;4 Ord. No. O.1774-2011; Ord. No. O.1843-2013]
a. No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as
described within the following sections unless an appropriate and
current parking permit as issued by the Township of Edison is displayed
on said vehicle for those streets or parts of streets as described or listed
within the following zones.
1. Zone #1. The following streets will constitute residential permit
parking Zone #1. Only residents from Zone #1 and their visitors
are eligible to park in Zone #1. Color-coded permit(s) will be issued
to residents and their guests of Zone #1.
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Central
Avenue
Both 1. Between Suttons
Lane and Prescott
Street
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
Both 2. Between
Prescott Street and
Reed Street
7:00 a.m.
- 9:00
p.m.
7 days
per week
(excluding
holidays)
Both 3. Plainfield Avenue
(CR #529) and
Stony Road West
7:00 a.m.
- 9:00
p.m.
7 days
per week
(excluding
holidays)
Chestnut
Street
Both From Hillcrest
Avenue to Stony
Road
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
4. Editor's Note: Section 7-17, Residential Permit Parking, was amended in its entirety by
Ordinance No. O.1701-2009. Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1999 Code
§§ 10.24.020 — 10.24.060 and Ordinance Nos. O.1469-2005, O.1481-2006, O.1510-2006,
O.1609-2008, O.1635-2008, O.1668-2008 and O.1680-2008.
§ 7-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-17
AO:207
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Ely Place Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
Hillcrest
Avenue
Both Between Chestnut
Avenue and
Greenwood Avenue
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
Lenox Street Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 9:00
p.m.
7 days
per week
(excluding
holidays)
Partch Place Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
Porter Street Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 9:00
p.m.
7 days
per week
(excluding
holidays)
Prescott
Street
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 9:00
p.m.
7 days
per week
(excluding
holidays)
Price Drive Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
Reed Street Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 9:00
p.m.
7 days
per week
(excluding
holidays)
Runyon
Avenue [Ord.
No.
O.1668-2008]
Both From Plainfield
Avenue (CR #529)
to Stony Road
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
Rutgers Street Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
7 days
per week
(excluding
holidays)
Sims Road Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
Stony Road
West
Both From Central
Avenue to Chestnut
Street
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
§ 7-17 EDISON CODE § 7-17
AO:208
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Walnut Street Both From Hillcrest
Avenue to Stony
Road
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
(excluding
holidays)
2. Zone #2. All other current residential permit parking areas not
incorporated into another parking zone will constitute Zone #2.
Only residents from Zone #2 and their visitors are eligible to park
in Zone #2. A color-coded permit will be issued to residents and
their guests in Zone #2. [Ord. No. O.1811-2012]
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Center Street
[Ord. No.
O.1635-2008
§ II]
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Ellen Street Both Entire length All All
Flower Court Both Entire length All All
Freeman
Street
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Gold Street Both From Amboy
Avenue (CR #501)
to Safran Avenue
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Hector Avenue
[Ord. No.
O.1635-2008
§ II]
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Helene Avenue
[Ord. No.
O.1716-2009]
Both Entire length 8:00 a.m.
- 8:00
p.m.
All
Hillcrest
Avenue
Both Between 157 feet
south of the
southerly curbline
of NJ Route #27
and Ovington
Avenue
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Jeff Street West Between Winslow
Street and U.S.
Route #1
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Miller Avenue Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
§ 7-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-17
AO:209
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Paley Place
[Ord. No.
O.1635-2008
§ II]
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Pleasant
Avenue
East Between 120 feet
north of the
northerly curbline
of Amboy Avenue
(CR #501) to a
point 275 feet
therefrom
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Pleasant
Avenue
West Between 135 feet
north of the
northerly curbline
of Amboy Avenue
(CR #501) and
Hoover Avenue
7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Preston
Avenue [Ord.
No.
O.1635-2008
§ II]
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
Taft Avenue
[Ord. No.
O.1811-2012]
West From NJ Route
#27 to Duley
Avenue
24 hours 7 days
per week
Velikan Place
[Ord. No.
O.1609-2008
§ II]
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 3:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
3. (Reserved)
4. Zone #4. The following streets will constitute residential permit
parking Zone #4. Only residents from Zone #4 and their visitors
are eligible to park in Zone #4. Color-coded permit(s) will be issued
to residents and their guests of Zone #4. [Ord. No. O.1742-2010]
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Blossom
Street [Ord.
No.
O.1742-2010]
2 parking stalls in
front of 45
Blossom Street
7:00 a.m.
- 6:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
§ 7-17 EDISON CODE § 7-17
AO:210
5. Zone #5. The following streets will constitute residential permit
parking Zone #5. Only residents from Zone #5 and their visitors
are eligible to park in Zone #5. Color-coded permit(s) will be issued
to residents and their guests of Zone #5. [Ord. No. O.1791-2012]
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Alexis Lane
[Ord. No.
O.1827-2013]
Both Entire length,
from the
southerly
intersection of
Talmadge Road
and Alexis Lane
up to and through
the northerly
intersection of
Talmadge Road
and Alexis Lane
7:00
a.m.—
6:00 p.m.
All
Charles Street
[Ord. No.
O.1843-2013]
North
Side
Only
Entire length,
from Wood
Avenue (CR #649)
to Henry Street,
excepting the
section 100 feet
westward from
the northwest
intersection of
Charles Street
with Wood
Avenue, which
section is
designated as a
Bus Stop
7:00
a.m.—
6:00 p.m.
All
Ventnor Drive Both Entire length 7:00 a.m.
- 6:00
p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
6. Zone #6. The following streets will constitute residential permit
parking Zone #6. Only residents from Zone #6 and their visitors
are eligible to park in Zone #6. Color-coded permit(s) will be issued
to residents and their guests of Zone #6.
Name of
Street Side Location Hours Days
Tamagnini
Court
Both Entire Length 7:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
All
§ 7-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-17
AO:211
b. Residential Parking Permit System. No vehicle shall be parked on the
streets or parts of streets designated in this Section 7-17 during the
days and hours designated in the schedule unless the vehicle falls under
one (1) of the exceptions to the parking ban or:
1. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident of
that street;
2. The vehicle has displayed on the front driver's side window in the
lower rear corner, two (2) inches from the bottom of the window
when in a rolled up position, a current residential parking permit so
as to be closely examined by an officer;
3. The resident's vehicle displaying a residential parking permit is
consistently parked within the immediate block of the resident
owner's home.
c. Exempt Vehicles. The following vehicles shall be exempt from this
parking permit chapter:
1. Contractors', Service and Delivery Vehicles. Contractors', service
and delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a
commercial business may park without a permit during the time
they are rendering service to a residence within the permit parking
area.
2. Emergency Vehicles. Emergency vehicles and public utility vehicles
may park within the permit parking area during the time they are
rendering service or repairs within the area.
3. Visitors.
(a) A vehicle displaying a current visitor parking permit, which
shall be a hang tag from the rear view mirror, may park a
maximum of three (3) days, provided that the operator is a
bona fide guest of a resident within the parking area. If a
visitor must park beyond the three-day limit, the host-resident
must notify the police to this effect and supply the vehicle
identification information requested. The police shall not
enforce this section against a visitor for up to but not
exceeding fourteen (14) days if this procedure is followed.
(b) A visitor's vehicle must be parked on the same block as the
host-person's residence.
d. Basis for Determination. Whenever the Mayor or his or her designee
shall determine that certain streets exclusively or primarily servicing
residential land uses, or portions of such streets, are being used for
parking by the operators of vehicles who do not reside on the streets,
and that the average number of such vehicles parking in such manner is
in excess of twenty-five (25%) percent of the number of parking spaces
on such streets and that the total number of parking spaces actually
§ 7-17 EDISON CODE § 7-17
AO:212
§ 7-18. ANGLE PARKING. [1999 Code § 10.08.080; New]
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby established as Angle
Parking at an angle so indicated below.
Name of Street Side(s) Angle Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-19. THROUGH STREETS. [1999 Code § 10.08.110]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
occupied exceeds sixty-five (65%) percent of the total number of
parking spaces on such streets on the weekdays of any month, as
disclosed by an engineering or traffic study, then the Mayor or his
or her designee shall recommend to the Municipal Council that such
streets be included within this section.
e. Applications. Application for parking permits under this section shall be
made in writing on forms provided by the Department of Health.
Permits shall be issued without charge only under the following terms
and conditions:
1. Residential permits shall be renewed every three (3) years and the
current year's sticker must be affixed to the registered vehicle by
January 15 of the first year the permit is issued. Permits bearing
the year 2010 are extended and effective through December 31,
2012, thereafter all permits will be renewed for a three (3) year
term. As part of the renewal process, residents shall be required to
show their issued visitor permits in order to obtain a color-coded
residential sticker for the particular zone.
2. Three (3) visitor permits shall be issued to each residential unit on
any street or portion thereof upon which parking is restricted by
this section.
f. Violations—Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
shall violate any of the provisions of this section, or any supplement
thereto shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one
thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars, and each violation of
any of the provisions of this section and each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 7-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-19
AO:213
Name of Street Limits
Andre Avenue Between NJ Route #27 and Chestnut Street
Andre Avenue Between U.S. Route #1 and Chestnut Street
Annette Drive Entire length
Beatrice Parkway Between McKinley Street and Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
Beatrice Parkway Between West Hegel Avenue and Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
Boulevard of the
Eagles
From Old Post Road to Winthrop Road
Brookfall Road Entire length
Calvert Avenue
(East)
Between Christie Street and Grove Avenue
Calvert Avenue
(West)
Between Grove Avenue and Stephenville Parkway
Cedar Street Between NJ Route #27 and Union Avenue
Central Avenue Between Suttons Lane and Plainfield Avenue (CR
#529)
Christie Street Between NJ Route #27 and Dellwood Road
Clive Hills Road Between Grove Avenue and Mason Drive
Colton Road Between Winthrop Road and Route 27 [Ord. No.
O.1478-2005]
Crosby Avenue Between Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) and Fern
Street
Division Street Between NJ Route #27 and Plainfield Avenue (CR
#529)
Duley Avenue Between Duclos Lane (CR #676) and Morgan Drive
Eardley Road Between Suttons Lane and Division Street
Ellis Parkway Between Nicholson Avenue and Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
Ellis Parkway Between Sheryl Drive and Inman Avenue (CR #602)
Ethel Road Entire length
Fairview Avenue Between Suttons Lane and 50 feet of Auld Way
Featherbed Avenue Between Inman Avenue (CR #602) and Scotch
Plains line
Fleet Avenue Between Nevsky Street and South Plainfield line
Fox Road Between Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) and
Raymond Street
§ 7-19 EDISON CODE § 7-19
AO:214
Name of Street Limits
Garden Street Between Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) and
Wisteria Street
Grandview Avenue
(CR #660)
Between U.S. Route #1 and Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514)
Grove Avenue Between Inman Avenue (CR #602) and New Dover
Road
Grove Avenue Between New Dover Road and Oak Tree Road (CR
#604)
Grove Avenue Between Oak Tree Road (CR #604) and Borough of
Metuchen corporate line
Gurley Road Between Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) and Violet
Place
Harding Avenue Between Stephenville Parkway and Oak Tree Road
(CR #604)
Harman Road Between Grandview Avenue (CR #660) and the end
of Harmon Road at Hallo Street
Hillwood Avenue Between Park Avenue (CR #531) and Plainfield
Road
Holly Place Between Eden Avenue and Eastlick Road
Idlewild Road Between Sturgis Road and Miko Road
James Street Between Grove Avenue and NJ Route #27
Jefferson Boulevard Between Plainfield Avenue (CR #529) and Orange
Street
John Street Entire length
Kilmer Road Between "C" Court South and Plainfield Avenue (CR
#529)
King Georges Road Between Raritan Center Parkway and Amboy
Avenue (CR #501)
Lafayette Avenue Between Amboy Avenue (CR #501) and U.S. Route
#1
Lakeview Boulevard Between Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) and Walton
Street
Lakeview Boulevard Between Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) and Clifton
Street
Livingston Avenue Between Grove Avenue and Parker Road
Loring Avenue From Jefferson Boulevard to NJ Route #27
Meadow Road Entire length
Melville Road Between Gurley Road and Old Post Road
§ 7-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-19
AO:215
Name of Street Limits
Montview Road Between Grandview Avenue (CR #660) and
Grandview Avenue (CR #660)
Morris Avenue Between Main Street and Whelan Street
Mt. Pleasant Avenue Between Oak Tree Road (CR #604) and Library
Place
New Dover Road Between Oak Tree Road (CR #604) and the
Woodbridge Township line
North Eighth
Avenue
Entire length
Oakland Avenue Between U.S. Route #1 and Jefferson Boulevard
Old Post Road Entire length
Orange Street From Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) to Duclos Lane
(CR #676)
Overbrook Avenue Between Bonniebrook Avenue and Norwood Place
Park Way Between Proctor Street and Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
Philip Street Between NJ Route #27 and Union Avenue
Pine Street Between Vineyard Road and Rodak Circle
Player Avenue Between U.S. Route #1 and Meriman Place
Rahway Road Entire length
Raritan Center
Parkway
From Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) to end of
Parkway
Redwood Street Between U.S. Route #1 and Jefferson Boulevard
Roxy Avenue Between New Dover Road and Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
Safran Avenue Entire length
Schuyler Drive (a) Between NJ Route #27 and Seymour Avenue
(b) Between Seymour Avenue and Morgan Drive
Seymour Avenue Between Morgan Drive and Loring Avenue
Silver Lake Avenue Entire length
Sine Road Entire length
Stephenville
Parkway
Between Park Avenue (CR #531) and Plainfield
Road (CR #531)
Stephenville
Parkway
Between Plainfield Road (CR #531) and its easterly
terminus
Stony Road Between NJ Route #27 and Wilson-Eden Avenue
Stony Road West From NJ Route #27 north to Central Avenue
§ 7-19 EDISON CODE § 7-19
AO:216
Name of Street Limits
Talmadge Road Between NJ Route #27 and New Durham Road (CR
#501)
Tingley Lane Between New Dover Road and Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
Vineyard Road Entire length
Whitman Avenue Between Vineyard Road and the Metuchen line
Wintergreen Avenue Between Grove Avenue and Inman Avenue (CR
#602)
Winthrop Road Between Stony Road and Vernon Road
Wood Avenue (CR
#649)
Between NJ Route #27 and Oxford Road
Woodbrook Drive Between Park Avenue (CR #531) and Woodbury
Road
§ 7-20. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [1999 Code § 10.08.120]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
below are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Alice Avenue and Lahier Avenue Alice Avenue
Altamont Road and Ashley Road Altamont Road [Ord. No.
O.1409-2004]
Annette Drive and most easterly point of
Annette Drive
Annette Drive
Ballo Place and Dellwood Road Ballo Place
Ballo Place and Lench Avenue Ballo Place
Bank Place and Calvert Avenue, East Bank Place
Banyan Court and Rolling Brook Drive Banyan Court [Ord. No.
O.1369-2003]
Barlow Road and Suttons Lane Barlow Road
Barlow Road West and Suttons Lane Barlow Road West
Bartha Avenue and Suttons Lane Bartha Avenue
Beaver Street and Lyle Place Beaver Street
Bella Vista Court and Winding Brook Drive Bella Vista Court [Ord. No.
O.1369-2003]
Bloomfield Avenue and Fay Street Bloomfield Avenue
§ 7-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20
AO:217
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Boulevard of the Eagles and Winthrop
Road
Boulevard of the Eagles
Brookfall Road and Marshall Drive Brookfall Road
Brook Hollow Road and Shamrock Way Brook Hollow Road [Ord. No.
O.1369-2003]
Brook Hollow Road and Rolling Brook
Drive
Brook Hollow Road [Ord. No.
O.1369-2003]
Calvert Avenue East and Farmhaven
Avenue
Calvert Avenue East
Calvert Avenue East and Jamica Street Calvert Avenue East
Calvert Avenue West and Stephenville
Parkway
Calvert Avenue West
Campbell Avenue and Suttons Lane
[Deleted by Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
Carmello Drive and Suttons Lane Carmello Drive
Central Avenue and Suttons Lane Central Avenue
Chestnut Street and Linden Avenue Chestnut Street
Cleremont Avenue and Elm Street Cleremont Avenue
Clive Hills Road and Grove Avenue Clive Hills Road
Colton Road and Winthrop Road Colton Road
Columbus Avenue and Walton Street Columbus Avenue
Compton Avenue and Lench Avenue Compton Avenue
Concord Street and Calvert Avenue West Concord Street
Concord Street and Frost Avenue West Concord Street
Concord Street and Marlin Avenue West Concord Street
Cornell Street and Suttons Lane Cornell Street
Dalton Place and Andre Avenue Dalton Place
Dalton Place and Langstaff Avenue Dalton Place
Dalton Place and Sheppard Place Dalton Place
David Drive and Ballo Place David Drive
David Drive and Turner Avenue David Drive
Denver Boulevard and McKinley Street Denver Boulevard
Dey Place and Prospect Avenue Dey Place
Diamond Drive and David Court Diamond Drive
Distribution Boulevard and Mill Road Distribution Boulevard
Duley Avenue and Morgan Drive Duley Avenue
§ 7-20 EDISON CODE § 7-20
AO:218
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Eardley Road and Division Street Eardley Road
Eardley Road and Suttons Lane Eardley Road
Eastlick Road and Holly Place Eastlick Road
Eden Avenue and Magnolia Street Eden Avenue
Eden Avenue (easterly approach) and
Wooding Avenue
Eden Avenue (easterly
approach)
Eden Avenue and Wilson Avenue and
Stony Road
Eden Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. O.1511-2006]
Ellen Street and Wilson Avenue Ellen Street
Ellis Parkway and Sheryl Drive Ellis Parkway
Elmwood Avenue and John Street Elmwood Avenue
Elmwood Terrace and Dalton Place Elmwood Terrace
Fairmont Avenue and Mount Pleasant
Avenue
Fairmont Avenue
Fairview Avenue and Suttons Lane Fairview Avenue
Farmhaven Avenue and Calvert Avenue
East
Farmhaven Avenue
Fayette Street and Crosby Avenue Fayette Street
Fayette Street and Oakland Avenue Fayette Street
Fulton Street and Wilson Avenue Fulton Street
Garden Terrace and Violet Place Garden Terrace
Glenville Road and Miko Road Glenville Road
Gracey Street and Lloyd Street Gracey Street
Greenwood Avenue and Prospect Avenue Greenwood Avenue
Greenwood Avenue and Sheppard Place Greenwood Avenue
Gurley Road and Violet Place Gurley Road
Harding Avenue and Stephenville Parkway Harding Avenue
Harrison Street and Cellar Road Harrison Street
Heathcote Avenue and Pine Street Heathcote Avenue
Heather Drive and Azalea Drive Heather Drive
Heather Drive and Lavender Drive Heather Drive
Hillcrest Avenue and Ovington Avenue Hillcrest Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue and Prospect Avenue Hillcrest Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue and Runyon Avenue Hillcrest Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue and Seymour Avenue Hillcrest Avenue
§ 7-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20
AO:219
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Hillsdale Road and Jean Place Hillsdale Road
Holly Place and Eden Avenue Holly Place [Ord. No.
O.1459-2005]
Hoover Avenue and First Avenue Hoover Avenue
Hoover Avenue and Pleasant Avenue Hoover Avenue
Hoover Avenue and Third Street Hoover Avenue
Idlewood Road and Miko Road Idlewood Road
Independence Drive (northerly
intersection) and Roxy Avenue
Independence Drive
(northerly intersection)
Independence Drive (southerly
intersection) and Roxy Avenue
Independence Drive
(southerly intersection)
Irving Street and Russell Avenue Irving Street
Jamica Street and Calvert Avenue East Jamica Street
Johnstone Street and Idlewild Road Johnstone Street
John Street and Maplewood Avenue John Street
Kenmore Road and Sanders Road Kenmore Road
Lahiere Avenue and Sheppard Place Lahiere Avenue
Leslie Street and Highland Avenue Leslie Street
Leslie Street and Brookhill Avenue Leslie Street
Linden Avenue and Dalton Place Linden Avenue
Loring Avenue and Jefferson Boulevard Loring Avenue
Louise Road and Dey Place Louise Road
Lyle Place and Rolling Brook Drive Lyle Place [Ord. No.
O.1369-2003]
Lyle Place and Wintergreen Avenue West Lyle Place [Ord. No.
O.1362-2003]
Magnolia Street and Eastside Avenue Magnolia Street
Magnolia Street and Wooding Avenue Magnolia Street
Markham Road and Idlewild Road Markham Road
Marshall Drive and Fairhill Road Marshall Drive
Mason Drive and Clive Street Mason Drive
Melville Road and Gurley Road Melville Road
Melville Road and Old Post Road Melville Road
Miko Road and Ashley Road Miko Road
Mineola Place and Brookhill Avenue Mineola Place
§ 7-20 EDISON CODE § 7-20
AO:220
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Mineola Place and Campbell Avenue Mineola Place
Mineola Place and Washington Avenue Mineola Place
Monroe Avenue and Lench Avenue Monroe Avenue
Morning Glory Lane and Winding Brook
Way
Morning Glory Lane [Added
by Ord. No. O.1369-2003]
Morning Glory Lane and Bellavista Court Morning Glory Lane [Added
by Ord. No. O.1369-2003]
Mt. Pleasant Avenue and Library Place Mt. Pleasant Avenue
Mundy Avenue and Adams Street Mundy Avenue
Normandy Road and Ellis Parkway Normandy Road
Oakland Avenue and Schuyler Drive Oakland Avenue
Olden Road and Hamlin Road Olden Road
Outcalt Road and Caldwell Road Outcalt Road
Ovington Avenue and Loring Avenue Ovington Avenue
Ovington Avenue and Morgan Drive Ovington Avenue
Ovington Avenue at the southwesterly
quadrant of the intersection formed by the
sidelines of Ovington Avenue and Stony
Road to control traffic traveling in a
northeasterly direction on Ovington
Avenue
Ovington Avenue
Oxford Road and Sheryl Drive Oxford Road
Pacific Street and Larson Avenue Pacific Street
Partch Place and Central Avenue Partch Place
Peace Street and Delancy Street Peace Street
Penn Avenue and Ovington Avenue Penn Avenue
Penn Avenue and Pannonia Avenue Penn Avenue
Perry Road and Hamlin Road Perry Road
Player Street and Gracey Street Player Street
Price Drive and Central Avenue Price Drive
Prospect Avenue and Ovington Avenue Prospect Avenue
Prospect Avenue and Runyon Avenue Prospect Avenue
Putnam Avenue and Loring Avenue Putnam Avenue
Raleigh Road and Colton Road Raleigh Road
Raleigh Road and Fairfax Road Raleigh Road
Raleigh Road and Winthrop Road Raleigh Road
§ 7-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20
AO:221
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Reed Street and Central Avenue Reed Street
Remington Drive and Golf Road Remington Drive [Added by
Ord. No. O.1459-2005]
Riverview Avenue and Leo Street Riverview Avenue
Rolling Brook Drive and Rolling Brook
Drive
Rolling Brook Drive [Added
by Ord. No. O.1369-2003]
Runyon Avenue and Linden Avenue Runyon Avenue
Safran Avenue and Gold Street Safran Avenue
Sanders Road and Windsor Road Sanders Road
Schuyler Drive and Seymour Avenue Schuyler Drive
Seymour Avenue and Morgan Drive Seymour Avenue
Seymour Avenue and Prospect Avenue Seymour Avenue
Sharon Avenue and Violet Place Sharon Avenue
Sheppard Place and Runyon Avenue Sheppard Place
Sherman Boulevard and Parker Road Sherman Boulevard [Added
by Ord. No. O.1444-2005]
Sine Road and Clausen Road Sine Road
Stone Street and Brookhill Avenue Stone Street
Stone Street and Campbell Avenue Stone Street
Stony Road and Wilson Avenue Stoney Road
Sturgis Road and Ashley Road [Deleted
by Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
Suttons Lane and Truman Drive, South Suttons Lane
Sycamore Avenue and Dalton Place Sycamore Avenue
Taylor Road and Brunswick Avenue Taylor Road
Thomasine Street and Germantown
Avenue
Thomasine Street [Added by
Ord. No. O.1434-2004]
Truman Drive and Kilmer Road Truman Drive
Tyroler Avenue and Lench Avenue Tyroler Avenue
Walnut Street and Linden Avenue Walnut Street
Washington Avenue and Leslie Street Washington Avenue
Wayne Street and Walton Street Wayne Street
Webb Street and Old Raritan Road Webb Street [Added by Ord.
No. O.1345-2003]
Western Avenue and Beech Street Western Avenue
Wilson Avenue and Dey Place Wilson Avenue
§ 7-20 EDISON CODE § 7-20
AO:222
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Wilson Street and Craig Street Wilson Street
Wilson Avenue and Eden Avenue and
Stoney Road
Wilson Avenue [Added by
Ord. No. O.1511-2005]
Winding Brook Way and Rolling Brook
Drive
Winding Brook Way [Added
by Ord. No. O.1369-2003]
Winslow Road and Jeff Street Winslow Road
Winter Street and Calvert Avenue West Winter Street
Winter Street and Oliver Avenue Winter Street
Winter Street and Marlin Avenue West Winter Street
Wintergreen Avenue West and Reverend
Samuel Carpenter Boulevard
Wintergreen Avenue West
[Added by Ord. No.
O.1377-2003]
Winthrop Road at the northeasterly
quadrant of the intersection formed by the
sidelines of Winthrop Road and Stony
Road to control traffic traveling in a
southwesterly direction on Winthrop Road
Winthrop Road
Winthrop Road and Vernon Road Vernon Road [Added by Ord.
No. O.1478-2005]
Wood Avenue and Thornall Street Wood Avenue
Wooding Avenue and Eden Avenue Wooding Avenue [Added by
Ord. No. O.1459-2005]
§ 7-21. MULTI-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. [1999 Code
§ 10.08.120; Ord. No. O.1583-2007; Ord. No. O.1637-2008; Ord. No.
O.1638-2008; Ord. No. O.1639-2008; Ord. No. O.1644-2008; Ord. No.
O.1648-2008; Ord. No. O.1649-2008; Ord. No. O.1711-2009; Ord. No.
O.1712-2009; Ord. No. O.1885-2014; Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated as Multi-Way stop intersections. Stop signs shall
be installed as provided herein.
a. Two (2)-Way Stops. [Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
(Reserved)
b. Three (3)-Way Stops.
§ 7-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-21
AO:223
Intersection (Location) Stop Sign(s) On
1. Ashley Road (north)
intersection with Sturgis Road
2. Sturgis Road (northeast)
intersection with Ashley Road
Ashley Road and Sturgis Road
[Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
3. Sturgis Road (southwest)
intersection with Ashley Road
(north) intersection
1. Beatrice Parkway (north)
intersection with West Hegel
Avenue
2. West Hegel Avenue (east)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
Beatrice Parkway and West Hegel
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
3. West Hegel Avenue (west)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
1. Campbell Avenue and Suttons
Lane
2. Suttons Lane (southwest)
intersection with Campbell
Avenue
Campbell Avenue and Suttons
Lane [Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
3. Suttons Lane (northeast)
intersection with Campbell
Avenue
1. Fairfax Road at the Tintersection
with Raleigh Road
2. Raleigh Road at the southeast
intersection with Fairfax Road
Fairfax Road and Raleigh Road
[Ord. No. O.1648-2008 § I]
3. Raleigh Road at the northeast
intersection with Fairfax Road
1. Finley Road at the Tintersection
with Cambridge Road
2. Cambridge Road at the
southeast intersection with Finley
Road
Finley Road and Cambridge Road
[Ord. No. O.1649-2008 § I]
3. Cambridge Road at the
northwest intersection with Finley
Road
Idlewild Road and Brookville Road
[Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
1. Brookville Road (east) and
Idlewild Road
§ 7-21 EDISON CODE § 7-21
AO:224
Intersection (Location) Stop Sign(s) On
2. Idewild Road (north) and
Brookville Road (east)
3. Idlewild Road (south) and
Brookville Road (east)
1. Johnstone Street (west) and
Idlewild Road
2. Idlewild Road (north) and
Johnstone Street (west)
Idlewild Road and Johnstone
Street [Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
3. Idlewild Road (south) and
Brookville Road (west)
1. Clifton Street and the Tintersection
with Meadow Road
2. Meadow Road at the northeast
intersection with Clifton Street
Meadow Road and Clifton Street
[Ord. No. O.1639-2008 § I]
3. Meadow Road at the southwest
intersection with Clifton Street
1. Elm Street at the T-intersection
with Meadow Road
2. Meadow Road at the northeast
intersection with Elm Street
Meadow Road and Elm Street
[Ord. No. O.1638-2008 § I]
3. Meadow Road at the southwest
intersection with Elm Street
1. Middlesex Avenue (south)
intersection with Christie Street
2. Christie Street (northeast)
intersection with Middlesex
Avenue
Middlesex Avenue and Christie
Street [Ord. No. O.1885-2014]
3. Christie Street (southwest)
intersection with Middlesex
Avenue
1. 7th Avenue (north) and Echo
Road
2. Echo Avenue (east) and 7th
Street
7th Street, Echo Avenue and
Roosevelt Boulevard [Ord. No.
O.1583-2007]
3. Roosevelt Avenue (south) and
Echo Avenue
Stephenville Parkway and
Warwick Road [Ord. No.
O.1644-2008 § I]
1. Warwick Road at the
intersection with Stephenville
Parkway
§ 7-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-21
AO:225
Intersection (Location) Stop Sign(s) On
2. Stephenville Parkway at the
left-turn curbed island opening to
Warwick Road
3. Stephenville Parkway at the
easterly intersection with Third
Street
1. Truman Drive and the southern
intersection of Suttons Lane
2. Suttons Lane and the eastern
intersection of Truman Drive
Suttons Lane and Truman Drive
[Ord. No. O.1712-2009 § I]
3. Truman Drive and the northern
intersection of Suttons Lane
c. Four (4)-Way Stops.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
1. Beatrice Parkway (south)
intersection with West Shirley
Avenue
2. West Shirley Avenue (east)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
3. Beatrice Parkway (north)
intersection with West Shirley
Avenue
Beatrice Parkway and West
Shirley Avenue [Ord. No.
O.1908-2015]
4. West Shirley Avenue (west)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
1. Beatrice Parkway (south)
intersection with West Prescott
Avenue
2. West Prescott Avenue (east)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
3. Beatrice Parkway (north)
intersection with West Prescott
Avenue
Beatrice Parkway and West
Prescott Avenue [Ord. No.
O.1908-2015]
4. West Prescott Avenue (west)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
§ 7-21 EDISON CODE § 7-21
AO:226
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
1. Beatrice Parkway (south)
intersection with West Grant
Avenue
2. West Grant Avenue (east)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
3. Beatrice Parkway (north)
intersection with West Grant
Avenue
Beatrice Parkway and West Grant
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. West Grant Avenue (west)
intersection with Beatrice
Parkway
1. Price Drive and the western
intersection of Central Avenue
2. Central Avenue and south
intersection of Partch Place
3. Partch Place and eastern
intersection of Central Avenue
Central Avenue, Partch Place and
Price Drive [Ord. No.
O.1711-2009 § I]
4. Central Avenue and northern
intersection of Price Drive
1. Third Street at the southeast
intersection with Echo Avenue
2. Third Street at the northwest
intersection with Echo Avenue
3. Echo Avenue at the southeast
intersection with Third Avenue
Echo Avenue and Third Street
[Ord. No. O.1637-2008 § I]
4. Echo Avenue at the northeast
intersection with Third Street
1. Ellis Parkway (south)
intersection with West 1st Street
2. West 1st Street (east)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
3. Ellis Parkway (north)
intersection with West 1st Street
Ellis Parkway and West 1st Street
[Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. West 1st Street (west)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
1. Ellis Parkway (south)
intersection with West Locust
Avenue
Ellis Parkway and West Locust
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
2. West Locust Avenue (east)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
§ 7-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-21
AO:227
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
3. Ellis Parkway (north)
intersection with West Locust
Avenue
4. West Locust Avenue (west)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
1. Ellis Parkway (south)
intersection with West Prescott
Avenue
2. West Prescott Avenue (east)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
3. Ellis Parkway (north)
intersection with West Prescott
Avenue
Ellis Parkway and West Prescott
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. West Prescott Avenue (west)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
1. Ellis Parkway (south)
intersection with West Grant
Avenue
2. West Grant Avenue (east)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
3. Ellis Parkway (north)
intersection with West Grant
Avenue
Ellis Parkway and West Grant
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. West Grant Avenue (west)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
1. Ellis Parkway (south)
intersection with West Hegel
Avenue
2. West Hegel Avenue (east)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
3. Ellis Parkway (north)
intersection with West Hegel
Avenue
Ellis Parkway and West Hegel
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. West Hegel Avenue (west)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
1. Ellis Parkway (south)
intersection with Normandy Road
2. Normandy Road (east)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
Ellis Parkway and Normandy Road
[Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
3. Ellis Parkway (north)
intersection with Normandy Road
§ 7-21 EDISON CODE § 7-21
AO:228
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
4. Normandy Road (west)
intersection with Ellis Parkway
1. Loring Avenue (south)
intersection with Ovington Avenue
2. Ovington Avenue (east)
intersection with Loring Avenue
3. Loring Avenue (north)
intersection with Ovington Avenue
Loring Avenue and Ovington
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. Ovington Avenue (west)
intersection with Loring Avenue
1. Penn Avenue (south)
intersection with Ovington Avenue
2. Ovington Avenue (east)
intersection with Penn Avenue
3. Penn Avenue (north)
intersection with Ovington Avenue
Penn Avenue and Ovington
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. Ovington Avenue (west)
intersection with Penn Avenue
1. Roxy Avenue (south) and
McKinley Avenue
2. Roxy Avenue (north) and
McKinley Avenue
3. McKinley Avenue (west) and
Roxy Avenue
Roxy Avenue and McKinley
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1583-2007]
4. McKinley Avenue (east) and
Roxy Avenue
1. Wood Avenue (south)
intersection with West 1st Street
2. West 1st Street (east)
intersection with Wood Avenue
3. Wood Avenue (north)
intersection with West 1st Street
Wood Avenue and West 1st Street
[Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. East 1st Street (west)
intersection with Wood Avenue
1. Wood Avenue (south)
intersection with West Prescott
Avenue
Wood Avenue and West Prescott
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
2. West Prescott Avenue (east)
intersection with Wood Avenue
§ 7-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-21
AO:229
§ 7-22. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [1999 Code § 10.08.130]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Signs On
Eden Avenue and Holly Place Holly Place
Eden Avenue and Wooding Avenue Wooding Avenue (northerly
approach)
Grace Street and Old Post Road Old Post Road, eastbound
McEvoy Road and Wilk Road McEvoy Road [Ord. No.
O.1622-2008 § 1]
Morgan Drive and Schuyler Drive Schuyler Drive
Markham Road and Stiles Road Stiles Road
Idlewild Road and Sturgis Road Sturgis Road
Concord Street and Walker Avenue
(southwest corner)
Walker Avenue
Winthrop Road and Vernon Road Winthrop Road
§ 7-23. ONE-WAY STREETS. [1999 Code § 10.08.100]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
3. Wood Avenue (north)
intersection with West Prescott
Avenue
4. East Prescott Avenue (west)
intersection with Wood Avenue
1. Wood Avenue (south)
intersection with West Grant
Avenue
2. West Grant Avenue (east)
intersection with Wood Avenue
3. Wood Avenue (north)
intersection with West Grant
Avenue
Wood Avenue and West Grant
Avenue [Ord. No. O.1908-2015]
4. East Grant Avenue (west)
intersection with Wood Avenue
§ 7-21 EDISON CODE § 7-23
AO:230
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Albany Street West From Gold Street to
Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514)
Both sides
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
West Between Edgegrove
Street and Dartmouth
Street
North side
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
West Between Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514) and
Madison Avenue
North side
Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
West Between Albourne Street
and Amboy Avenue (CR
#501)
North side
Blossom Street
[Added by Ord.
No.
O.1474-2005;
repealed by
Ord. No.
O.1581-2007]
Carlton Street
South
South From Gross Avenue to
Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#524)
Both sides
Carlton Street
South
North From Gross Avenue to
Amboy Avenue CR #501)
Both sides
Church Street North From Germantown
Avenue to Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514)
Both sides
Dellwood Road North From NJ Route #27 to
Temple Street
Both sides
Division Street North From NJ Route #27 to
Plainfield Avenue (CR
#529)
Both sides
Eastside Avenue North Entire length between
Old Post Road and U.S.
Route #1
Both sides
Elizabeth Avenue East From Egan Street to NJ
Route #27
Both sides
Ireland Avenue
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
O.1443-2004]
§ 7-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-23
AO:231
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Kate Place Southbound
Allison Court to Inman
Avenue (CR #602)
Both sides
Lehigh Street West From Gold Street to
Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514)
Both sides
Library Place South Between Grove Avenue
and Emil Court
Both sides
Lyle Place West Between Wintergreen
Avenue West and Beaver
Street
Both sides
Marion Street East From Plainfield Road (CR
#531) to Oak Tree Road
(CR #604)
Both sides
Oak Hills Road East Between Plainfield Road
(CR #531) and Clive Hills
Road
Both sides
Riverview Avenue South From Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514) to Holmes
Street
None
Russell Avenue North From Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514) to U.S. Route
#1
Both sides
School House
Lane
North From Germantown
Avenue to Woodbridge
Avenue (CR #514)
Both sides
Thomasine Street South From Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514) to
Germantown Avenue
Both sides
Thomas Place North John Street to Grandview
Avenue (CR #660)
Both sides
Walsh Avenue South From Amboy Avenue (CR
#501) to Safran Avenue
Both sides
Weston Forbes
Court
South Between its northern
entrance with
Wintergreen Avenue West
and its southern entrance
with Wintergreen Avenue
West
Both sides
§ 7-23 EDISON CODE § 7-24
AO:232
§ 7-24. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR (4) TONS. [1999 Code
§ 10.08.090; Ord. No. O.1640-2008 § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as routes for vehicles over four (4) tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight (GVW) of vehicle plus load
in excess of four (4) tons shall be excluded from all streets, except for those
streets listed below which form a part of the system of truck routes upon
which trucks are permitted to travel and operate subject to any prohibited
time restrictions set forth below. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.2,
trucks are allowed to make deliveries of merchandise or other property
along streets from which such trucks are excluded and trucks used by
public utility companies are permitted upon any street within the Township
for the purpose of construction, installation and operation or maintenance
to a public facility.
Name of
Street Location Prohibited Time
Amboy Avenue Between NJ Turnpike and Route
U.S. #1
Executive
Avenue
Entire length
Kilmer Road Entire length
Meadow Road
[Ord. No.
O.1640-2008]
Entire length 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Mill Road (CR
#667)
Between Nixon Lane and its
southerly terminus
New Dover
Road
Between Oak Tree Road (CR
#604) and Tingley Lane
Old Post Road Between Vineyard Road and the
easterly intersection of Old Post
Road with U.S. Route #1
Plainfield
Avenue (CR
#529)
Entire length
Rahway Road Entire length
Raritan Center
Parkway
Entire length
Riverview
Avenue
Between Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514) and U.S. Route #1
Talmadge Road Between NJ Route #27 and New
Durham Road (CR #501)
Tingley Lane Entire length
§ 7-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-25
AO:233
§ 7-25. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [New]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such street, or the use of emergency vehicles on such street.5
Name of Street Tons Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-26. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [1999 Code § 10.08.180A; Ord. No.
O.1583-2007 § 3]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn
Prohibited
Time At Intersection
Durham
Avenue
West South
(left)
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. Monday
through Friday,
excluding
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Kester Drive
Farmhaven
Avenue
North Left 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. Monday
through Friday,
excluding
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays (Subject
to Chief
Mieczowski's
approval)
Oak Tree Road
May Street Northwest
Left Anytime Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
Mill Road (CR
#667)
South East (left) Anytime Avenue B
Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
West (SW) Left Anytime May Street
5. Editor's Note: Ord. No. O.1383-2003, regarding Silverlake Avenue and Glendale Avenue,
was rejected by the N.J.D.O.T. in a letter dated March 30, 2004.
§ 7-25 EDISON CODE § 7-27
AO:234
§ 7-27. RIGHT TURN ONLY. [New]
No person shall make a turn at the below listed location other than Right
Turning Movement.
Intersection Movement Permitted
Wood Avenue (CR #604) and the
easternmost driveway of the Oak
Tree Shopping Center
Westbound from the easternmost
driveway of the Oak Tree Shopping
Center to westbound onto Wood
Avenue (CR #604)
§ 7-28. NO TURN ON RED. [1999 Code § 10.08.180B]
No person shall make a Right Turn on the Red Signal at any location listed:
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Prohibited
Time At Intersection
Grove Avenue Southbound
(northwest corner)
At all times Oak Tree Road
(CR #604)
James Street
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
O.1544-2006
§ I]
New Dover Road Eastbound
(southwest corner)
At all times Wood Avenue
(CR #649)
Oak Tree Road
(CR #604)
Westbound
(northeast corner)
At all times Wood Avenue
(CR #649)
Old Raritan
Road (CR #509)
Westbound
(northeast corner)
At all times Woodland
Avenue
Park Avenue (CR
#531)
Eastbound
(southwest corner)
At all times Plainfield Road
(CR #531)
Parsonage Road
(CR #630)
Southbound
(northwest corner)
At all times Oakwood
Avenue (CR
#657)
Plainfield
Avenue (CR
#529)
Southbound
(northwest corner)
At all times Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
Plainfield Road
(CR #531)
Southbound
(northwest corner)
At all times Oak Tree Road
(CR #604)
Plainfield Road
(CR #531)
Southbound
(northwest corner)
At all times Park Avenue (CR
#531)
Wildwood
Avenue
Northbound
(southeast corner)
At all times Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
§ 7-27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-28
AO:235
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Prohibited
Time At Intersection
Wood Avenue
(CR #649)
Southbound
(northwest corner)
At all times New Dover Road
Wood Avenue
(CR #649)
Southbound
(northwest corner)
At all times Oak Tree Road
(CR #604)
Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
All directions At all times Amboy Avenue
(CR #501)
Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
Eastbound
(southwest corner)
At all times Wildwood
Avenue
Woodbridge
Avenue (CR
#514)
Westbound
(northeast corner)
At all times Plainfield
Avenue (CR
#529)
Woodland
Avenue (CR
#514)
Northbound
(southeast corner)
At all times Old Raritan
Road (CR #509)
§ 7-29. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [1999 Code § 10.08.290; Ord.
No. O.1798-2012]
The following locations are hereby established as Mid-Block Crosswalks.
Name of Street Location
Ashley Road Beginning at a point 365 feet north of Miko
Road and extending to a point 6 feet northerly
therefrom
Boulevard of Eagles Beginning at a point 314 feet north of Old Post
Road and extending to a point 8 feet northerly
therefrom
Grove Avenue Beginning at a point 195 feet south of Hawk
Drive and extending to a point 10 feet southerly
therefrom
Grove Avenue Beginning at a point 259 feet south of Inman
Avenue (CR #602) and extending to a point 10
feet southerly therefrom
New Dover Road 315 feet east of the center line of Keen Lane
Plainfield Avenue (CR
#529)
Beginning at a point 80 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Runyon Avenue and
extending 6 feet northerly therefrom (for the
Stelton School)
§ 7-28 EDISON CODE § 7-29
AO:236
Name of Street Location
Vineyard Road Located on Vineyard Road at the mid-way point
between the northmost extension of Pine Street
and the southmost extension of Mercury Road
Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514) and Horizon Drive
intersection
1,100 feet east of New Jersey Turnpike
§ 7-30. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [1999 Code § 10.08.190]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection (Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Raritan Center Parkway
and Clover Place
Southbound left lane of
Raritan Center Parkway
Left turns
Raritan Center Parkway
and Clover Place
Westbound left lane of Clover
Place
Left turns
Raritan Center Parkway
and Clover Place
Westbound right lane of
Clover Place
Right turns
Raritan Center Parkway,
approximately 75 feet
north of intersection with
Mayfield Avenue
Southbound left lane of
Raritan Center Parkway
Left turns
§ 7-31. EXCLUSIVE LANE USE. [New]
The lane locations described are hereby designated as Exclusive Lanes for
use by certain vehicles as indicated.
Name of Street Type of Vehicle Direction Limits
(Reserved)
§ 7-32. BICYCLE ROUTES/LANES. [New]
The lane locations described are hereby designated as Bicycle Lanes.
Bicycle Lanes shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width, pursuant to the
"Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways."
Name of Street Side Lane Width Limits
(Reserved)
§ 7-33. SPEED LIMITS. [1999 Code § 10.08.240]
§ 7-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-33
AO:237
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to affect
the above-designated speed limits.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Amboy Avenue 35 Between the Edison
Township corporate line-
Metuchen Borough corporate
line and Barton Street [Ord.
No. O.1476-2005 § 1]
Amboy Avenue 25 Between Barton Street and
the NJ Turnpike overpass
[Ord. No. O.1476-2005 § 1]
Grove Avenue 35 Entire length within the
Township of Edison, except
school zones
Mill Road (CR #667) 40 From 100 feet south of Nixon
Drive to Woodbridge Avenue
(CR #514)
New Durham Road (CR
#501)
45 Entire length
Oak Tree Road (CR # 604)
[Ord. No. O.1886-2014]
35 From the limits of Woodland
Avenue, from the border with
the Borough of South
Plainfield, to Wood Avenue,
to the border with the
Township of Woodbridge
c. School Zone Speed Limits.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514) [Ord. No.
O.1745-2010]
25 Benjamin Franklin School
Zone during recess, when
the presence of children is
clearly visible from the
roadway, or while children
are going to or leaving
school, during opening or
closing hours
§ 7-33 EDISON CODE § 7-33.1
AO:238
§ 7-33.1. Speed Limits for Trucks Over Four (4) Tons.
The speed limit for trucks over four (4) tons in gross weight on the following
streets shall be 15 miles per hour:
§ 7-34. NO PASSING ZONES. [1999 Code § 10.08.280]
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street
Location or Sketch Date and
Number
Amboy Avenue (CR #501) 12-3-1973, NPZ-737
Amboy Avenue (CR #501) From Lake Avenue, Metuchen to
King Georges Road, Edison both
directions
Boulevard of Eagles 10-15-1974, NPZ-1462
Central Avenue From Plainfield Avenue (CR #529)
to the entrance of Central Avenue
Park
Colton Road 10-15-1974, NPZ-1462
Duclos Lane (CR #676)/Suttons
Lane
Entire length
Ethel Road 10-12-1973, NPA-635
Grandview Avenue (CR #660) 12-3-1973, NPA-738
Grandview Avenue (CR #660) From Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514) to U.S. Route #1
Grove Avenue 10-31-1973, NPZ-661
Inman Avenue (CR #602) 6-22-1973, NPZ-557
James Street 8-1-1979, B1205
Leo Street Between U.S. Route #1 and Player
Avenue
New Dover Road 12-02-1973, NPZ-741
New Durham Road (CR #501) Entire length to Stelton Road
Oak Tree Road (CR #604) 7-7-1971, NPZ-074
Old Post Road 12-17-1973, NPZ-779
Park Avenue (CR #531) 11-27-1979, NPZ-300-C
Plainfield Road (CR #531) 12-4-1972, NPZ-350
a. Silverlake Avenue [Ord. No. O.1379-2003]
b. Glendale Avenue [Ord. No. O.1379-2003]
§ 7-33.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-34
AO:239
Name of Street
Location or Sketch Date and
Number
Tingley Lane 10-12-1973, NPZ-634
Vineyard Road 11-05-1973, NPZ-692
Whitman Avenue 11-07-1973, NPZ-693
§ 7-35. BUS STOPS. [1999 Code § 10.08.160]; Ord. No. O.1707-2009
§ 2]; Ord. No. O.1497-2006]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus which is picking up or discharging passengers shall
be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Editor's Note: EB/Eastbound; FS/Far Side; NB/Northbound; NS/Near Side;
WB, Westbound
Street and Location:
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Coolidge Avenue, NS (at bench)
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Fourth Street, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Waltuma Avenue, NS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Coral Street, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Madison Avenue, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Lincoln Avenue, NS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Wolfe Avenue, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), EB, at Ireland Avenue, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), WB, at Franklin Avenue, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), WB, at Wolfe Avenue, NS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), WB, at Lincoln Avenue, NS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), WB, at Albourne Street, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), WB, at Waltuma Avenue, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), WB, at Fifth Street, FS
Amboy Avenue (CR #501), WB, at Lafayette Avenue, NS
Corporation Row, SB, at Distribution Boulevard, FS
Distribution Boulevard, WB, at Mill Road (CR #667), FS
Evergreen Road (CR #657), NB, at Meadow Brook Road, FS
§ 7-34 EDISON CODE § 7-35
AO:240
Executive Avenue, WB, at Mill Road (CR #667), FS
Fieldcrest Avenue, SB, at Raritan Center Parkway, NB
Grove Avenue, NB, at Edison Avenue, NS
Grove Avenue, NB, at Monroe Avenue, FS
Grove Avenue, NB, at Marlin Avenue East, NS
Grove Avenue, NB, at Timber Road, NS
Grove Avenue, NB, at Baltic Street, NS
Grove Avenue, NB, at New Dover Road, FS
Grove Avenue, NB, at Martha Street, NS
Grove Avenue, NB, at Wintergreen Street, NS
Grove Avenue, NB, at Rev. Samuel C. Carpenter Blvd., FS
Grove Avenue, SB, at Rev. Samuel C. Carpenter Blvd., NS
Grove Avenue, SB, at Wintergreen Avenue, NB
Grove Avenue, SB, at Martha Street, NS
Grove Avenue, SB, at Baltic Street, FS
Grove Avenue, SB, at George Avenue East, FS
Grove Avenue, SB, at Marlin Avenue West, FS
Grove Avenue, SB, at Monroe Avenue, FS
Grove Avenue, SB, at Twin Oaks Drive, NS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), EB, at Wintergreen Avenue E., NS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), EB, at Wakefield Drive, NS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), EB, at Amherst Street, FS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), EB, at Beatrice Parkway, NS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), EB, at West Drive, NS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), WB, at West Drive, NS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), WB, at Beatrice Parkway, NS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), WB, at Feather Bed Lane, FS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), WB, at Davis Boulevard, FS
Inman Avenue (CR #602), WB, at Progress Street, FS
§ 7-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35
AO:241
James Street, EB, at Mundy Avenue, NS
James Street, EB, at Egan Street, NS
James Street, WB, at Egan Street, FS
James Street, WB, at Mundy Avenue, FS
Lafayette Avenue, NB, at Parsonage Road (CR #630), FS
Lafayette Avenue, SB, at Parsonage Road (CR #630), FS
Lafayette Avenue, SB, at Parsonage Road (CR #630), NS
Main Street, NB, at Martin Avenue, NS
Main Street, NB, at Harrison Avenue, NS
Main Street, SB, at Morris Avenue, FS
Main Street, SB, at Martin Avenue, NS
Menlo Park Mall, NB, at Mall Bus Stop, TM (at Rain Forest Cafe sign)
Mill Road (CR #667), NB, at Nixon Lane, NS
Mill Road (CR #667) NB at Executive Avenue, NS
New Dover Road, EB, at Keen Lane, FS
New Dover Road, EB, at Jonathan Drive, NS
New Dover Road, EB, at Parker Road, NS
New Dover Road, EB, at Darwin Boulevard, NS
New Dover Road, EB, at Wood Acres Drive, FS
New Dover Road, WB, at Wood Avenue (CR #649), FS
New Dover Road, WB, at Revere Boulevard, FS
New Dover Road, WB, at Parker Road, FS
New Dover Road, WB, at Jonathan Drive, FS
New Dover Road, WB, at Weinfield Drive, FS
Newfield Road, EB, at Fernwood Road, NB
Northfield Road, SB, at Fieldcrest Avenue, NB
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), EB, at Alpine Street, NS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), EB, at Monica Drive, FS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), EB, at Ventnor Drive, NS
§ 7-35 EDISON CODE § 7-35
AO:242
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), EB, at Farmhaven Avenue, NS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), EB, at Sugar Road, FS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), EB, at Henry Street, NS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), WB, at Henry Street, FS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), WB, at Sugar Road, NS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), WB, at Ellmyer Road, FS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), WB, at Ventnor Drive, NS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), WB, at Monica Drive, NS
Oak Tree Road (CR #604), WB, at Plainfield Road (CR #531), FS
Parsonage Road (CR #630), NB, at Lafayette Avenue, NB
Parsonage Road (CR #630), SB, at Oakwood Avenue (CR #657), NB
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), NB, at Greenwood Avenue, FS
Plainfield Avenue(CR #529), NB, at Runyon Avenue, FS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), NB, at Central Avenue, NS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), NB, at Kilmer Road, FS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), NB, at Brunswick Avenue, FS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), NB, at Brunswick Avenue, NB
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), NB, at Rivendell Way, FS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), SB, at Rivendell Way, FS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), SB, at Brunswick Avenue, NB
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), SB, at Brunswick Avenue, FS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), SB, at Central Avenue, NS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), at Division Avenue, FS
Plainfield Avenue (CR #529), SB, at Greenwood Avenue, NS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), NB, at Oak Hills Road, NS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), NB, at Oak Grove Lane, FS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), NB, at Park Avenue (CR #531), FS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), NB, at Southfield Road, NS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), NB, at Stephenville Parkway, NS
§ 7-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35
AO:243
Plainfield Road (CR #661), NB, at Bradford Road, NS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), NB, at Marion Street, FS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), SB, at Marion Street, NS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), SB, at Lucinda Court, FS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), SB, at Stephenville Parkway, FS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), SB, at Southfield Road, NS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), SB, at Park Avenue (CR #531), NB
Plainfield Road (CR #661), SB, at Oak Grove Lane, NS
Plainfield Road (CR #661), SB, at Paddock Court, NS
South Main Street., SB, at Glen Terrace, FS
Thornall Street (CR #657), NB, at Evergreen Road (CR #657), NB
Thornall Street (CR #657), SB, at Evergreen Road (CR #657), NB
Wood Avenue (CR #649), SB at Garfield Street, NS
Wood Avenue (CR #649), SB, at McKinley Street, FS
Wood Avenue (CR #649), SB, at New Dover Road, FS
Wood Avenue (CR #649), SB, at Curtis Avenue, FS
Wood Avenue (CR #649), SB, at Livingston Avenue, FS
Wood Avenue (CR #649), SB, at Charles Street, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Duclos Lane (CR #676), NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Church Street, FS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Lake View Boulevard, FS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Kearny Avenue, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Webster Place, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Mill Road (CR #667), FS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Sine Road, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Cherry Street, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Grace Street, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Bonham Drive, FS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Amboy Avenue (CR #501), FS
§ 7-35 EDISON CODE § 7-35
AO:244
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), EB, at Wildwood Avenue, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Grandview Avenue (CR #660), NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Amboy Avenue (CR #501), NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Bonham Drive, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Grace Street, FS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Cherry Street, FS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Sine Road NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Mill Road (CR #667), NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Webster Place, FS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Rutland Street, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Chapel Street, NS
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514), WB, at Duclos Lane (CR #676), NS
§ 7-36. ARTICULATED BUS STOPS. [New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Articulated Bus Stops. No
vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall
be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Name of Street Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-37. LOADING ZONES. [1999 Code § 10.08.140]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side Location
(Reserved)
(Note: Minimum length for all loading zones is fifty (50) feet. No Loading
Zone may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stand or park
by statute. N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.)
§ 7-38. TAXI STANDS. [1999 Code § 10.08.150]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
§ 7-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-38
AO:245
Name of Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-39. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-39.1. Handicapped Parking on Streets. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking places. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Name of Street No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-39.2. Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences.
[1999 Code § 10.28.030D; Ord. No. O.1456-2003; Ord. No.
O.1475-2005; Ord. No. O.1664-2008; Ord. No. O.1804-2012; Ord. No.
O.1912-2015; Ord. No. O.1929-2016; Ord. No. O.1976-2017; Ord. No.
O.1990-2017]
a. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following
on-street locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in
front of private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards or plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle
Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No
other person shall be permitted in these spaces.
7-39.2 Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences
Name of Street Location
Permit
Number
Carlton Street [Ord.
No. O.1912-2015]
16 Carlton Street
College Drive [Ord.
No. O.1664-2008]
130 College Drive
Evergreen Road (CR
#657)
11A Evergreen (CR #657)
Fourth Street 74 Fourth Street
135-A Grandview Avenue (CR
#660), Apartment 4
Grandview Avenue (CR
#660)
145-A Grandview Avenue (CR
#660), Apartment 1
§ 7-38 EDISON CODE § 7-39.2
AO:246
7-39.2 Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences
Name of Street Location
Permit
Number
Harrison Avenue [Ord.
O.1475-2005]
29 Harrison Avenue
Highway Terrace [Ord.
No. O.1976-2017]
11 Highway Terrace
Hillcrest Avenue [Ord.
No. O.1990-2017]
48 Hillcrest Avenue
Lafayette Road 253-D Lafayette Road, Apt. 3-A
Mill Road (CR #667) 99 Mill Road (CR #667)
Myrtle Street [Ord.
No. O.1912-2015]
10 Myrtle Street
Paul Street (eastern
side) [Ord. No.
O.1456-2003]
Adjacent to 10 Jefferson Boulevard
Safran Avenue [Ord.
No. O.1990-2017]
14 Safran Avenue
Sine Road No. 13 Sine Road
Wallace Street 112 Wallace Street
Wildwood Avenue
[Ord. No.
O.1912-2015]
82 Wildwood Avenue
Willard Dunham Drive
[Ord. No.
O.1976-2017]
A-6 Avenue C
Woodedge Avenue
[Ord. No.
O.1929-2016]
45 Woodedge, Apartment, Bldg.
38, Unit 6
Woodhaven Drive
[Ord. No.
O.1912-2015]
306 Woodhaven Drive
b. Permit Applications.
1. Applications for special handicapped parking permits under this
section shall be in writing, on a form provided by the Division of
Licenses and Permits. The permits shall be issued to the
handicapped person who resides at the location specified in this
section. Such permits shall only be issued to persons who can prove
ownership and operation of the motor vehicle and residency at the
location specified therein.
§ 7-39.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-39.2
AO:247
§ 7-39.3. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
Handicapped Parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-39.4. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business). [1999
Code § 10.28.030C]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking spaces are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
In any space on public or private property appropriately marked for vehicles
for the physically handicapped pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., or any other applicable law unless the vehicle is
authorized by law to be parked therein and a handicapped person is either
the driver or a passenger in that vehicle. State, county, or municipal law
enforcement officers or parking enforcement officers shall enforce the
parking restrictions on spaces appropriately marked for vehicles for the
physically handicapped on both public and private property.
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
Property Location
Number
of
Parking
Stalls
Brick Church (27 and Stony Road), Lot 27-D,
Block 1143
3
105 College Drive [Ord. No. O.1605-2008] 1
2. The permit shall be five and one-half (5 1/2) inches by eight and
one-half (8 1/2) inches in size, shall bear an appropriate
certification of authenticity, shall be displayed prominently within
the vehicle, and shall identify the specific motor vehicle and the
location where it is to be parked. [1999 Code § 10.28.020]
§ 7-39.2 EDISON CODE § 7-39.4
AO:248
Property Location
Number
of
Parking
Stalls
215 College Drive, Building 5 [Ord. No.
O.1355-2003]
1
Edison Mall, Lot 43-N to 42-Z, Block 265 4
Edison Railroad Station, Lot 2, Block 97A 3
Edison Shopping Center, Lot 11-E3, Block 265 3
74 Fourth Street 1
135-A Grandview Avenue Apartment 4 (see
Exhibit B on file in the Clerk's office for width
and approximate location of parking stall)
1
145-A Grandview Avenue Apartment 1 (see
Exhibit B on file in the Clerk's office for width
and approximate location of parking stall)
1
Eastbound side of Grandview Avenue at 145A
Grandview Avenue, Apt. 3 [Ord. No.
O.1376-2003]
1
123 Greenwood Avenue (see Exhibit B for
approximate location -width of parking space
shall be 30 feet)
1
165 Highland Avenue [Ord. No. O.1355-2003] 1
Hillside Avenue (northern side) space (1)
beginning at the eastern side of the curb cut for
a length of 20 feet in an easterly direction
toward Plainfield Avenue
1
Hillside Avenue (northern side) space (2)
beginning at western side of the curb cut for a
length of 20 feet in a westerly direction toward
Division Street
1
Kilmer Plaza, Lot 44, Block 96 4
7 Koster Boulevard, Apartment 7-A (See Exhibit
A on file in clerk's office for width and
approximate location of parking stall.) [Added
by Ord. No. O.1590-2007]
1
Liquor Locker (Oak Tree Road), Lot 20-G1,
Block 643.DD
3
15 Loring Avenue [Ord. No. O.1355-2003] 1
Menlo Park Shopping Center, Lot 2-D, 3, 5,
Block 690
28
§ 7-39.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-39.4
AO:249
Property Location
Number
of
Parking
Stalls
99 Mill Road 1
Nixon Park Shopping Center, Lot 22-A to 23-A2,
Block 1122
3
Oakwood Edison Shopping Center, Lot K-1,
Block 546
2
Oakwood Plaza, Lot 20-N4, 27-C27-D to 27-G,
Block 643
3
Paul Street (eastern side) beginning 60 feet
south of the stop sign at the intersection of Paul
Street and Jefferson Boulevard and continuing
to a point 95 feet south of the intersection [Ord.
No. O.1456-2005]
1
Pines, Lot 3.A1, Block 124 6
Rickels, Lot 3-A, 5-F and 5-G, Block 686 4
No. 13 Sine Road
(See Exhibit A on file in the Clerk's office for
width and approximate location of parking stall)
1
Tano Mall, Lot 36, Block 722 4
112 Wallace Street
(See Exhibit A on file in the Clerk's office for
approximate location - width of parking space
shall be 30 feet)
1
203 Woodhaven Drive 1
Side entrance to 111 Jefferson Avenue on Fay
Street [Ord. No. O.1364-2003]
1
§ 7-39.5. Certain Handicapped Ordinances Require Verification to
Township Clerk After Five (5) Years. [1999 Code § 10.28.030, Ord.
No. O.1590-2007 § 2; Ord. No. O.1903-2015]
The provisions of certain subsections creating a handicapped parking space
and those ordinances creating the following handicapped parking spaces
shall expire five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter unless the owner or occupant at the locations indicated
verifies to the Township Clerk on or before the date of expiration that the
circumstances requiring a handicapped parking space have not changed
and that an individual who qualifies under the terms of N.J.S.A. 39:4-201
et seq. is in residence at the property adjacent to the location of the
handicapped space designated below.
§ 7-39.4 EDISON CODE § 7-39.5
AO:250
135-A Grandview Avenue, Apartment 3;
112 Wallace Street;
99 Mill Road;
74 Fourth Street;
29 Harrison Avenue;
130 College Drive;
82 Wildwood Avenue; and
307 Central Avenue.
§ 7-39.6. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1; the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-39.7. Handicapped Parking on Municipal Parks. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-39.8. Handicapped Parking on Postal Properties. [New]
In accordance with 40 U.S.C. § 318B and a written request from the
Postmaster, the off-street locations are hereby designated as Handicapped
Parking, pursuant to P.L. 1989 c. 201(1), eff. 06/01/1990. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates
or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
§ 7-39.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-39.8
AO:251
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-39.9. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 7-39.3, 7-39.4 and
7-39.7 shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each
parking space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-39.10. Penalty. [New]
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without
a special identification card shall be liable to a fine of two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars for the first offense and a fine of two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars plus a maximum of ninety (90) days community service for
all subsequent offenses.
§ 7-39.11. Prohibition on Blocking of Handicapped Spaces. [1999
Code § 10.28.040]
No owner or operator of premises having parking spaces reserved for
handicapped drivers shall cause or permit such handicapped spaces to be
blocked in any way or manner, including, but not limited to, the storage of
or placement of shopping carts.
§ 7-40. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-40.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
Property Regulations
(Reserved)
§ 7-39.8 EDISON CODE § 7-40.2
AO:252
§ 7-40.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public Is
Invited (Retail Business). [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations.
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the current "Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" (M.U.T.C.D.). The cost
of signs and installations shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
property. The owner shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition
at no cost or expense to the Township of Edison.
a. Oak Tree Village. [1999 Code, Ch. 10.32]
1. Property: Oak Tree Village
2. Regulations:
(a) Applicability of statute. The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey are made applicable to
semipublic and private roads, streets or driveways within and
leading to and from Oak Tree Village located on Oak Tree Road
(CR #604) in the Township. [1999 Code § 10.32.010]
(b) Parking. All vehicles shall park in designated areas between
lines provided. [1999 Code 10.32.020]
(c) Handicapped parking. Handicapped parking spaces indicated
on the site plan are designated as restricted parking spaces for
use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the Motor Vehicle Commission or the
temporary cards issued by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee. No other persons shall be permitted to park in these
spaces. [1999 Code § 10.32.030; Ord. No. O.1607-2008
§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
(d) Signs to be erected. The proper officials of the Township are
directed to have signs erected at the appropriate locations as
designated on the site plan which has been previously
submitted to the Department of Transportation for approval.
[1999 Code § 10.32.040]
(e) Violations; Penalties. Any person, firms, partnerships or
corporations convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
paragraph shall be liable to a penalty of not more than a fine of
§ 7-40.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-40.2
AO:253
one hundred ($100.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both, at the discretion of the
court, in accordance with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey. [1999 Code § 10.32.050]
b. Semi-Public Roads, Streets, Driveways and Parking Lots. [1999 Code,
Ch. 10.48]
1. Property.
2. Regulations:
(a) General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
(3) Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve (12) feet
wide as shown on the attached site plan and signed with
the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty
Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the Handicapped Parking Permits by the
Motor Vehicle Commission.
(b) Stop intersections.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road "A" and Road "B" Road "A"
Road "B" and Road "C" Road "B"
Road "C" and Old Post Road Road "C"
Road "D" and Road "E" Road "D"
Road "E" and Road "B" Road "E"
Road "F" and Road "A" Road "F"
(c) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of
streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "D" East Entire length
(d) Speed limits.
§ 7-40.2 EDISON CODE § 7-40.2
AO:254
(1) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 M.P.H.
(2) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the
following roadways are:
Name of Street M.P.H. Limits
All roads 15 Entire length
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
(e) Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct
or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit
ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
(f) Turn prohibitions. No persons shall make a turn at any location
listed and only in the manner described.
Name of Street
Turn
Prohibition
Movement
Prohibition
Road "C" and Old
Post Road
Left Northbound on Road
"C" to westbound on Old
Post Road
(g) Loading zone. The locations described are hereby designated
as Loading Zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said
location during the times indicated other than for the loading
and unloading of goods and materials.
Name of
Street Time Sides Location
Road "D" All hours South Entire length
(h) Signs. That all signs, posts, or other necessary materials be
installed and paid for by the applicant. All signing shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Control Devices,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
(i) Violations; Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by the New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of
a violation of this paragraph or any supplement thereto shall
be liable to a penalty of not more than two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
fifteen (15) days or both.
c. Privately Owned Public Parking Areas. [1999 Code, Ch. 10.20]
§ 7-40.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-40.2
AO:255
1. Submission of plan. The Chief of the Division of Fire and the Chief
of Police or his/her designee of the Township shall jointly provide
the Director of Public Safety with an individual plan for each
privately owned public parking area to which this section shall be
applicable. The plan shall contain the outline of each parking area
and shall clearly designate areas of traffic flow and areas or zones
in which there shall be no stopping, standing or parking of vehicles.
[1999 Code § 10.20.010; Ord. No. O.1607-2008 § 7; Ord. No.
O.1722-2009; Ord. No. O.1981-2017]
2. Adoption of plans; Amendment procedures. Upon receipt of each
individual plan the Director of Public Safety shall file such plan with
the Township Clerk and with the Clerk of the Municipal Court, to be
kept as a part of the permanent records of each office. Each such
plan so filed shall be included herein and made part of this section
and shall also be forwarded to the Department of Transportation of
the State of New Jersey. Amendments and changes to such plans
may be made by forwarding the proposed change(s) to the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey for
approval; and, after notice of approval, the changed or amended
plans shall be immediately filed with the Township Clerk and the
Clerk of the Municipal Court. [1999 Code § 10.20.020; Ord. No.
O.1607-2008 § 7; Ord. No. O.1981-2017]
3. Responsibilities of owners. An appropriate copy of each plan shall
be provided to the owner and/or operator of each individual
privately owned public parking area. The owner and/or operator of
each such area shall then at his, her or its own cost and expense
cause the parking area to be painted with stripings in accordance
with the plan provided to each such individual owner, operator or
corporation. In addition, appropriate signs shall be provided and
installed by the owner and/or operator at his, her or its own cost
and expense. Each sign and the placement therefor shall conform
to the State of New Jersey standard traffic sign criteria and must be
in strict accordance with the plan provided. [1999 Code
§ 10.20.030; Ord. No. O.1981-2017]
4. Regulations; No stopping or standing. There shall be no stopping or
standing within thirty (30) feet of the front of any building and as
designated on the respective plans with regard to the sides and
rear of every building located in the following privately or publicly
owned public parking lots which are subject to the provisions of
this section: [1999 Code § 10.20.040; Ord. No. O.1981-2017]
§ 7-40.2 EDISON CODE § 7-40.2
AO:256
Name of Parking Lot Location
Alfieri Building From 379 Thornall Street (CR
#657) to 399 Thornall Street
(CR #657)
B.M.I. Center 1897 Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514)
Captains Plaza 691 U.S. Route #1
Centre Place at Edison
Condominium Association, Inc.
[Ord. No. O.1735-2010]
Woodbridge Avenue and Stanley
Swiderski Drive
Cittone School Oak Tree Road (CR #604)
Clarion Hotel NJ Route #27
Edison Estates Plainfield Avenue (CR #529)
and Kilmer Road
Edison Glen Fire access lane
Edison Mall Old Post Road and U.S. Route
#1
Edison Shopping Center Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514)
and Rutland Street
Greenwood Townhouses (1045
Grove Avenue)
Grove Avenue
Greenwood Townhouses (71
Wintergreen Avenue)
Grove Avenue and Wintergreen
Avenue
Hartwick at Oaktree Oak Tree Road (CR #604)
Holiday Inn Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514)
Inman Grove Senior Citizen
Complex
1061 Inman Avenue (CR #602)
Inman Square [Ord. No.
O.1981-2017]
a/k/a JSM at Inman, LLC 976
Inman Avenue (Block 412, Lot
3.5)
Jewish Community Center 1775 Oak Tree Road (CR #604)
John F. Kennedy Medical Center James Street and NJ Route #27
Kilmer Plaza Shopping Center NJ Route #27 and Division
Street
Menlo Park Shopping Center U.S. Route #1 and Parsonage
Road (CR #630)
Midatlantic Bank 499 Thornall Road (CR #657)
Minnie B. Veal Community
Center
Inman Avenue (CR #602)
§ 7-40.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-40.2
AO:257
Name of Parking Lot Location
Oak Grove Center Shopping
Plaza
Inman Avenue (CR #602)
Oak Tree Center Shopping
Plaza
Oak Tree Road (CR #604)
Oakwood Manor Plaza Oak Tree Road (CR #604) and
Wood Avenue (CR #649)
Open Road Honda U.S. Route #1 and Leo Street
Pines Manor NJ Route #27 and Parsonage
Road (CR #630)
Pines Plaza NJ Route #27
Price Club NJ Route #27 and Vineyard
Road
Ramada Inn Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514)
Raritan Exposition Center 97 Sunfield Avenue
Roosevelt Hospital Parsonage Road (CR #630)
Tano Mall Amboy Avenue (CR #501) and
Pierson Avenue
Victorian Plaza 2849 Woodbridge Avenue (CR
#514)
Wellesley Inn 831 U.S. Route #1
Wick Shopping Plaza U.S. Route #1 and Plainfield
Avenue (CR #529)
5. Violations; Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to
provide the striping or signs as herein provided shall, upon
conviction for failing or refusing to comply herewith, be subject to a
fine of not more than two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, in
the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. Where the
violator is a corporation, each day after the first conviction shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense for which this penalty
may be imposed in the discretion of the Municipal Judge. [1999
Code § 10.20.050]
d. Turn Prohibitions.
§ 7-40.2 EDISON CODE § 7-40.2
AO:258
§ 7-40.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Name of Street
Turn
Prohibition
Movement
Prohibition
1. Route 27 Southbound and
Sturgis Lane (Valley National
Bank) [Ord. No. O.1535-2006]
Left Southbound
onto Route 27
2. Block 1120, Lots 43, 44-A and
45-A and Route NJ 27 (160 feet
north of Sturgis Lane)
approximate milepost 20.02 [Ord.
No. O.1608-2008 § 1]
Left Westbound from
the driveway on
Block 1120, Lots
43, 44-A and
45-A onto
southbound NJ
27.
e. Edison Shopping Center, 2303 Woodbridge Avenue. [Ord. No.
O.2032-2018]
The Edison Police Department and other law enforcement agencies
having jurisdiction are hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of
Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey including,
but not limited to, the following:
1. Tractor trailers not conducting business at the Edison Shopping
Center shall not be permitted to park or idle at the Edison
Shopping Center, whether during business hours or otherwise.
2. Parking of any type of vehicle shall be permitted in designated
locations and only for customers, employees and other invitees of
the Edison Shopping Center.
3. Appropriate signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be
erected by the owner of the property and shall be paid for by the
owner.
4. All signage shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39.4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
a. Oak Tree Village
Oak Tree Road (CR #604) and Cinder Drive
b. Edison Plaza
511 Old Post Road
§ 7-40.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-40.3
AO:259
§ 7-40.4. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Park Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed.
Property Regulations
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.5. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
United States Post Office Property. [New]
In accordance with 40 U.S.C. 318B and a written request from the
Postmaster, the following Various Traffic Regulations are hereby made
applicable to the properties listed below as follows. No person shall operate
or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations listed below.
Property Regulations
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.6. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in this subsection 7-40.2, 7-40.3 and
7-40.5 shall provide and install signs and pavement markings as required,
which signage and markings shall be in accordance with the "Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways." The cost of
procurement and installation of the signs and pavement markings shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner shall, subsequent
to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs and
pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the Township
of Edison. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
§ 7-41. RED LIGHT RUNNING AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT. [Ord.
No. O.1645-2008 § I]
c. Village Gate Condominiums
Talmadge Road and Orosz Boulevard
a. Installation.
1. The Township hereby determines to install and utilize a traffic
control signal monitoring system (the "system") at various
intersections within the Township as approved by the
Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to P.L. 2007, Chapter
348 (the "Act").
§ 7-40.3 EDISON CODE § 7-41
AO:260
2. The System to be installed shall be approved by the Township
Council by resolution.
3. The Township shall have the authority to enter into a contract,
following a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the
System. Any contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the
Act shall not be deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to
the Act.
4. The signs notifying drivers that the System is being utilized shall be
approved by the Township Engineer, and shall be placed on each
street converging into the affected intersection as required by the
Act.
5. The Township Engineer shall inspect and certify the System at least
once every six (6) months from the date of its installation.
b. Issuance of the Summons. The Division of Police of the Township shall
review the recorded images produced by the System, to determine
whether sufficient evidence exists demonstrating that the traffic control
signal violation has occurred and shall issue summons when
appropriate in accordance with the Rules of the Court.
c. Use of Recorded Images.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the System shall be available for the exclusive use of
the Division of Police for the purpose of discharging his or her
duties under the Act.
2. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with
the System shall not be deemed a public record in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1
et seq., or common law. The recorded images shall not be: (i)
discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter, or (ii) offered as evidence
in any civil or administrative proceeding not directly related to a
traffic control signal violation.
3. Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a
traffic control signal violation shall not be retained after sixty (60)
business days following the collection of any fine or penalty.
4. If a summons is not issued within forty (40) business days following
the traffic control signal violation, all recorded images and any
information collected with respect to the traffic control violation
shall be removed by the Division of Police within two (2) business
days.
5. The Township shall certify compliance of this section by filing a
report with the Commissioner of Transportation in accordance with
the Act.
§ 7-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-41
AO:261
§ 7-42. TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
§ 7-42.1. Established. [1999 Code § 10.08.260]
d. Owner's Liability. The liability of the owner and operator of a motor
vehicle for a traffic control signal violation summons pursuant to the
System shall be joint, subject to provisions of the Act.
a. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets described below.
Intersection
Beverly Street and Oak Tree Road (Emergency Fire Traffic Signal)
[Ord. No. O.1682-2009]
Ford Avenue/Amboy Avenue and King Georges Post Road/New
Brunswick Avenue [Ord. No. O.1492-2006]
Inman Avenue (CR #602) and Shamrock Way [Ord. No.
O.1705-2009]
Kilmer Road and Kilmer Court/New Jersey Transit Driveway [Ord.
No. O.1738-2010]
New Dover Road and Tingley Lane [Ord. No. O.1684-2009]
New Dover Road and Wood Avenue
New Durham Road and Durham Avenue [Ord. No. O.1613-2008]
Oak Tree Road and Sugar Tree Plaza driveway [Ord. No.
O.1681-2009
Oakwood Avenue and Parsonage Road
Old Post Road and Vineyard Road [Ord. No. O.1756-2010]
Park Avenue and Stephenville Parkway [Ord. No. O.1487-2006]
Plainfield Road and Oak Tree Road and New Dover Road [Ord. No.
O.1683-2009]
Plainfield Road (C.R. #531/C.R. #661) and Park Avenue (C.R. #531)
[Ord. No. O.1956-2016]
Plainfield Road and Stephenville Parkway [Ord. No. O.1356-2003]
Raritan Center Parkway and Mayfield Avenue/Campus Drive [Ord.
No. O.1732-2010]
Raritan Center Parkway and Parkway Place (CR #656) [Ord. No.
O.1704-2009]
Vineyard Road and Johnstone Street [Ord. No. O.1757-2010]
Woodbridge Avenue and Amboy Avenue
Woodbridge Avenue and Grace Street
§ 7-41 EDISON CODE § 7-42.1
AO:262
§ 7-42.2. Installation of signals.
§ 7-43. DEAD-END STREETS. [O.1368-2003, Repealed, 06/24/2004,
Delancey, Spring, Good Luck and Salem — ordinance set aside and
deemed null and void by Superior Court of NJ; O.1368-2003, Added,
06/11/2003, 7-10 added to Section 10.08.300; O.1290-2002,
Amended, 01/24/2002, Section 10.08.300(C) added; O.1274-2001,
Amended, 10/17/2001, Added Marion Street]
Intersection
Woodbridge Avenue (CR 514) and Gurley Road [Ord. No.
1864-2014]
Woodbridge Avenue and Horizon Drive
Woodbridge Avenue (CR #514) and Main Street (CR #531) [Ord. No.
O.1717-2009]
Woodbridge Avenue (C.R. #514) and Mill Road (C.R. #667) [Ord. No.
O.1957-2016]
Woodbridge Avenue and Stanley Swiderski Drive [Ord. No.
O.1573-2007]
Woodbridge Avenue (CR 514) and Trenton Avenue [Ord. No.
1864-2014]
Woodland Avenue and Oak Tree Road (CR 604) [Added 10-7-2019
by Ord. No. O.2053-2019]
b. Plans for the above named intersections may be found on file in the
Township Offices. The traffic control signals shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Title
39 of the Revised Statutes and the New Jersey Administrative Code, and
shall be operated in conformance with the designated plan.
a. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, shall conform to the
design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey. [1999 Code
§ 10.08.270]
b. Flashing signals for pedestrian crossing shall be installed as follows:
[1999 Code § 10.08.270]
Type Location Time
Flashing signal with a
symbol of pedestrian
crossing
James Street, adjacent to the
main entrance of John F.
Kennedy Medical Center
24 hours a day,
7 days a week
a. The areas of Gold Street, Lincoln Avenue, Madison Avenue, Wiley
Avenue, Wolff Avenue, Jefferson Avenue, Bloomfield Avenue, Ireland
§ 7-42.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-43
AO:263
Avenue and Walsh Avenue which are contiguous to Block 815 are
designated as dead-end streets in these respective locations.
b. The following streets shall be enumerated as dead-end streets in their
respective locations:
1. Alcoa Avenue;
2. Avery Street;
3. Hickory Street;
4. Harley Road;
5. Harmon Road;
6. Harris Road;
7. Heman Street;
8. Marion Street;
9. Morris Avenue;
10. Nora Road;
11. Paul Street;
12. Whelan Street.
c. The following streets shall be enumerated as dead end streets at the
indicated locations:
1. Elizabeth Avenue at its intersection with the eastern side of the
PSE&G right-of-way (Block 643-DD, Lot 16-B), bounded by Block
643-L, Lot 57 and Block 643-V, Lot 19.
2. Turner Avenue west of Lench Avenue at its intersection with the
eastern side of the PSE&G right-of-way, bounded by Block 975, Lot
9 and Block 974, Lot 12.
3. Compton Avenue west of Lench Avenue at its intersection with the
eastern side of the PSE&G right-of-way, bounded by Block 974, Lot
7 and Block 973, Lot 13.
4. Elizabeth Avenue at its intersection with the southern side of
Compton Avenue extended to the western side of PSE&G right-ofway.
5. Edison Avenue—the westerly terminus of Edison Avenue, west of
Lench Avenue where the northerly right-of-way line of Edison
Avenue intersects 1) the southeasterly line Lot 11, Block 975 and 2)
along the terminus of Edison Avenue to the westerly sideline of
Terry Avenue, also depicted as the easterly property line of Lot 1-A,
Block 643-V.
§ 7-43 EDISON CODE § 7-43
AO:264
Chapter 8
(RESERVED)
Chapter 9
ANIMALS
6. Terry Avenue— the northerly terminus of Terry Avenue at its
intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of Edison Avenue,
extended westerly and bounded by Block 643-J, Lot 76 and Block
643-V, Lot 1-A.
§ 7-43 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-43
AO:265

ARTICLE I
Dogs
§ 9-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 9-1.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.76.010]
As used in this article:
AT LARGE — Means off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of the owner or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord,
chain or otherwise as provided herein.
DOG — Means both male and female.
KENNEL — Means any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — Means any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
§ 9-2. LICENSING.
§ 9-2.1. Licensing and Registration Required. [1999 Code
§ 8.76.020]
All dogs over seven (7) months of age kept, harbored or maintained in the
Township shall be licensed and registered by the Township and shall bear
evidence of such license at all times in accordance with the laws of the State
of New Jersey. The owner shall state, at the time application is made for
such license and upon printed form provided for such purpose, his or her
name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned or
kept by the owner.
§ 9-2.2. Time for Procuring License and Tag. [New]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall, in the
month of January, annually apply for and procure from the Municipal Clerk
a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog so owned,
kept or harbored and shall place upon each dog a collar or harness with the
registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 9-2.3. License and Tag Fees; Exceptions. [New]
a. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay an
annual dog license fee as established in Article IV, Fee Schedule, of this
chapter.
b. If a license tag has been misplaced or lost, the Township Clerk may
issue a duplicate license for that particular dog at a fee of one ($1.00)
dollar.
§ 9-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.3
AO:267
§ 9-2.4. Evidence of Inoculation with Rabies Vaccine or Certification
of Exemption Requirement for License. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2a]
No Municipal Clerk or other official designated by the Governing Body of
any municipality to license dogs therein shall grant any such license and
official metal registration tag for any dog unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the dog to be licensed and registered has been inoculated
with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance
with the recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture
and the United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, or has
been certified exempt as provided by regulations of the State Department
of Health. Such vaccination shall be repeated at intervals as provided by
regulations of the State Department of Health, and shall be administered
by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted
by law to do the same. The State Department of Health shall promulgate
regulations providing for the recognized duration of immunity, interval of
inoculation, certificate of vaccination, certificate of exemption, and such
other matters related to this act.
§ 9-2.5. Newly Acquired Dogs. [New]
The owner of any newly acquired dog or of licensing age of any dog which
attains the age of seven (7) months shall make application for a license and
registration tag for such dog within ten (10) days after such acquisition or
age attainment.
§ 9-2.6. Licensing Dogs Brought Into Township. [New]
c. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing
eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
d. Only one (1) license and registration tag shall be required in any
licensing year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and
tag shall be accepted by all municipalities as evidence of compliance
with this Article.
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any dog licensed in another State for the current year and bearing a
registration tag, and shall keep same or permit same to be kept within
the Township for a period of more than ninety (90) days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each dog.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog, and shall keep same or permit same to be kept
within the Township for a period of more than ten (10) days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
§ 9-2.3 EDISON CODE § 9-2.7
AO:268
§ 9-2.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1856-2014§ 2]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with this section
shall be liable to a penalty of fifty ($50.00) dollars for each offense.
Appearance before a Municipal Court Judge will not be required unless
specified and duly noted on the summons. A violator may plead guilty and
pay any penalty in person or by mail. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19)
§ 9-3. CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF DOGS.
§ 9-3.1. Running at Large Prohibited. [1999 Code § 8.76.030]
No dog shall run at large at any time.
§ 9-3.2. Dogs Off Premises to Be Leashed. [1999 Code § 8.76.040]
Any dog off the premises of the owner shall be accompanied by a person
who is capable of controlling it and who has the dog securely confined and
controlled by an adequate leash not more than six (6) feet long.
§ 9-3.3. Dogs on Premises to Be Tethered. [Ord. No. O.1985-2017]
a. It is unlawful to chain or tether unneutered/unspayed dogs in any
manner, at any time, within the Township.
b. Neutered/spayed dogs may be tethered under the following
circumstances:
1. The tether must be at least fifteen (15) feet long and have an
operative swivel on both ends, weigh no more than one eighth (1/8)
of the dog's weight and be attached to and properly fitted with a
buckled collar or harness;
2. The collar used for tethering may not be a choke chain collar, slip
collar or prong collar;
3. The tether must allow the dog access to proper shelter, sufficient
food, sufficient potable water and dry ground at all times;
4. The tether may not be used in any area where it may be tangled
around an object, such as, but not limited to, a tree, pole, fence or
stake;
5. Dogs shall be so confined for a period no greater than nine (9)
hours within a twenty-four (24) hour period;
6. No animal shall remain outdoors, tethered, untethered, or penned
during a period of extreme weather, including but not limited to,
extreme heat (ninety (90) degrees or above), extreme cold (thirtytwo
(32) degrees or below), thunderstorms, tornadoes, blizzards,
tropical storms, or hurricanes; and
§ 9-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.3
AO:269
§ 9-3.4. Nuisances by Dogs on Public and Private Property; Penalty.
[1999 Code § 8.76.050; Ord. No. O.1985-2017]
§ 9-3.5. Barking Dogs. [1999 Code § 8.76.060; Ord. No.
O.1985-2017]
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks
or cries so as to disturb the public peace or the comfort and repose of any
person in the vicinity.
7. In no instance shall an animal remain outdoors, tethered,
untethered, or penned under the age of six (6) months old, or while
sick, injured or in distress.
a. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog who
allows such dog to defecate on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk,
passageway, bypath, play area, park, school grounds or any space
where the public congregate or walk or upon any public property or
place whatsoever or upon any private property without the permission
of the owner of the property shall:
1. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by
the Department of Health;
2. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog curbed in accordance with the provisions of this
section in a sanitary method approved by the Department of
Health.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply to blind persons who may
use dogs as guides.
c. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog not
curbed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be
deemed to be in violation of this section and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be liable for a minimum fine of fifty ($50.00) dollars and a
maximum fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or
imprisonment in the County jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or both.
d. This section shall be enforced by the Edison Township Police
Department, Edison Township Health Department or Edison Township
Animal Control Officer. Such enforcement powers shall not preclude a
citizen of Edison Township from filing a complaint on a violation of this
section directly with the Edison Township Municipal Court.
§ 9-3.3 EDISON CODE § 9-3.6
AO:270
§ 9-3.6. Responsibility of Owner for Damage. [1999 Code § 8.76.070;
Ord. No. O.1985-2017]
The owner or custodian of any dog shall be responsible for any damage done
by such dog.
§ 9-4. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
§ 9-4.1. Vicious Animals. [1999 Code § 8.76.080]
§ 9-5. through § 9-6. (RESERVED)
a. A dog or other animal which the Division of Health or a licensed
veterinarian finds, upon examination or consideration of its history, to
be vicious shall be surrendered to the Division by the person who owns,
possesses or controls it, and the animal shall be destroyed by the
Division.
b. A dog or other animal which has bitten a person or various persons on
three (3) separate occasions within a period of twenty-four (24) months,
with or without provocation, when the bite in each instance was of
sufficient severity so that medical treatment was required by the person
bitten, shall be surrendered to the Division by the person who owns,
possesses or controls it and shall be destroyed by the Division. A
Division record of a report made pursuant to Chapter XII, Health
Regulations and Licensing, is prima facie evidence of the fact that
medical treatment was required.
c. An animal which is vicious or uncontrolled may be impounded by a
peace officer or may be killed if capture is dangerous.
d. The owner of a dog which has attacked or bitten a person must subject
that animal to a ten-day confinement period. At the expiration of the
ten-day confinement period, the owner shall be required to have the
aforesaid dog examined by a veterinarian in order to determine
whether the animal shows symptoms of rabies. It shall be the obligation
of the owner to present proof of that examination to the Edison Division
of Health within forty-eight (48) hours of the conclusion of the period of
confinement. The aforesaid dog may, at the discretion of the Edison
Division of Health, be housed for the ten-day period of confinement at
the home of the owner or a designated veterinary hospital.
§ 9-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5
AO:271

ARTICLE II
Cats
§ 9-7. DEFINITIONS. [1999 Code 6.08.010]
As used in this article:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Means any person or agency designated
or certified by the State of New Jersey or the licensing authority to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Means the Health Officer, sanitarian, an Animal
Control Officer, a Police Officer or any other authorized representative of
the Township.
CAT — Means any animal of the domestic feline species; male, female or
altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Means any cat which has attained the age of
seven (7) months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DWELLING UNIT — Means any single-family detached dwelling
condominium, townhouse, cooperative or residential rental units.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Means the office of the Township Clerk or any
designated representative charged with administering this section and/or
issuing or revoking licenses under the provision of this section.
OWNER — Means every person having a right of property (or custody) in
any cat and every person who has a cat in his keeping, or who harbors
or maintains a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any
premises occupied by that person. The owner of a cat shall be considered
the initial owner of its kittens. A person who continually feeds a stray cat
shall be considered its owner.
RUN AT LARGE — Applies to any cat not being physically restrained by the
owner which is off and not on the premises of the owner.
§ 9-8. VACCINATION AND LICENSING.
§ 9-8.1. Vaccination Requirements. [1999 Code § 6.08.060]
No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any cat of licensing age
within the Township unless the cat is vaccinated against rabies and
licensed. All such cats shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian in
accordance with the latest Compendium of Animals Rabies Vaccines and
Recommendations for Immunization published by the National Association
of State Public Health Veterinarians. Newly acquired cats of licensing age
must be vaccinated within ten (10) days of acquisition and before a permit
or license will be issued. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or
maintaining a cat within the Township may, subject to such reasonable rules
and regulations which may be established by the Health Officer, have such
cat inoculated at any Township sponsored clinic for the presentation of
rabies in dogs.
§ 9-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-8.2
AO:273
§ 9-8.2. Vaccination Certificate. [1999 Code § 6.08.070]
A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each cat
vaccinated on a form recommended by the state and consistent with
Township requirements.
§ 9-8.3. Exclusions. [1999 Code § 6.08.080]
The foregoing vaccination and licensing requirements shall not apply to
cats held by a State or Federally licensed research facility or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatment, or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or
pet shops.
§ 9-8.4. Vaccination Exemptions. [1999 Code § 6.08.090]
A cat may be exempted from the requirements of vaccination for a specified
period of time by an authorized agent upon presentation of a veterinarian's
certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other physical condition,
regimen or therapy, the inoculation for the cat is deemed inadvisable.
§ 9-8.5. License Required; Not Transferable. [1999 Code § 6.08.100]
Any person who owns, keeps, harbors or maintains a cat of licensing age
must apply and procure annually from the licensing authority a license
and official registration tag with license number for each cat so owned,
kept, harbored or maintained. Licenses and registration tags shall not be
transferable.
§ 9-8.6. Time of Procurement. [1999 Code § 6.08.110]
Cat licenses shall be applied for and procured between January 1 and
January 31 of each year. The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing
age, or any cat which attains licensing age during any other period, must
purchase a license within ten (10) days of such acquisition or age
attainment.
§ 9-8.7. Cats Brought Into Jurisdiction. [1999 Code § 6.08.120]
a. Any person who brings or causes any cat of licensing age to be brought
into the Township which is licensed in another state for the then current
year and which bears a registration tag may keep or permit said cat to
be kept within the Township for a period of no more than ninety (90)
days, unless a license and registration tag for such cat is applied for and
procured pursuant to the provisions of this section.
b. Any person who brings or causes to be brought any unlicensed cat of
licensing age into the Township may keep or permit the cat to be kept
within the Township for a period of no more than ten (10) days, unless a
license and registration tag for such cat is applied for and procured
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 9-8.2 EDISON CODE § 9-8.7
AO:274
§ 9-8.8. Application. [1999 Code § 6.08.130]
The application shall state breed, sex, whether or not neutered, date of
birth, color and markings of the cat for which license and registration tag
are sought, and whether it is of a long or short haired variety; and the
names, streets and mailing addressees of the owner and the person, if other
than the owner, who shall keep, harbor or maintain the cat. The information
on the application and the registration number issued for the cat shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the licensing authority.
§ 9-8.9. License Forms and Tags. [1999 Code § 6.08.140]
License forms and registration tags shall be furnished by the licensing
authority, shall be numbered sequentially, shall bear the year of validity and
the name of the Township. Licenses and registration tags shall be valid from
January 1 of a given year through January 31 of the immediately succeeding
year.
§ 9-8.10. Evidence of Inoculation with Rabies Vaccine or
Certification of Exemption. [1999 Code § 6.08.150]
The Township Clerk or other person designated by the licensing authority
to license cats shall not grant a license for any cat unless written proof
is provided that the cat to be licensed has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Human Services, or
has been certified as exempt as provided in subsection 9-8.4. The rabies
inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian.
§ 9-8.11. License Fee. [1999 Code § 6.08.160]
A license shall be issued upon payment of the fee as stated in Article IV,
Fee Schedule, by the person applying therefor. Proof of neutering shall be
required prior to issuance of a license at the rate for neutered cat(s).
§ 9-8.12. Proof of Licensing. [1999 Code § 6.08.170]
The owner shall place and maintain upon each such cat a collar, harness,
or other device with the registration tag securely fastened thereto. Proof of
licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping, maintaining or
harboring a cat upon the request of any authorized agent of the Township.
§ 9-8.13. Disposition of Fee Collected. [1999 Code § 6.08.190]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this chapter shall be forwarded to the Township Treasurer and shall
c. Any valid New Jersey license and registration tag or similar type
identification markers issued by a New Jersey Municipality shall be
accepted by the Township as evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this section for the year of issuance of such license.
§ 9-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-8.13
AO:275
be placed in a separate account to be used for the following purposes
only; collecting, keeping and disposing of animals liable to seizure; local
control of rabies; providing anti-rabies treatment for any person known
or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; and for administering and
implementing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 9-8.14. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1856-2014§ 3]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with this section
shall be liable to a penalty of fifty ($50.00) dollars for each offense.
Appearance before a Municipal Court Judge will not be required unless
specified and duly noted on the summons. A violator may plead guilty and
pay any penalty in person or by mail.
§ 9-9. IMPOUNDMENT AND RECOVERY OF CATS. [1999 Code
§ 6.08.200]
a. An authorized agent may take cats into custody and impound and later
destroy them, release them to the owner, or offer them for adoption, as
provided within this section, in the following situations:
1. The owner does not produce a current license or registration tag
for a cat which is required to be licensed; or
2. A cat is suspected to be a stray, abandoned, diseased, injured or to
have bitten a person or other animal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:4-82.
b. If any cat is taken into custody whose owner is known or which is
wearing a registration tag, an authorized agent shall attempt to contact
the owner. If the cat is not claimed by the owner or contact cannot be
made with the owner within forty-eight (48) hours of seizure, a notice in
writing will be sent to the owner stating that the cat has been seized
and is subject to being offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed
within seven (7) days after the service of the notice.
c. A notice under this section shall be deemed to be effective if served
personally, or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of
abode or at the address given in the license application, or by mailing to
any such address by United States mail, postage prepaid.
d. An authorized agent may cause a cat to be offered for adoption or
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible and consistent
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19 seven (7) days after seizure,
provided that:
1. The cat was not wearing a valid registration tag at the time of
seizure and the owner is unknown; or
2. A notice was served as provided and the cat was not claimed; or
3. The owner or person keeping or harboring a cat which was
unlicensed at the time of seizure does not within a reasonable
§ 9-8.13 EDISON CODE § 9-9
AO:276
§ 9-10. INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED AGENT PROHIBITED.
[1999 Code § 6.08.180]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any authorized agent in the
performance of any duty under this chapter.
§ 9-11. CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF CATS.
§ 9-11.1. Limitation of Cats Per Dwelling Unit. [1999 Code
§ 6.08.030]
No more than five (5) cats may be harbored or maintained within any singledwelling
unit by any owner or owners.
§ 9-11.2. Running at Large Unlawful. [1999 Code § 6.08.040]
No owner shall permit or allow any cat of licensing age to run at large.
§ 9-11.3. Nuisances Prohibited. [1999 Code § 6.08.050]
No owner shall permit or allow, either willfully or negligently, any cat to
create a nuisance upon the property of another or to destroy or deface the
property of another, whether the same be real or personal.
§ 9-11.4. Abandonment Prohibited. [1999 Code § 6.08.020]
No person shall abandon any cat, no matter what its age or condition, within
the Township.
§ 9-12. through § 9-14. (RESERVED)
period of time produce a valid license and registration tag for the
cat.
§ 9-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12
AO:277

ARTICLE III
Animal Shelters, Kennels and Pet Shops
§ 9-15. TOWNSHIP ANIMAL SHELTER.
§ 9-15.1. Maintenance of Animal Shelter by Township. [1999 Code
§ 6.04.010]
The Township shall maintain an animal shelter for the purpose of housing
and caring for dogs, cats and other domestic animals that have been taken
into custody by virtue of running loose or being abandoned.
§ 9-15.2. Operational Control. [1999 Code § 6.04.020]
Operation and control of the animal shelter shall be vested in the Division
of Health of the Township.
§ 9-15.3. Availability of Facilities. [1999 Code § 6.04.030]
Utilization of the shelter and its facilities shall be made available to
residents of the Township, and any stray animals which are caught or taken
into custody within the confines of the Township shall be housed and cared
for in the shelter.
§ 9-15.4. Shelter Fees. [1999 Code § 6.04.040; Ord. No.
O.1987-2017]
Upon receiving any animal in custody brought to the shelter by an owner or
person (except an Animal Control Officer, Police Officer or other employee
or enforcing agent of the Township), the following schedule of fees shall
apply to the use of the shelter:
a. Redemption Fees.
1. For the first redemption of any animal housed in the shelter:
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
2. For the redemption of any animal in the shelter on the second
occasion: fifty ($50.00) dollars.
3. For the third redemption and any redemption thereafter and all
redemptions from noncontracting municipalities: one hundred
($100.00) dollars.
b. Daily boarding charge, per animal per day: four ($4.00) dollars.
c. For the picking up of:
1. Adult dogs, cats, puppies and kittens for either the owner or
custodian of an animal: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars;
2. Any other animal at a private place: N/C.
§ 9-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.4
AO:279
§ 9-15.5. Interpretation of Fee Schedule. [1999 Code § 6.04.050]
The schedule of fees above shall be defined to mean that a daily boarding
charge of four ($4.00) dollars is for a twenty-four (24) hour period covering
12:00 midnight to 11:59 p.m. Any portion of a day where the animal is in
custody for less than one day will be chargeable as a full day. The sum of all
d. For receiving unwanted animals brought to the shelter:
1. For Adult spayed/neutered and rabies vaccinated dogs and cats,
each $30.00. For Adult unspayed/unneutered rabies vaccinated
dogs and cats, each $100.00.
2. Puppies and kittens, each $25.00.
3. All other species of animals and any animal brought in:
(a) By Edison Township residents, each $15.00.
(b) By nonresidents, each $25.00.
e. Adoption Fees.
1. Dogs/puppies: $175.00.
2. Cats/kittens: $100.00.
3. Small animals/birds/other: $35.00.
f. Special Services.
1. Holding quarantined animals: eighty ($80.00) dollars.
2. Euthanasia and disposal:
(a) Small animals up to 20 pounds: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
(b) Medium animals over 20 pounds and up to 50 pounds: fifty
($50.00) dollars.
(c) Large animals over 50 pounds: seventy-five ($75.00) dollars.
3. Transportation of animal head to Trenton for rabies examination:
fifty ($50.00) dollars.
4. Decapitation of animal and transportation to Trenton for rabies
examination: seventy-five ($75.00) dollars.
5. Bathing, only animals in custody: twenty ($20.00) dollars.
g. Unspecifiable Fees. Any expenses not specified or of an unusual nature
shall be charged at cost or if this figure is not readily available, then at a
reasonable estimated charge to be determined by the Health Officer or
his or her authorized agent.
§ 9-15.4 EDISON CODE § 9-15.5
AO:280
applicable fees and expenses for an animal must be paid in cash prior to the
release of the animal.
§ 9-15.6. Placing of Live Traps; Removal of Animals From Traps.
[1999 Code § 6.04.060]
§ 9-16. KENNELS AND PET SHOPS.
Editor's Note: See also Section 9-24, Keeping of Animals for Commercial
Purposes, for additional regulations.
§ 9-16.1. License Required for Kennel or Pet Shop. [1999 Code
§ 8.76.090]
No person shall operate a kennel or pet shop without a license issued by the
Division of Health.
§ 9-16.2. License Fee. [New]
The fee for a license required under this section may be found in Article IV,
Fee Schedule, of this chapter.
§ 9-17. through § 9-18. (RESERVED)
a. A deposit of thirty ($30.00) dollars shall be required for the placing of
live traps.
b. Refund of deposit will be made when the trap is picked up by the Animal
Control Officer or brought to the animal shelter. No refund will be made
for damaged or stolen equipment. No trap will be lent for more than
fourteen (14) consecutive days.
§ 9-15.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-17
AO:281

ARTICLE IV
Fee Schedule
§ 9-19. LICENSE FEES. [1999 Code §§ 6.08.170, 8.48.020, 8.84.020;
O.1646-2008]
Editors Note: Pursuant to subsection 2-128.3a1 of the Township of Edison
Charter and Code, any resident of the Township who shall have obtained the
age of sixty-five (65) years old is hereby exempt from the municipal fees of
this section.
All applicants for permits and licenses and for renewal thereof as
encompassed herein shall be made in accordance with this chapter and
shall be accompanied by the payment of the fees prescribed by the following
table. Permits and licenses shall expire and shall be renewed in accordance
with the expiration date as prescribed by the following schedule:
Description of Activity Under
Permit Fee Expiration Date
a. Animals: permit to sell or hold for
sale: cats, birds or other small
animals
$50.00 June 30
b. Cattle and other stabled animals:
Permit to keep stabled animals:
Commercial $150.00 June 30
Noncommercial $50.00 June 30
Permit to slaughter animals: $500.00 June 30
c. Cats: Cat license
unneutered $10.00 January 31
neutered $6.00 January 31
d. Dog license:
Spayed/Neutered $16.20 January 1
Not spayed/neutered $19.20 January 1
Service dog $1.00 January 1
Replacement of license $0.50 January 1
Permit to operate a dog kennel $150.00 June 30
Business of grooming and clipping $75.00 June 30
e. Pet shop: permit to conduct a pet
shop
$100.00 June 30
f. Poultry:
Permit to conduct a commercial
establishment
$50.00 June 30
§ 9-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-19
AO:283
Description of Activity Under
Permit Fee Expiration Date
Permit to keep for noncommercial
purposes
$10.00 June 30
g. Vietnamese potbellied pigs6 $25.00 June 30
§ 9-20. (RESERVED)
6. Editor's Note: See inspection fee in subsection 9-22.1.
§ 9-19 EDISON CODE § 9-20
AO:284
ARTICLE V
Cows, Horses, Sheep, Swine and Poultry
§ 9-21. COWS, HORSES, SHEEP, GOATS AND DEER.
§ 9-21.1. Cattle Defined. [1999 Code § 8.60.010]
As used in this Article:
CATTLE — Means and includes the following animals and their respective
young: cows, horses, mules, asses, sheep, goats, deer and other hoofed
animals, but does not include swine.
§ 9-21.2. License Required for Stabling. [1999 Code § 8.60.020]
No person shall keep in any building or part thereof or on any land in the
Township any cattle, as defined in this Article, without the approval of the
Zoning Officer and the Health Officer and a license issued by the Division of
Licenses.
§ 9-21.3. Requirements for Stables. [1999 Code § 8.60.030]
No stable, building or part thereof shall be used to keep cattle unless it
complies with the terms of the Public Health Code, the Building Code, the
Fire Prevention Code and with other Township ordinances that may apply.
§ 9-21.4. Milk Cattle. [1999 Code § 8.60.040]
All cattle used for milk production shall be maintained according to Title 24
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
§ 9-21.5. Cattle to Be Free of Disease; Inspection. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.050]
All cattle shall be free of disease and, if requested by the Division of Health,
shall be inspected by a licensed veterinarian at the expense of the owner or
person in charge of the cattle.
§ 9-21.6. Stable Floors. [1999 Code § 8.60.060]
Floors of all stables shall be constructed of some nonabsorbent material and
shall be graded so as to discharge all drainage into properly trapped seweror
septic-tank-connected drains. All floors and beds shall be kept clean and
in sanitary condition at all times.
§ 9-21.7. Ventilation, Lighting and Water Supply of Stables. [1999
Code § 8.60.070]
Every stable shall be adequately ventilated to the external air by natural
or mechanical means, adequately lighted by natural or artificial means and
provided with a proper and adequate water supply.
§ 9-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-21.8
AO:285
§ 9-21.8. Sanitary Maintenance of Walls, Ceilings and Woodwork.
[1999 Code § 8.60.080]
All walls, ceilings and exposed woodwork shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times and whitewashed whenever required by the
Division of Health.
§ 9-21.9. Sanitary Maintenance of Stables and Stable Yards. [1999
Code § 8.60.090]
Every stable, stable yard or places where cattle are kept or grazed shall
be maintained in a clean, dry, wholesome condition so as not to cause a
nuisance or permit the breeding of flies.
§ 9-21.10. Removal of Manure from Stables; Storage. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.100]
Manure shall be removed from the stable as often as may be necessary
to prevent the creation of a nuisance or the discharge of offensive odors.
Upon removal of the manure from the stable, it must be immediately taken
from the premises or stored in boxes or pits which shall at all times be kept
watertight and the contents protected by a suitable cover from the rain,
snow, sun and flies and all other conditions which tend to produce offensive
decomposition.
§ 9-21.11. Emptying of Manure Pits. [1999 Code § 8.60.110]
All manure pits or boxes shall be emptied regularly in accordance with the
requirements of the Division of Health.
§ 9-21.12. Receptacles for Transporting Manure. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.120]
No manure may be removed or transported excepting in a watertight,
covered receptacle designed to prevent the escape of offensive odors.
§ 9-21.13. Cattle at Large. [1999 Code § 8.60.130]
No cattle shall be allowed to run at large but shall be confined to licensed
premises. Confinement does not apply to riding stables or workhorses.
§ 9-21.14. Locations of Pastures or Stables. [1999 Code § 8.60.140]
No cattle shall be pastured within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any
dwelling or adjoining property line, or stabled within fifty (50) feet of any
dwelling or within ten (10) feet of any property line.
§ 9-21.8 EDISON CODE § 9-21.15
AO:286
§ 9-21.15. Location of Manure Pits. [1999 Code § 8.60.150]
No manure pit shall be located, placed or maintained within ten (10) feet
of the nearest adjoining property line or within fifty (50) feet of the nearest
dwelling.
§ 9-22. SWINE; POTBELLIED PIGS.
§ 9-22.1. Keeping of Swine Prohibited; Exception. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.160]
No person shall have, keep, raise or maintain any swine, pigs or hogs within
the Township except that a person shall be permitted to keep, raise or
maintain a Vietnamese potbellied pig, subject to the following conditions:
a. Only one (1) Vietnamese potbellied pig (not to exceed seventy (70)
pounds in weight) shall be permitted in a household, and there shall be
no breeding or hobby breeding permitted.
b. A license fee or permit fee shall be paid to the Township in accordance
with Article IV, Fee Schedule.
c. The Vietnamese potbellied pig must reside within the dwelling and
cannot be kept outside the dwelling.
d. If the applicant for the license or permit is a tenant, the applicant must
at the time of submitting the application for the license produce a letter
from the landlord consenting to the application.
e. The permit or license shall be renewed annually on or before the
thirtieth day of June of each year and revoked as a discretion of the
Division of Health. No permit shall be issued until it has been
determined by the Division of Health, upon inspection, that such place
and premises are suitable for the housing of the pig. Permit shall be
revoked if, by virtue of a subsequent inspection, it has been determined
that the premises have not been kept in a sanitary condition and/or the
premises are not suitable for the maintaining of the good health of the
animal in question.
f. Disposition of animal waste, garbage, refuse or vegetable matter shall
be such so as to prevent insects from breeding, rodent infestation,
pollution of the air or any body of water or the creation of any other
unhealthy or unsanitary condition. There shall be daily placement of the
animal waste in a plastic garbage bag, tightly closed, for periodic
removal from the premises with normal garbage collection.
g. The Health Officer of the Township shall be authorized to inspect any
premises where a Vietnamese potbellied pig is kept for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions herein.
h. Besides the licensing fee set forth in Article IV, Fee Schedule, the owner
of any Vietnamese potbellied pig shall be subject to an additional
§ 9-21.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-22.1
AO:287
§ 9-23. SLAUGHTERING OF LARGE ANIMALS.
§ 9-23.1. License Required. [1999 Code § 8.60.170]
No person shall slaughter, kill or dress cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules,
swine or other large animals without a license issued by the Division of
Health.
§ 9-23.2. Applicable Regulations. [1999 Code § 8.60.180]
"Regulations Concerning Construction, Operation, Maintenance and
Licensing of Slaughterhouses and Inspection and Labeling of Animals
Slaughtered for Food," New Jersey State Department of Health, as same
may be amended from time to time, is to be used as the authority and the
basis for the issuance of licenses.
§ 9-24. KEEPING OF ANIMALS FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
§ 9-24.1. Animals Defined. [1999 Code § 8.60.190]
As used in this Article:
ANIMALS — Means and includes rabbits, mink, cats, guinea pigs, rodents,
reptiles, amphibians and insects and other small animals kept or raised
for commercial purposes (for sale; for production of meat, fur or wool; for
exhibition or other purposes; or as a course of supply for laboratories).
§ 9-24.2. Approval and License Required. [1999 Code § 8.60.200]
No person shall keep small animals, as defined in this Article, or maintain
a pet shop on any premises within the Township without prior approval
from the Zoning Officer and the Health Officer and a license issued by the
Division of Licenses.
§ 9-24.3. Conditions Precluding Issuance of License. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.210]
No license for the keeping or raising of small animals shall be granted to
any person when the keeping or raising of such small animals, because of
the nature or characteristics thereof, would be detrimental to the general
health and to the residents of the neighborhood of the premises sought to
be so licensed.
inspection fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars payable to the Township
if a complaint is filed which requires a reinspection of the premises,
provided that it is determined that the complaint is valid.
§ 9-22.1 EDISON CODE § 9-24.4
AO:288
§ 9-24.4. Maintenance of Hutches or Coops. [1999 Code § 8.60.220]
Each hutch or coop shall be dry and adequately ventilated and shall be
cleaned daily and rebedded with fresh straw, leaves or other absorbent
material.
§ 9-24.5. Keeping of Diseased and Wild Animals Prohibited. [1999
Code § 8.60.230]
§ 9-24.6. Destruction or Disinfection of Infected Hutches or Coops.
[1999 Code § 8.60.240]
Any hutch or coop wherein such affected animal is found, and all adjoining
hutches or coops, shall be destroyed or thoroughly disinfected with a
germicide approved by the Division of Health and under the direction
of the Health Officer. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any small animal under regular professional treatment by a duly licensed
veterinarian.
a. Keeping of Diseased Animals Prohibited. No person shall keep any
small animal affected with skin mange, coccidiosis, parasitic worms or
other diseases contagious to other animals or human beings, and any
such animal so affected shall immediately be destroyed and the carcass
cremated forthwith.
b. Wild Animals Prohibited.
1. No person shall keep an animal of a mammal or reptile species
which is wild, ferocious, fierce, dangerous or naturally inclined to
do harm in any place other than:
(a) A zoological park or aquarium;
(b) An approved laboratory;
(c) A circus, sideshow or other place of public exhibition or
amusement, an educational or scientific institution or an
establishment of a commercial dealer in animals, which has
protective devices which are adequate to prevent such animal
from escaping or injuring the public.
2. An animal of a species specified in paragraph 1. above shall not be
sold or given to any person or institution except those set forth in
paragraph b. above.
3. A venomous snake shall not be sold to, given to or kept by any
person except an educational or scientific institution, a zoological
park or aquarium, a snake farm engaged in the preparation of
antivenin or an importer of animals.
§ 9-24.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-24.7
AO:289
§ 9-24.7. Location of Hutches or Coops. [1999 Code § 8.60.250]
No hutch or coop shall be less than fifty (50) feet from any dwelling nor less
than ten (10) feet from all adjoining property lines.
§ 9-24.8. Confinement of Animals to Premises. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.260]
Small animals shall be confined to the licensed premises.
§ 9-24.9. Sanitary Maintenance of Yards. [1999 Code § 8.60.270]
Any yard adjoining or connected with any hutch or coop shall be kept in a
clean, sanitary condition and shall not be allowed to become a nuisance.
§ 9-24.10. Removal and Disposal of Feces and Refuse. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.280]
All feces and refuse shall be removed daily or as often as may be necessary
to prevent the creation of a nuisance or the discharge of offensive odors.
Upon removal of the feces, it must immediately be taken from the premises
or stored in boxes or pits which shall at all times be kept watertight and the
contents protected by a suitable cover from the sun, rain, snow and flies and
all other conditions which tend to produce offensive decomposition.
§ 9-25. COMMERCIAL POULTRY ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 9-25.1. Poultry Defined. [1999 Code § 8.60.290]
When used in this article:
POULTRY — Means and includes chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea
fowl, pigeons, pheasants and all other fowl or winged animals kept, raised
or sold for human consumption or for production of eggs.
§ 9-25.2. Permission and License Required. [1999 Code § 8.60.300]
No person shall engage in the business of keeping, selling or preparing for
sale live poultry, or the slaughtering of poultry, in the Township without first
obtaining permission from the Zoning Officer and the Health Officer and a
license from the Division of Licenses.
§ 9-25.3. Applicable Regulations. [1999 Code § 8.60.310]
"Regulations Concerning Construction, Operation, Maintenance and
Licensing of Slaughter Houses and Inspection and Labeling of Animals
Slaughtered for Food," New Jersey State Department of Health, is to be
used as the authority and the basis for the issuance of licenses.
§ 9-24.7 EDISON CODE § 9-25.4
AO:290
§ 9-25.4. Application for License. [1999 Code § 8.60.320]
Before such license is granted, the applicant shall submit to the Division
of Licenses an application in writing, setting forth the description of the
premises intended to be so used, the character of the building where the
business is contemplated to be conducted, and also a description of all
buildings, if any, located within a distance of two hundred (200) feet of the
premises to be so used.
§ 9-25.5. Denial of License. [1999 Code § 8.60.330]
A license will be denied if the application or an independent investigation
reveals that the premises or the intended use:
§ 9-25.6. Requirements for Buildings. [1999 Code § 8.60.340]
All buildings or places in which poultry slaughtering or the business of
selling or preparing for sale live poultry is conducted shall at all times
conform to the following requirements:
a. Is detrimental to the health of the surrounding neighbors; or
b. Does not strictly comply with all the requirements of this Article and the
rules and regulations of the State Board of Health; or
c. Will tend to create a nuisance.
a. Floors shall be paved with material impervious to moisture and shall be
properly sloped to a well-trapped outlet having direct connection with
the sewer or septic tank.
b. The walls of every room in which slaughtering is actually carried on
shall be covered to a height of at least six (6) feet with smooth,
moisture-proof material and the remainder of the walls and ceilings
shall be finished with a smooth, hard surface.
c. No building or place operating under any such license, or any part of
such building, shall be used for any purpose other than that provided
for in the license.
d. Watertight receptacles shall be provided for all refuse and shall be
properly covered and the contents removed daily from the premises.
e. All live poultry or fowl shall at all times be confined to the licensed
premises, unless removed for the purpose of slaughter or sale.
f. Every room and every other place used for the purpose of slaughtering
live poultry and fowl, or either of them, shall be ventilated directly to
the open air.
g. All coops shall be constructed of heavy wire; all stands or counters shall
at all times be built substantially, maintained without cracks or joints
and covered with material impervious to moisture. The stands, counters
§ 9-25.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.6
AO:291
§ 9-25.7. Sale of Poultry After Slaughtering. [1999 Code § 8.60.350]
All poultry or fowl shall be sold within twenty-four (24) hours of
slaughtering, unless the same shall be adequately refrigerated in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 9-25.8. Plucking. [1999 Code § 8.60.360]
Plucking shall not be carried on in a room used for slaughtering.
§ 9-25.9. Sale of Unfit Poultry Prohibited. [1999 Code § 8.60.370]
No person shall sell or offer for sale any fowl or poultry which is diseased or
in any manner unfit for human consumption. This shall apply alike to such
fowl or poultry whether alive, or slaughtered.
§ 9-25.10. Placement and Storage of Feed. [1999 Code § 8.60.380]
All feed for immediate consumption shall be placed in suitable feeding
troughs or similar containers, and all other feed shall be stored in ratproof
containers at all times.
§ 9-26. KEEPING OF POULTRY; NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
§ 9-26.1. Permission and License Required. [1999 Code § 8.60.390]
No person shall keep or maintain any live poultry, as defined in subsection
9-25.1, even for noncommercial purposes, without first obtaining
permission from the Zoning Officer, the Health Officer and a license for that
purpose from the Division of Licenses covering the premises to be so used.
§ 9-26.2. Coops and Runs. [1999 Code § 8.60.400]
and coops shall be raised from the floor in such manner as to permit
thorough flushing under the same.
h. A plentiful supply of hot water shall be provided for cleaning purposes.
i. Every such poultry house or poultry slaughterhouse or other place in
which the same is sold or prepared for sale shall at all times be kept in a
sanitary condition.
a. All coops and runs shall be located outside of and completely apart from
any building used wholly or in part for dwelling purposes, in which
people congregate, or used as a food eating establishment.
b. All coops or runs shall be constructed in accordance with the
regulations now or hereafter in force under the zoning code, the
building code and all other applicable ordinances or laws of Edison
Township.
c. All live poultry shall be confined in coops or runs.
§ 9-25.6 EDISON CODE § 9-26.2
AO:292
§ 9-26.3. Placement and Storage of Feed. [1999 Code § 8.60.410]
All feed for immediate consumption shall be placed in suitable feeding
troughs, or similar containers, and all other feed shall be stored in ratproof
containers at all times.
§ 9-26.4. Keeping of Poultry for Sale Not Authorized. [1999 Code
§ 8.60.420]
The provisions of this Article shall not be deemed to authorize the keeping
of live poultry for sale or for the preparation for sale.
§ 9-26.5. Location of Coops or Runs. [1999 Code § 8.60.430]
No coop or run shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any unit or place
where people congregate, or within two hundred (200) feet of any food or
eating establishment or within ten (10) feet of any property line.
d. All coops shall be provided with concrete floors.
e. All coops and runs and the entire surroundings of all such places shall
be kept clean and sanitary at all times and shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the Health Officer of the Township or his representative.
f. Coops and runs shall be disinfected or otherwise treated when so
directed by the Health Advisory Board.
g. The floors of all coops shall be kept clean and dry at all times.
h. All of the droppings shall be removed from each coop and buried,
removed from the premises or otherwise disposed of at least once each
week.
§ 9-26.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-26.5
AO:293
Chapter 10
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 10-1. NOISE CONTROL.7
§ 10-2. LITTERING.8
§ 10-3. (RESERVED)
§ 10-4. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND
GOVERNMENT.
§ 10-4.1. Interference with Township Officers or Employees. [1999
Code § 9.04.010]
No person shall interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct the proceedings,
functions or deliberations of the Council of the Township or any other
official body in the Township, nor shall any person molest, obstruct, hinder
or interfere with any Township officer or official engaged in the
performance of his or her duty, or knowingly resist or oppose any person
authorized by law to make arrests or to serve any writ, bill, order or process
when the person so authorized is acting in the performance of his or her
duty.
§ 10-4.2. Interference with Fire Fighting; False Alarms. [1999 Code
§ 9.04.020]
No person shall intentionally, willfully or maliciously interfere with, destroy
or injure any of the wires, posts, machines, bells, sirens, boxes, locks or
other apparatus of any fire alarm system; nor shall any person intentionally,
willfully or maliciously interfere with intent to create a false alarm or
obstruct the efficient operation of the same, or hinder or impede any of
the operations intended to be accomplished thereby. Nor shall any person
intentionally, willfully or maliciously cause a false alarm of fire to be given in
any manner within the limits of the Township. Nor shall any person during
an alarm of fire hinder, prevent or deter by any device whatsoever any
fire fighter or other person from rendering lawful assistance in abating or
quelling such fire, or hinder or interfere with any fire fighter from going
to or returning from the place where any building or other property is
on fire, or from which an alarm proceeds. Nor shall any person hinder or
obstruct the passage of any fire engine, hook or ladder truck, hose cart
or any fire apparatus in going to or from the place from which an alarm
of fire proceeds, or where any building or other property may be burning.
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 10-1, Noise Control, containing portions of 1999 Code
§§ 8.12.050 and 9.08.100B, originally codified in the 2007 Code as Section 10-1, has been
relocated to Chapter XII, Health Regulations and Licensing as Section 12-27.
8. Editor's Note: Former Section 10-2, Littering, containing portions of 1999 Code § 8.24,
originally codified in the 2007 Code as Section 10-2, has been relocated to Chapter XII,
Health Regulations and Licensing as Section 12-28.
§ 9-26.5 EDISON CODE § 10-4.2
AO:294
Nor shall any person intentionally and maliciously ring or cause to be rung
any type of alarm involving ambulance service, thereby giving or causing
to be given a false alarm for the ambulance service. Nor shall any person
intentionally, willfully or maliciously send any message of false alarm of fire
or ambulance call by telephone or by any other method or means. No person
shall drive a motor vehicle or other vehicle over fire hose or fire equipment
except as authorized by the authority in charge.
§ 10-4.3. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.04.030]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 10-5. PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY.
§ 10-5.1. Prohibited Acts; Disorderly Conduct; Intoxication in
Public. [1999 Code § 9.08.010A]
No person or persons shall make, aid, assist in any riot, breach of peace or
disturbance or be guilty of any disorderly conduct or open drunkenness or
drink intoxicating liquors in the open streets or highways of the Township
or other quasi-public open places in the Township.
§ 10-5.2. Indecent Language; Trespassing. [1999 Code § 9.08.020]
No person or persons shall loiter in the streets or highways or in other
public or quasi-public places or utter loud, offensive or indecent language
in the streets or highways or in other public or quasi-public places or make
improper noise, utter loud, offensive or indecent language or make offensive
or improper language or remarks or indecent language on private property
so that the same is audible to the public beyond the confines of the private
property or make offensive or improper gestures to any person or persons
on such streets, highways or public places or conduct himself or herself in
any manner contrary to public decency; nor shall any person or persons
trespass upon the property of another without permission of the owner,
occupant or lessee.
§ 10-5.3. Behavior of Persons in Vehicles. [1999 Code § 9.08.030]
No person or persons in a vehicle shall make offensive remarks or gestures
to any person or persons on the public streets or highways, these remarks
being uncalled for and unwanted and contrary to proper decorum. No
person or persons in a vehicle shall accost male or female persons on
foot or in another vehicle in a seductive or enticing manner or in any
manner contrary to good taste and decorum, either by words or gestures or
mannerisms.
§ 10-5.4. Disorderly Houses Prohibited. [1999 Code § 9.08.040]
No persons shall keep or maintain a disorderly house or a house of ill
fame or allow or permit any house, shop, store or other building owned or
§ 10-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.4
AO:295
occupied by him or her to be used as a disorderly house or house of ill fame,
to be frequented or resorted to by riotous or disorderly persons, prostitutes,
gamblers or vagrants.
§ 10-5.5. Indecent Exposure. [1999 Code § 9.08.050]
No person shall intentionally appear on any street, avenue, road, highway
or other public place in a state of nudity, or make any indecent exposure of
his or her person, or commit or cause to be committed, or participate in, the
commission of any lewd or indecent act or behavior.
§ 10-5.6. Prostitution. [1999 Code § 9.08.060]
No person shall by word, act, sign or other device invite, solicit or aid
or abet in inviting or soliciting, unlawful sexual intercourse or any other
unlawful, lewd, indecent or lascivious act.
§ 10-5.7. Offensive or Dangerous Weapons. [1999 Code § 9.08.070]
No person shall conduct himself or herself in or about the Township having
concealed upon him or her any implements with an intent to break or
enter into any building, nor shall have upon him or her any pistol, hanger,
cutlass, bludgeon or other offensive or dangerous weapon; nor shall any
person have upon him or her, whether concealed or not, any implements
or things with the intent of committing any unlawful act, nor shall any
person be present in or near any dwelling, house, warehouse, stable, barn,
garage or any place of public resort or assemblage for business, worship
or amusement or other lawful purpose, with intent to steal any goods or
chattels; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to law officers
and other persons duly authorized under certain statutes of this State to
carry proper weapons of defense.
§ 10-5.8. Gambling. [1999 Code § 9.08.080]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, deal, play or engage
in faro, roulette, illegal lottery, numbers games or other games of chance,
either as banker, player or dealer, or otherwise, for the purpose of gaming
or gambling for money or other valuable things. Raffles, bingos and lotteries
for which permits are obtained are excluded from the prohibition herein set
forth.
§ 10-5.9. Recruiting, Securing Employment During Strikes or
Lockouts Unlawful. [1999 Code § 9.08.090]
It is unlawful within the Township for any person, firm or corporation not
directly involved in a labor strike or lockout to recruit any person or persons
for employment or to secure or offer to secure for any person or persons
any employment, when the purpose of such recruiting, securing or offering
to secure employment is to have such persons take the place in employment
of employees in an industry where a labor strike or lockout exists.
§ 10-5.4 EDISON CODE § 10-5.10
AO:296
§ 10-5.10. Spitting in Public. [1999 Code § 8.112.070]
It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalk or upon any
part of the interior or exterior of any public building or public conveyance.
§ 10-5.11. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.08.100]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 10-6. LASER BEAM DEVICES.
§ 10-6.1. Use of Laser Beam Devices Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 9.08.110A, B]
§ 10-6.2. Violations and Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.08.110, C]
§ 10-7. INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY.
§ 10-7.1. Lewdness and Indecency Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 9.20.010]
Any person who commits open lewdness or a notorious act of public
indecency, grossly scandalous and tending to debauch the morals and
manners of the people of the Township is guilty of a violation of this section
and, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, shall be subject to the
penalties set forth elsewhere in this section.
§ 10-7.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 9.20.020]
As used in this section:
COMMUNITY STANDARDS — Means the standards of the community which
is comprised of the citizenry of the Township.
a. For the purposes of this section, a laser beam device or laser pointer
means any device that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission
of radiation that is visible to the human eye.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser beam
or laser beam pointer device directly or indirectly upon another person
or animal in such a manner as to reasonably cause harassment or
annoyance or harm to said person or animal.
a. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
b. At the time of arrest, the laser beam device used in the violation of this
section, shall be seized by the Police Department and kept as evidence
of a crime.
§ 10-5.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.2
AO:297
CONTEMPORARY COMMUNITY STANDARD — Means the majority view
as expressed through the Municipal Council within the confines of the
Township.
KNOWINGLY — Means having knowledge of the character and content of
material described herein or having failed to exercise reasonable inspection
which would disclose its character and content.
MATERIAL — Means anything tangible which is capable of being used
or adapted to arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading,
observation, sound, feel or in any other manner.
MATERIAL OBSCENE FOR PERSONS — Means any descriptive, narrative
account or depiction of a specified anatomical area or specified sexual
activity contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other representation,
publication, sound recording or film, which, by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sexuality with
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interests in the area of activity.
OBSCENE — Means that which, to the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, when considered as a whole, has as
its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to prurient interests. Any book,
publication, picture, writing, record or other mechanical or electrical audio
or visual reproduction or other material shall be "obscene" within the
meaning of this section if it is established that:
OBSCENE WORK — Means a work which, taken as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interests in sex; which portrays sexual conduct in a patently
offensive way; and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political and scientific value. In determining whether or not a work or
material is obscene, the trier of fact must find that:
The dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to a
prurient interest;
a.
The material is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary
community standards relating to the description or representation of
sexual materials;
b.
c. The material is utterly without redeeming social value.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interests; and
a.
The work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual
conduct specifically defined by this section as being a portrayal of
patently offensive sexual conduct as that phrase is used in the definition
of an "obscene work;" and
b.
The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
c.
§ 10-7.2 EDISON CODE § 10-7.2
AO:298
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE — Means so offensive on its face as to affront
community standards. The phrase "patently offensive sexual conduct" shall
be deemed to include any of the following sexual conduct as depicted,
described or dramatized in a patently offensive way:
PERFORMANCE — Means any play, motion picture, dance, dramatization,
with or without conversation, directly or in silhouette, or any other
exhibition performed before one or more persons.
REDEEMING SOCIAL VALUE — Means that which is capable of or intended
for the advancement of medical science and/or formal education.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Means:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Means:
An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including genital-genital, anal-genital or oral-genital intercourse,
whether between human beings, or between a human or humans and
an animal or animals;
a.
Sadomasochistic abuse meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person or persons, whether in the nude or clad in undergarments or
in a revealing costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained;
b.
Masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals,
including any explicit close-up, representation of human genital organs
or spread-eagle exposure of female genital organs;
c.
Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the unclothed pubic
area or buttocks of humans or the breast of female humans whether
the same involves two (2) or more humans or one (1) or more animals
with the humans, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation and/or
gratification;
d.
Any device, designed and marketed as being useful primarily for the
stimulation of human genital organs;
e.
Male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
turgidity.
f.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola;
a.
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
b. Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
c.
§ 10-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.2
AO:299
WORK — Means any material or performance.
§ 10-7.3. Determination of Redeeming Social Value. [1999 Code
§ 9.20.030]
In any prosecution under the provisions of this section, evidence of
pandering or evidence that the sale or distribution of the material in
question was exploited on the basis of its appeal to prurient interests
may be considered in determining whether such material is utterly without
redeeming social value.
§ 10-7.4. Violations Enumerated. [1999 Code § 9.20.040]
a. A person shall be guilty of violating this section if the person knowingly
sells, rents, lends or gives away to another person or induces such
person to seek, buy, borrow or receive:
1. Any books, publications, pictures, writings, records or other
mechanical or electronic audio or visual reproductions or other
material of any person or persons posed or presented in such
manner as to exploit lust, and which shows, depicts or reveals such
person or persons in acts of sexual stimulation, deviation or
perversion with one's self or with another or others;
2. Any collection, series or combination of photographs, drawings or
other similar representations, whether or not contained in books,
publications, pictures, writings, records or other mechanical or
electronic audio or visual reproductions, of any person or persons
posed or presented in such a manner as to exploit lust for
commercial gain and depicted or shown in such a posture or way
that the viewer's attention or concentration is primarily focused on
those persons in acts of sexual stimulation, deviation or perversion
which would appeal to the lust of any person;
3. Any books, publications, pictures, writings, records or other
mechanical or electronic audio or visual reproductions or other
material containing details, descriptions or narrative accounts of
acts of sexual stimulation, deviation or perversion with one's self or
with another or others, which details, descriptions or narrative
accounts are written or presented in such a manner as to exploit
lust for commercial gain and which would appeal to the lust of
persons and which are to be distinguished from flat and factual
statements of the facts, causes, functions or purposes of the subject
of the writing or presentation, such as would be found in bona fide
medical or biological textbooks.
For the purpose of this subsection, "knowingly" means having
knowledge of the character and content of any item described
in this section or failure to exercise reasonable inspection which
would disclose the character and content of the item.
§ 10-7.2 EDISON CODE § 10-7.4
AO:300
§ 10-7.5. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.20.050]
§ 10-8. (RESERVED)
§ 10-9. PROPERTY OFFENSES.
§ 10-9.1. Signs and Notices in Streets. [1999 Code § 9.12.010]
No person shall:
b. Any person who knowingly and without just cause utters or exposes to
the view or hearing of another, or poses with intent to utter or expose to
the view or hearing of another, any obscene works or written,
mechanical or electronic materials; or poses with the intent to do any of
the above; or advertises the same; or in any manner, whether by
recommendation for or against its use, gives any information on how or
where such works or materials may be obtained, viewed, heard, bought
or sold, is guilty of violating this chapter.
c. Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent, office or employee
thereof, engaged in the business of distributing goods, wares,
publications or other articles or materials of any kind whatsoever to
retail dealers, who shall refuse to furnish to any retail dealer any
quantity of goods, wares, publications or other articles sought to be
purchased by a retail dealer because that dealer refuses to purchase or
accept delivery of lewd, lascivious, obscene or indecent publications or
materials shall be guilty of violating this section.
a. Proceedings for alleged violations of this section or any of its
subsections shall be prosecuted in the Municipal Court of Edison
Township.
b. For a first violation the minimum mandatory fine shall be the sum of
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars and the maximum fine two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars.
c. Upon conviction of subsequent offenses, violators shall be subject to a
minimum fine of two hundred ($200.00) dollars and a maximum fine as
stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 for each subsequent violation.
a. Mutilate or remove any notice or damage, destroy or remove any
warning sign or signal or remove any barricade placed or posted on any
highway in connection with or relating to the closing of any road;
b. Drive any vehicle over or upon the closed portion of any highway;
c. Violate any rule or regulation for the use of any highway.
§ 10-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-9.2
AO:301
§ 10-9.2. Depositing Substances in Streets or Other Places;
Throwing Objects at Vehicles.9 [1999 Code § 9.12.020]
No person shall place, throw, suffer or permit the depositing of any stone,
sticks, glass, snow or ice, or any hard, dangerous or offensive substance
upon any street, avenue, road, highway or other public thoroughfare; nor
shall any person throw any such object or substance at, upon or against
any person, vehicle of transportation, building or other structure; nor shall
any person or persons throw objects from a moving vehicle within Township
limits.
§ 10-9.3. Dumping Prohibited. [1999 Code § 9.12.030]
No person shall dispose of, throw away or discard any papers, bottles,
tin cans, cartons, garbage or refuse of any kind whatsoever upon public
streets, sidewalks, public grounds or parks, playgrounds or places of public
assemblage or accommodation, including all municipally owned facilities;
nor shall such refuse be thrown into the water of any pond, stream or lake,
or into waters adjacent thereto; nor shall any person discharge any sewage
or waste into the waters of any of them or pollute the waters of any of them
in any manner whatsoever.
§ 10-9.4. Obscene Drawings. [1999 Code § 9.12.040]
No person shall write or cause to be written any lewd, indecent or obscene
word or words, mark or marks whatsoever, or draw or cause to be drawn
any lewd, indecent or obscene figure upon any house, building, wall, fence
or other place in the Township.
§ 10-9.5. Destruction of Property. [1999 Code § 9.12.050]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, maliciously destroy,
damage or injure the personal property or real property of any person,
firm or corporation, or any public property, whether the same be personal
or real; nor shall any person place or cause to be placed any material or
obstruction or interfere in any manner whatsoever with public or private
property, specifically but not by way of limitation, of sewers, drainage and
water facilities, whether they be located on the public roads or private
property, nor shall any person suffer any interference, damage or injury to
any public or private property which shall affect the normal use thereof.
§ 10-9.6. Obstruction of Streets and Public Ways. [1999 Code
§ 9.12.060]
No person shall unnecessarily obstruct any street, avenue, sidewalk, road,
highway, alley or public place with any kind of vehicle or vehicles or with
boxes, lumber, wood or any other such thing that could obstruct a street or
other public place.
9. Editor's Note: See also Section 12-28, Littering.
§ 10-9.2 EDISON CODE § 10-9.7
AO:302
§ 10-9.7. Entering and Damaging Schools. [1999 Code § 9.12.070]
No person shall enter any building or go upon the lands of any public school
and break, injure or deface such building or any part thereof, or any other
property belonging to or connected with such building or lands; and no
person shall disturb the routines of any public school or molest or give
annoyance to the children attending such school, or annoy any teacher or
other personnel therein.
§ 10-9.8. Damaging Public Buildings. [1999 Code § 9.12.080]
No person shall destroy or abet in destroying any public building or public
work; no person shall injure, tarnish or deface or besmirch any public
building, work, tree, light or traffic post, fence, streetlight post, facilities,
monument, statue, flagpole or contents and fixtures of any public play area,
park or stadium.
§ 10-9.9. Nuisances in Streets and Other Public Places. [1999 Code
§ 9.12.090]
§ 10-9.10. Upsetting Refuse or Garbage Containers. [1999 Code
§ 9.12.100]
No person shall willfully upset refuse containers or garbage cans or
containers.
§ 10-9.11. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.12.120]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. Each
day such violations is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 10-10. REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS;
REMOVAL OF DOOR OR LOCKING MECHANISM REQUIRED.
a. No person or persons shall urinate or defecate or commit any kindred
nuisance in any public street, highway, public or quasi-public place,
such street, highway, public or quasi-public place or other public place
not provided for such purpose.
b. For the purpose of this section, the term "other public place" shall be
deemed to include the quasi-public area in front of or adjacent to any
store, shop, restaurant, luncheonette or other places of business, and
shall include also any parking lots or other vacant private property not
owned or under the dominion of the person charged with a violation of
this section.
§ 10-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-10.1
AO:303
§ 10-10.1. Prohibited Acts. [1999 Code § 9.12.110]
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or permit to
remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any
unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his,
her or its control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container, which has
an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking device.
§ 10-10.2. Violations and Penalty. [1999 Code § 9.12.120]
Any person found who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 10-11. (RESERVED)
§ 10-12. GRAFFITI.
§ 10-12.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 9.16.010]
As used in this section:
DEFACE — Means to cover, mark, write on, paint, color or otherwise mar,
disfigure or draw whatsoever on any private or public property of any
nature, without the express consent of the owner.
GRAFFITI — Means any form of inscription, word figure, marking or design
that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn down or painted on any building,
structure, fixture or other improvement, whether permanent or temporary,
including by way of example only and without limitation, fencing
surrounding construction sites, whether public or private without the
consent of the owner of the property, or the owner's authorized agent, which
is visible from the private right-of-way.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Means any felt tip marker, china marker, or similar
device that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing
surface one-half (1/2) inch or greater.
KNOWINGLY — Means and include knowledge or information which a
parent should reasonably be expected to have pertaining to the marking of
graffiti. It is intended to include and require neglectful or careless parents
to maintain a reasonable community standard of parental respectability
through an objective test. There shall be no defense of a parent who is
indifferent to the activities or conducts of a minor in their custody, when
they have knowledge of the individual's actions that are not in compliance
of this section.
MINOR or JUVENILE — Shall be used interchangeably and means any
person under the age of seventeen (17), any person less than seventeen (17)
years of age or any person who has not celebrated his or her seventeenth
(17th) birthday.
§ 10-10.1 EDISON CODE § 10-12.1
AO:304
OWNER — Means the owner of record of the property as set forth in the
records of the Tax Assessor for the Township of Edison.
PARENT — Means any person to whom legal custody of the juvenile has
been given by court order or is acting in the place of the parent or is
responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile and shall include:
PUBLIC PLACE — Means any place to which the public has access,
including but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk,
bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
parking, public building, structure or any municipal parking signs, etc., or
area.
TOWNSHIP — Means Township of Edison, New Jersey.
§ 10-12.2. Prohibited Acts. [1999 Code § 9.16.020]
The following acts are prohibited:
§ 10-12.3. Parental Responsibility. [1999 Code § 9.16.030]
It is unlawful for a parent as defined in this section having legal custody
over a minor to knowingly permit or by inefficient or lack of control to allow
such minor in their control to place graffiti on any private or public property
as defined in this section.
§ 10-12.4. Enforcement Procedures. [1999 Code § 9.16.040]
a. Natural or adoptive parents;
b. Legal guardians;
c. A person who stands in "loco parentis;"
d. A person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
a. No person shall willfully or maliciously damage, deface, or vandalize
any public, or private property by painting, writing, drawing or
otherwise in subscribing in any fashion of graffiti thereon without the
express permission or consent of the owner. However, this prohibition
shall not apply to easily removable (which are water soluble) chalk
markings on public sidewalks or streets, written or drawn in connection
with traditional children's games, or in any lawful business or public
purpose or activity.
b. It is unlawful to aid anyone in defacing public or private property.
c. No person shall possess a spray container or indelible marker in any
public place or on any public facility or private property with the intent
to use same to deface the public building, property or private property,
absent express permission to the contrary.
§ 10-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-12.4
AO:305
§ 10-12.5. Special Account. [1999 Code § 9.16.050]
Seventy (70%) percent of each fine collected, pursuant to this chapter, shall
be placed in a special account to be used as assistance to homeowners
for removing graffiti and to purchase necessary equipment to perform the
cleaning. The remaining thirty (30%) percent of the fees shall be deposited
into the general fund of the Township.
§ 10-12.6. Removal of Graffiti. [1999 Code § 9.16.060; Ord. No.
O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
The occupant, lease, agent and/or landlord of any commercial premises
which has any form of graffiti on any building or structure, shall be required
to either restore the defaced surface by removing the graffiti or repaint the
defaced surface within ten (10) business days after notice to the occupant,
lease, agent/or landlord by the Chief of Police or his/her designee to remove
same.
§ 10-12.7. Payment of Reward. [1999 Code § 9.16.070; Ord. No.
O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
A reward of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars shall be paid to any person
who provided information or assistance leading to the apprehension and
conviction of any person violating this section. This reward shall be payable
after conviction out of a fund established for this person, but no reward
shall be paid to any public employee whose duty is to investigate or enforce
this section. The Chief of Police or his/her designee is authorized to grant
such reward with the consent of the Municipal Council, and the reward shall
only be given upon notification by the Municipal Court that the matter has
been adjudicated.
§ 10-12.8. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.16.080]
a. In the case of a first violation by the juvenile, the juvenile and parent
shall receive, both in person and by certified mail, a written warning in
accordance with subsection 10-12.2, indicating the circumstances
under which the juvenile was found to be in violation of this section.
b. If the minor has been convicted of violating this section on a prior
occasion within six (6) months of the date of the present violation, there
shall be a presumption that the parent or guardian having care of the
minor, knew or should have known of the minor's violation of this
section.
a. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by one (1) or more of the following
penalties.
1. A fine not less than five hundred ($500.00) dollars and not
exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars;
§ 10-12.4 EDISON CODE § 10-12.8
AO:306
§ 10-13. SPRAY PAINT INK MARKERS.
§ 10-13.1. Spray Paint Ink Markers; Sales to Person Under Eighteen
(18) Years of Age Prohibited. [1999 Code § 9.17.010]
§ 10-13.2. Posting of Sign Near Display Required. [1999 Code
§ 9.17.040A]
Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint regulated
by this section, shall post in clear public view at or near the display of such
products using bold lettering at least one (1) inch in height a placard stating
as follows:
ANY PERSON DEFACING REAL PROPERTY NOT HIS OR HER OWN WITH
PAINT OR ANY OTHER LIQUID IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF $2,000.00 OR
IMPRISONMENT FOR UP TO NINETY (90) DAYS.
2. Imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days;
3. A period of community service not to exceed ninety (90) days.
b. If, after the receipt of a warning notice pursuant to subsection 10-12.3
of a first violation by a juvenile, a second graffiti violation is adjudged
against the same juvenile, the parents of the juvenile shall be subject to
prosecution under this section, and shall be required to perform
community service for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days, and
pay a fine of not less than five hundred ($500.00) dollars, but no more
than two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars. Additionally, any parent having
the care or custody of a juvenile found to be in violation of this section,
if it is adjudged that both the juvenile and the juvenile's parent violated
the graffiti ordinance, they shall be required to perform the community
service together.
a. Spray paint means any paint or pigmented substance in an aerosol or
similar spray container or intended for use in an aerosol or similar
spray container.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to any person under
eighteen (18) years of age any spray paint, or hobby kit or any similar
kind of kit containing spray paint.
c. No person may sell or offer to sell spray paint to any other person
unless the buyer presents evidence of his or her identity and age.
d. Containers of spray paint may not be displayed in any retail business
premises in a manner in which they can be picked up by a customer
when standing in an area allocated for customer use.
§ 10-12.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-13.3
AO:307
§ 10-13.3. Posting of Sign for Persons Responsible for Sales. [1999
Code § 9.17.040B]
Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint regulated
by this section shall also post in the direct view of such person or persons
responsible for accepting customer payment for such spray paint container
or marker pens, using bold lettering at least one (1) inch in height a placard
stating as follows:
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR OTHERWISE CONVEY SPRAY PAINT TO
PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE IN THE TOWNSHIP OF
EDISON. VIOLATORS SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $2,000.00
OR IMPRISONMENT FOR UP TO NINETY (90) DAYS.
§ 10-13.4. Aiding and Abetting Persons Under the Age of Eighteen
(18) to Obtain Spray Paint Prohibited. [1999 Code § 9.17.050]
No person shall aid, assist or abet a person under the age of eighteen (18) in
obtaining possession of paint in a spray can. This prohibition shall not apply
to:
§ 10-13.5. Possession of Spray Paint by Persons Under the Age of
Eighteen (18) Prohibited; Exemptions. [1999 Code § 9-17.020]
No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall possess any paint in a spray
can. This prohibition shall not apply to:
§ 10-13.6. Possession of Spray Paint Container Within Public
Buildings Unlawful; Possession of Same with Intent to Deface
Property Unlawful. [1999 Code § 9-17.030]
a. A parent or legal guardian assisting and supervising his or her own
child or ward in use of paint; and
b. A teacher, assisting and supervising his or her student in the use of
paint; and
c. An employer assisting and supervising his or her employee in the use of
paint.
a. A child using paint while under the immediate supervision of his or her
parent or legal guardian; and
b. A student using paint while under the immediate supervision of his or
her teacher; and
c. An employee using paint under the supervision of his or her employer.
a. It shall be unlawful for a person to possess a spray paint container on
the property of another or in any public building or upon any public
facility. It shall be a defense to an action for violation of this section that
the owner, manager, or other person having control of the property,
§ 10-13.3 EDISON CODE § 10-13.6
AO:308
§ 10-13.7. Violations and Penalties. [1999 Code § 9-17.010; New]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 10-14. ALCOHOL USE BY A MINOR.
§ 10-14.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 9.34.010]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Means a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Means an underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 10-14.2. Prohibitions. [1999 Code § 9.34.020]
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property within the Township of Edison.
§ 10-14.3. Violation and penalties. [1999 Code § 9.34.030]
Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this section shall be subject
to a fine of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for the first offense and a
fine of three hundred fifty ($350.00) dollars for any subsequent offense. In
addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may, upon a finding
of guilty, suspend or postpone for six (6) months the driving privileges of
the violator, in accordance with, and in the manner provided in N.J.S.A.
40:48-1.2.
§ 10-14.4. Exceptions. [1999 Code § 9.34.040]
building or facility, consented to the presence and use of the paint or
marker.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a spray paint on the public
way with intent to use the same to deface any building, structure or
property. This prohibition shall not apply to any employee of a public
utility or of the Municipal, State or Federal government using spray
paint or any marker within the scope of his or her prescribed duties.
a. This section shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 10-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-14.4
AO:309
§ 10-15. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR JUVENILE OFFENSES.
§ 10-15.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 9.32.010]
As used in this section:
DELINQUENCY — Means:
JUVENILE — Means any person who has not yet attained his or her
eighteenth birthday.
PARENT — Means any natural father or mother or any adult who has a
juvenile in his or her charge by virtue of an order of the court.
§ 10-15.2. Notice of Violations; Liability of Parent. [1999 Code
§ 9.32.020; Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
b. The section shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any person under the legal age while such person is lawfully engaged in
the performance of employment by a person who is licensed under Title
33 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, or while actively engaged in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a County vocational school or post-secondary
educational institution; however this section shall not be construed to
preclude the imposition of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81,
or under any other section of existing ordinance or law against a person
who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The commission of an act by a juvenile which, if committed by an adult,
would constitute:
1. A crime;
A disorderly person's offense or petty disorderly offense under
State law; or
2.
3. A violation of any other penal statute, ordinance or regulation.
a.
The commission of an act which constitutes a violation of Chapters 3, 4,
6 or 8 of Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, or of any amended supplement thereof, by a
juvenile of or over the age of seventeen (17) years, shall not constitute
delinquency as defined in this section.
b.
a. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his/her designee of the
Township, or an appropriate member of the Department of Police, to
notify the parent of every child convicted of a juvenile offense, which
offense shall have been committed within the jurisdiction of the
Township, placing that parent upon notice of the potential liability of
such parent for the further unlawful acts of his or her juvenile(s). The
notice shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a copy of this
section.
§ 10-14.4 EDISON CODE § 10-15.2
AO:310
§ 10-15.3. Remedies and Penalties Not Exclusive. [1999 Code
§ 9.32.030]
The remedies and penalties provided elsewhere in this section shall not be
exclusive, nor shall they conflict with any of the laws of the State of New
Jersey, it being the express intention of this section that the penalty and
remedies set forth herein shall be cumulative and in addition to any other
penalties and remedies set forth in the statutory laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 10-15.4. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.32.040]
Any parent who shall be convicted of violating the terms of this section in
the Municipal Court of the Township shall be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 10-16. (RESERVED)
§ 10-17. USE OF MOBILE TELEPHONES IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 10-17.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 10.06.010]
As used in this section:
MOBILE TELEPHONE — Means and includes but not limited to cellular,
analog, wireless and digital telephones.
PARK — Means for an automatic transmission vehicle that the vehicle is in
the park gear, for a standard transmission that the vehicle is in the neutral
gear and the brake is being utilized or the vehicle is otherwise stationary.
USE — Means to use a mobile telephone in dialing; answering; talking;
listening.
§ 10-17.2. Purpose. [1999 Code § 10.06.020]
It is the purpose of this section and the policy of the Municipality to
regulate the use of mobile telephones by persons operating motor vehicles
in order to protect other persons within the Municipality. This section shall
be liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes and policy.
§ 10-17.3. Use Restrictions. [1999 Code § 10.06.040]
Editor's Note: See also N.J.S.A. 39:4-97.3.
b. Upon a second conviction of any juvenile or minor, and after due notice
as prescribed herein, there shall arise a rebuttable presumption that
the juvenile's parent(s) has failed to exercise parental responsibility,
control and supervision of such juvenile delinquent, and for such
conduct the parent(s) shall be charged with a violation of this section
within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the Township.
§ 10-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-17.3
AO:311
§ 10-17.4. Penalties. [1999 Code § 10.06.050]
Violations of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars.
§ 10-17.5. Additional Penalties. [1999 Code § 10.04.030]
Any person who is convicted of a moving violation under the motor vehicle
laws of the State of New Jersey, Title 39, or operates a motor vehicle
which is involved in an automobile accident, who is also found to have
been operating a hand-held cellular telephone during the commission of
said moving violation or automobile accident shall be subject to a penalty
of up to two hundred ($200.00) dollars. The imposition of said penalty shall
be separate and in addition to any punishment or penalty imposed for the
violation of the motor vehicle laws.
§ 10-18. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 10-18.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 9.28.010; Ord. No.
O.1710-2009§ 1; Ord. No. O.1940-2016]
a. Restrictions. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street or
highway while engaging in any conduct defined as the "use" of a mobile
telephone unless the operator is using a mobile telephone with "handsfree"
technology for dialing, answering, talking and listening.
b. Permitted Uses. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to
the contrary, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of
mobile telephones by:
1. Any law enforcement, public safety or Police Officers, emergency
management officials, first aid, emergency medical technicians and
personnel, and fire safety officers in the performance of duties
arising out of and in the course of their employment as such.
2. A person who is using the mobile telephone to contact public safety
forces; or
3. That while maintaining the vehicle in the parked position either on
public or private property, or with a "hands free device" which
allows the operator to maintain both hands on the applicable
steering device while using the mobile phone.
a. In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7,
the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about January 1, 1984,
as amended on July 6, 2016 by the Township Engineer, is approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas
within the Municipality of property which is used for school purposes
and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board and of the areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet
of such school property.
§ 10-17.3 EDISON CODE § 10-18.1
AO:312
§ 10-18.2. Maps to Be Official Record. [1999 Code § 9.28.020]
The Drug-Free School Zone Map and Drug Zone Radius Map, approved
and adopted pursuant to subsection 10-18.1 shall continue to constitute an
official finding and record as to:
§ 10-18.3. Notification of Officials. [1999 Code § 9.28.030]
In the case of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school and which is used for school purposes, or any property
which comprises a public park, public housing facility or public library or
museum, the following are hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Director of
Law.
b. In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.l,
the Drug Zone Radius Map, produced on or about September 1, 1998,
as amended on July 6, 2016, by the Township Engineer is approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas
within the Municipality of property which comprises a public park,
public housing facility, or public library or museum, and of the areas on
or within five hundred (500) feet of such public park, public housing
facility, or public library or museum.
a. The location and boundaries of areas on or within one thousand (1,000)
feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board which is used for school purposes;
b. The location and boundaries of areas on or within five hundred (500)
feet of property comprising a public park, public housing facility, public
library or museum, until such time, if any, that this section shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location of school property, public parks, public housing facilities, or
public libraries and museums, and drug-free zones.
a. The School Board for all public school property;
b. Chief administrative officer for any private or parochial schools;
c. The Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation for any public
parks;
d. The Board of Trustees of the Free Public Library for the public libraries
of the Township;
e. The Edison Housing Authority for any properties comprising public
housing facilities.
§ 10-18.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-18.4
AO:313
§ 10-18.4. Filing of Maps. [1999 Code § 9.28.040]
The Municipal Clerk of the Township, is directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the maps approved and adopted pursuant to subsection
10-18.1 and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the maps approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is further directed that a true copy
of such maps and of this section shall be provided without cost to the Clerk
of Middlesex County and to the offices of the Middlesex County Prosecutor.
§ 10-18.5. Findings and Determinations. [1999 Code § 9.28.050]
The following additional matters are determined, declared, recited and
restated:
a. It is understood that the maps, which were approved and adopted
pursuant to subsection 10-18.1 were prepared and are intended to be
used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this
State, and that pursuant to State law, such maps shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes;
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within one
thousand (1,000) feet of such school property;
5. The location of public housing facilities, public parks, and public
libraries or museums within the Municipality;
6. That such property comprises and continues to comprise of public
housing facilities, public parks and public library or museums;
7. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within five
hundred (500) feet of such public housing facility, public park or
public library or museum.
b. 1. All of the property depicted on the Drug-Free School Zone Map
approved and adopted herein as school property was owned by a
school or school board and was being used for school purposes as
of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7
2. All of the property depicted on the Drug-Zone Radius Map
approved and adopted herein as property comprised of a public
housing facility, public park, or public library or museum, was used
§ 10-18.4 EDISON CODE § 10-18.5
AO:314
§ 10-19. (RESERVED)
§ 10-20. WEAPONS.
§ 10-20.1. Discharge of Firearms Restricted. [1999 Code § 9.36.010]
The discharge of any firearms, crossbow, slingshot, air gun, spring gun, gas
gun or weapon of any other kind, nature and description shall be and hereby
is prohibited except upon a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range and under
the supervision of the Police Department of the Township.
§ 10-20.2. Exception as to Peace Officers. [1999 Code § 9.36.020]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the members of the Edison
Township Police Department nor to any other duly appointed governmental
law enforcing officer while acting in the line of duty.
§ 10-20.3. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.36.030]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be liable for the penalty stated in Chapter I,
Section 1-5.
§ 10-21. BICYCLES.
§ 10-21.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 10.44.010]
As used in this section:
for such purposes on January 8, 1998, that being the effective date
of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the ones approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 10-18.1. The failure of the maps
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, or which
comprises a public housing facility, public park or public library or
museum, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not used for school purposes, public
housing facilities, public parks or public libraries or museums.
d. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone and
Drug Zone Radius Map, respectively, have been complied with.
§ 10-18.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-21.1
AO:315
BICYCLE — Means a vehicle propelled solely by human power through a
chain belt or gears that has at least one (1) wheel more than fourteen (14)
inches in diameter.
EARPHONES — Means any headset, radio, tape player, or other similar
device which is designed to provide the listener with radio programs, music,
or other recorded information through a device which covers all or a portion
of both ears.
LANE — Means the portion of roadway used for the movement of a single
line of vehicles. Unless otherwise indicated by traffic control devices every
undivided roadway on which lanes are not marked or on which the only
pavement marking is a centerline shall be deemed to be a two-lane street
with one (1) lane open for vehicular travel in each direction separated
by the centerline. The marked or unmarked portion of a street on which
parking is permitted is not a separate lane for vehicular travel but is a
parking lane.
PATH — Means a way publicly maintained that has been designated for use
by bicycles only or by bicycles and pedestrians by a traffic control device or
other sign or by regulation and that is separated from the roadway for other
vehicular traffic by open space, a curb or another barrier.
SAFE, SAFELY and IN SAFETY — Means: a. without hazard to person
or property; b. without in any way interfering with, impeding, hindering,
obstructing or taking the right-of-way from any other vehicle or pedestrian;
c. in an attentive, careful, and prudent manner; and d. at a speed such that
recovery from errors in judgment is possible.
§ 10-21.2. Application of Traffic Laws to Bicycles. [1999 Code
§ 10.44.020]
Every person driving a bicycle has all of the rights and duties applicable to
the driver of any other vehicle under this title except as modified by this
section.
§ 10-21.3. Required Method of Riding Bicycle. [1999 Code
§ 10.44.030]
§ 10-21.4. Carrying Articles Restricted. [1999 Code § 10.44.040]
Every person driving a bicycle shall keep at least one (1) hand on the
handlebars at all times and shall not carry any package, bundle or article
a. No person driving a bicycle shall ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.
b. No bicycle shall be used by either the driver or any passenger to carry
more persons than the number for which it is designed or equipped.
c. An adult riding on a bicycle may carry a child securely attached to the
person in a backpack or sling.
§ 10-21.1 EDISON CODE § 10-21.4
AO:316
that obstructs the driver's vision or prevents the use of both hands in the
control and operation of the bicycle.
§ 10-21.5. Bicycle to Be Driven to Right. [1999 Code § 10.44.050]
Every person driving a bicycle upon a roadway at a speed so slow as
to impede or block the normal and legal forward movement of traffic
proceeding immediately behind such bicycle shall drive within the right four
(4) feet of the right-hand through lane of the roadway, except under any of
the following conditions:
§ 10-21.6. Bicycle in Crosswalk. [1999 Code § 10.44.060]
Persons driving bicycles across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk
from a sidewalk or path have all the duties applicable to pedestrians under
the same circumstances and similarly have such rights, but only if the
approach and entry into the roadway are made at a speed no greater than
an ordinary walk so that other drivers may anticipate the necessity to yield
when required.
§ 10-21.7. Driving More Than Two (2) Abreast on Path Prohibited.
[1999 Code § 10.44.070]
No person shall drive a bicycle upon a path adjacent to more than one (1)
other bicycle.
§ 10-21.8. Left Turns by Bicycles. [1999 Code § 10.44.080]
a. When driving in a bike lane;
b. When preparing for a left turn;
c. When reasonably necessary for safety because of debris or other
obstruction on or a defect in the surface of the pavement, but the
bicyclist shall continue to drive as close to the right side of the roadway
as is practicable;
d. When overtaking and passing on the left of another vehicle; and
e. On a one-way street, when driving in the left four (4) feet of the lefthand
through lane.
A bicycle may be driven on a paved shoulder if such driving does not
violate any section of this chapter for passing or direction of travel.
a. The driver of a bicycle turning left may approach the turn anywhere
within any separate left turn lane and may finish the turn by moving to
the right lane as soon as it can be done in safety.
b. In addition to any other method specified in this chapter, the driver of a
bicycle may make a left turn by crossing the intersection as close as
practicable to the right-hand curbline to the far curb and then turning
left to proceed in the proper position on the other roadway.
§ 10-21.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-21.9
AO:317
§ 10-21.9. Bicycle Turn Signals. [1999 Code § 10.44.090]
The driver of a bicycle is excepted from giving the hand and arm signal
continuously if the hand is needed in the control or operation of the bicycle,
but it shall be given for a substantial period while stopped waiting to turn.
The driver of a bicycle may signal a right turn by extending the right hand
and arm horizontally.
§ 10-21.10. Right-of-Way; Traffic Control Devices. [1999 Code
§ 10.44.100]
§ 10-21.11. Driving Bicycle on Sidewalk Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 10.44.110]
§ 10-21.12. Bicycle Headlight and Reflector Required. [1999 Code
§ 10.44.120]
§ 10-21.13. Bicycle Brake Required. [1999 Code § 10.44.130]
No person shall drive a bicycle unless it is equipped with a brake system
which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle within twenty-five (25) feet
from a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement.
a. A person driving a bicycle on a sidewalk, a crosswalk, or a path shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing any pedestrian.
b. If any traffic control device is in place alongside of or on a sidewalk or a
path, no driver of a bicycle or pedestrian shall fail to obey the
requirements of the device.
a. No person shall drive a bicycle or use a skateboard, rollerblade, or
rollerski upon and along a sidewalk except upon sidewalks designated
as paths.
b. No person shall drive a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk where such
use is prohibited by a traffic control device.
a. No person shall drive a bicycle between sunset and sunrise unless it is
equipped with a red rear reflector mounted on the bicycle so located
and or sufficient size and reflectivity to be visible for five hundred (500)
feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle.
b. No person shall drive a bicycle between sunset and sunrise or at any
other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric
conditions, persons and vehicles are not clearly discernible at a
distance of one thousand (1,000) feet ahead, unless it is equipped with a
lamp mounted on the front of the bicycle and emitting a white light
visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front.
§ 10-21.9 EDISON CODE § 10-21.14
AO:318
§ 10-21.14. Pedestrian or Bicyclist Entering Roadway. [1999 Code
§ 10.44.140]
No pedestrian or bicyclist shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk, run, or drive into the path of a moving vehicle that is both
so close as to constitute an immediate hazard and is not required to stop or
yield by a traffic control sign or signal.
§ 10-21.15. Bicycle Racing Prohibited. [1999 Code § 10.44.150]
No person shall engage with another bicyclist or person driving any other
vehicle in any bicycle race, speed, or acceleration contest, or exhibition of
speed or acceleration on a street, a sidewalk or a path except as authorized
by the Municipality through an approved and coordinated event specifically
permitting controlled, organized and safe bicycle racing and/or similar
activity.
§ 10-21.16. Bicycle Parking. [1999 Code § 10.44.160]
§ 10-21.17. Use of Earphones Prohibited. [1999 Code § 10.44.170]
No person shall drive a vehicle while wearing earphones.
§ 10-21.18. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 10.44.180]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this section,
or any supplement to, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
to exceed two hundred ($200.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten (10) days, or both at the discretion of the court.
§ 10-22. VEHICLE PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
a. No person shall park a bicycle in such a way as to:
1. Cause an obstruction to or impede the flow of traffic or of
pedestrians on public or private sidewalks;
2. Hinder or restrict access to handrails or ramps;
3. Lock the bicycle to a tree or fire hydrant;
4. Park on a roadway except in an area designated for bicycle parking;
or
5. Leave the bicycle locked to a pole or post owned or leased by a
public authority.
b. Persons stopping or parking bicycles shall obey all the provisions of this
chapter regulating those activities on roadways, but are exempt from
other provisions of this chapter unless specifically mentioned,
notwithstanding their status as vehicles.
§ 10-21.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-22.1
AO:319
§ 10-22.1. Parking of Certain Vehicles Prohibited During Certain
Hours in Residential Zones. [1999 Code § 10.08.060]
No omnibus, motor home, house trailer, camping trailer, boat trailer, utility
trailer, construction equipment shall be parked on any street in any
residential zone within the Township between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., regardless of their weight.
Editor's Note: See also Traffic, Chapter VII.
§ 10-22.2. Certain Acts Prohibited While Parked on Streets or in
Municipal Lots. [1999 Code § 10.08.025]
No person shall park any vehicle at any time upon any street or municipal
parking lot for the purpose of:
§ 10-23. ABANDONED VEHICLES, VEHICLE IMPOUND AND
IMPOUND YARD.
§ 10-23.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 10.36.010; Ord. No.
O.1709-2009§ I]
As used in this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Means a vehicle which is left or has remained on
or along any highway, other than a limited access highway, or other public
property or on private property without the consent of the owner or other
person in charge of the private property. A vehicle which has remained
on or along any highway or other public property or on private property
without such consent for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours or
for any period without current license plates shall be considered to be an
abandoned motor vehicle.
IMPOUND — Means any vehicle or property taken into police custody
PERSON — Means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind or description.
PROPERTY — Means any real property within the Township which is not on
a public street or highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — Means the entire width between the curbs or
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
a. Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
b. Cleaning, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 10-22.1 EDISON CODE § 10-23.2
AO:320
§ 10-23.2. Abandonment Unlawful. [1999 Code § 10.36.020; Ord.
No. O.1709-2009§ I]
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Township, and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Township for such period of
time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably
appear to have been abandoned. The abandonment of any such vehicle is in
direct violation of this section.
§ 10-23.3. Abandoned Vehicles on Streets or Private Property;
Exceptions; Removal. [1999 Code § 10.36.030; Ord. No.
O.1709-2009§ I]
§ 10-23.4. Township of Edison to Maintain Impoundment
Equipment. [1999 Code § 10.36.040; Ord. No. O.17092009 § I]
The Township of Edison shall maintain a vehicle known as a "wrecker."
This vehicle shall be capable of picking up and moving vehicles within
the confines of the Edison Township Division of Police impound yard. The
wrecker shall be used to move and place vehicles within the impound yard
and/or any other location deemed necessary by the police department, in
order to support the safe and efficient operation of the Edison Division of
Police's impound yard.
a. The only exceptions to the maximum forty-eight (48) hour period in
which a vehicle may remain stationary in excess of forty-eight (48)
hours and, as a result, not be considered an abandoned vehicle, is when
(i) the vehicle is awaiting or undergoing repair at a garage or place of
business actually and actively engaged in the business of repairing
vehicles or (ii) if the vehicle is enclosed in a garage, warehouse or other
suitable building or on the premises of a private residence where the
lawful owner of that vehicle is actively engaged in the repair of his or
her own vehicle on property either owned or leased by the owner of the
vehicle or in which the person resides or is actively employed or (iii)
The vehicle is used or is to be used in the construction, operation or
maintenance of a public utility facility and which is left in a manner
which does not interfere with the normal movement of traffic.
b. Any vehicle considered to be abandoned shall be removed to the Edison
Township's Division of Police's Impound Lot by the Township's towing
contractor. Fees shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
XI, Section 11-28, Towing Regulations. In addition, the Township shall
charge the owner of any abandoned vehicle an administrative fee of
thirty-five ($35.00) dollars for the release of said vehicle.
c. When overnight security is deemed necessary to guard a vehicle which
may pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public and the
security deemed necessary is beyond that normally provided, an
additional charge of fifty ($50.00) dollars per hour may be charged,
provided that the maximum security charge shall not exceed two
hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars per night.
§ 10-23.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-23.5
AO:321
§ 10-23.5. Impounding Procedures. [1999 Code § 10.36.050; Ord.
No. O.1709-2009§ I]
§ 10-23.6. Disposition of Impounded Vehicles. [Ord. No.
O.1709-2009§ I]
a. The Department of Edison Division of Police shall cause to be created
an impoundment area or areas to hold the vehicles removed by it until
they can be disposed of in accordance with applicable statutes of the
State of New Jersey. A cyclone fence shall enclose the aforesaid
impounding area or areas or fencing of any other suitable character so
as to reasonably preclude theft, pilferage or further damage to such
abandoned vehicles.
b. Inasmuch as the bailment of impounded vehicles is for the sole benefit
of the public at large, absolutely no liability shall attach to or evolve
upon the Township to owners or prior owners of such vehicles, or
anyone else.
a. An employee in the Township of Edison Division of Police shall be
assigned to investigate the last title owner of the junked or abandoned
vehicle to attempt to uncover the person responsible for the
abandonment of each vehicle and to prosecute all culpable persons for
any violation of the State Motor Vehicle Act or this section. The Edison
Division of Police shall be responsible, in accordance with the
applicable State Statutes, for the sale or disposition of the impounded
vehicles N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et al. hereinafter referred to as the "Claiming
Abandoned Vehicles Act."
b. At any time prior to sale the owner or other person entitled thereto may
reclaim possession of the motor vehicle upon payment of the reasonable
costs of removal and storage of the vehicle and any fine or penalty and
court costs against him for a violation which gave rise to the seizure or
taking possession of such vehicle.
c. The Township of Edison Division of Police shall, at its sole judgment and
uncontrolled discretion, arrange for public sale of any vehicle which,
has been the subject of impoundment or when the owner has failed to
receive it. Such public sale shall be in accordance with the Claiming
Abandoned Vehicles Act.
d. The Township of Edison will not sell any vehicle without having first
received the proper authorization for the sale as required by the Motor
Vehicle Commission in accordance with the Claiming Abandoned
Vehicles Act.
e. The proceeds from the sale of each vehicle shall be applied to the
payment of any towing and storage charges due to the appropriate
official tower pertaining to the vehicle sold. Any surplus funds per each
vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with the Claiming Abandoned
Vehicles Act. If the proceeds from such sale of a vehicle are insufficient
§ 10-23.5 EDISON CODE § 10-23.6
AO:322
§ 10-23.7. Abandoned Vehicles on Private Property. [1999 Code
§ 10.36.070; Ord. No. O.1709-2009§ I]
Whenever any junked, wrecked or abandoned vehicle is found on private
property, any private citizen, Health Officer, member of the Division of
Police or Division of Fire or employee of the Zoning Office may cause the
Zoning Officer to issue a five-day notice to the assessed owner of the private
property to have the junked, wrecked or abandoned vehicle removed from
the property in question by private means. If, after five (5) days' notice, the
assessed owner of the property fails to have the offensive vehicle removed, a
complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court for violation of this section.
§ 10-23.8. Violations; Penalties. [N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5; Ord. No.
O.1709-2009§ I]
Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject for
the first offense to a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars
nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars and his license or driving
privilege may be suspended or revoked for not more than two (2) years. For
any subsequent violation he shall be subject to a fine of not less than five
hundred ($500.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars
and his license or driving privilege be suspended or revoked for a period of
not more than five (5) years.
§ 10-24. INTERNET-BASED TRANSACTIONS. [Ord. No.
O.1971-2017]
The Township of Edison hereby establishes an "Online Exchange Zone"
for conducting in-person private transactions which involve a Township
resident, which has been facilitated through online marketplaces, to be
located in the lobby of the Township Public Safety Complex, twenty-four
(24) hours a day, seven (7) days per week.
to pay the accrued towing or service charges for that vehicle, the
official tower agrees that there shall be no farther liability of the
Township of Edison to pay same and any excess amounts which may be
due shall be waived.
a. The sale or transfer of items at the Township Public Safety Complex
shall be legal items only;
b. Private exchange of motor vehicles and/or weapons shall not be
permitted;
c. The Township will not provide police personnel or staff to witness any
transaction, but the proximity of video surveillance and police
personnel is meant to increase the public's peace of mind when
engaging in such transactions with unfamiliar individuals in the Online
Exchange Zone;
§ 10-23.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24
AO:323
Chapter 11
GENERAL LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: See Chapter 12, Health Regulations and Licensing, for
licenses requiring approval of the Department of Health.
§ 11-1. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS; TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND
RETAIL BUSINESSES.
§ 11-1.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.40.010]
As used in this section:
ACTUAL AND BONA FIDE EXHIBITION AND/OR SALE (as used in the
definitions "TRANSIENT MERCHANT" or "ITINERANT VENDOR" and
"NEW BUSINESS") — Means the operation of the business at a building,
structure, site or other premises, containing a sign or other designation of
the business located therein, stock-in-trade available for immediate sale,
furnishings and equipment for the usual and ordinary conduct of business
and being open at regular intervals for the transaction of business.
CHIEF — Means the Chief of the Edison Division of Police.
DAYS — Means business days of the Township.
DIRECTOR — Means the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
PEDDLER — Means a person, commonly referred to either as a "peddler" or
"hawker," who goes from place to place by traveling on the streets or from
house to house and carries with him or her goods, wares and merchandise
and any other commodity for the purpose of selling and delivering them to
d. The Township makes no guarantees, assurances or promises with
respect to the condition or authenticity of any items exchanged
between private parties, or as to the safety or security of any in-person
transactions that may take place on Township property;
e. While it is the Township's intent that the Township Public Safety
Complex lobby be available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days
per week for the exchange of legal items, the Township makes non
guarantees, assurances or promises as to availability of the Online
Exchange Zone at any particular date or time;
f. The Township encourages all persons to bring a cell phone in case of
emergency, to notify friends and/or family of the intention to meet to
conduct such a transaction, and to reconsider any transaction with
someone who refuses to meet at the Township Public Safety Complex
lobby;
g. Any individual in violation of this section shall be subject to the general
penalties established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Township Code of
General Ordinances, and/or any other State or Federal law(s), as
applicable.
§ 10-24 EDISON CODE § 11-1.1
AO:324
consumers. Included in the foregoing definition are order takers, purveyors
of subscriptions for newspapers, periodicals, magazines, books and the like
and any and all other such persons who seek sales or orders for services,
goods, chattels or merchandise of any kind or description covering those
peddlers that are commonly known as "door-to-door solicitors."
PERSON — Means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, incorporated association and principal or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Means a person, whether a resident of the
Township or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motortruck
or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house
or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of
books, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever
for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or perform in the future,
whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the
subject of the sale, with or without accepting an advance payment for the
goods. The term "solicitor" shall also include any person who may be taking
a poll or a survey for commercial purposes from house to house or on the
streets.
SUPERVISOR — Means the Supervisor of Licenses and Permits of the
Township.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR — Means a person who
engages in the merchandising business in the Township with intent to close
out or discontinue such business within a period of one (1) year from the
date of commencement, and, for that purpose, hires, leases or occupies any
building, structure, room, tent, lot, railroad car or any other premises for
the actual and bona fide exhibition and/or sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise and other commodities.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT-PEDDLER — Means a person who engages in the
business of a transient merchant or itinerant vendor and, in pursuance
thereof, becomes a peddler or hires a peddler as defined herein.
WITH INTENT TO CLOSE OUT OR DISCONTINUE SUCH BUSINESS —
Means the operation of the business at one address; but the removal of
a business from one address to another shall not be deemed to be the
closing out of the business; and the opening of a new business shall not
be considered to mean the continuance of the same enterprise at another
address.
§ 11-1.2. Purpose. [1999 Code § 5.40.020]
The purpose of this section is to:
a. Deter the use of soliciting, canvassing and peddling to gain access to
homes for criminal purposes;
b. Maintain quiet and privacy for the residents of the Township;
c. Discourage unethical and dishonest business practices within the
Township;
§ 11-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.2
AO:325
§ 11-1.3. License Required; Badge; Investigation; Hours of
Operation. [1999 Code § 5.40.030; Ord. No. O.2009-2018]
d. Regulate all peddlers, transient merchants, itinerant vendors, transient
merchant peddlers, solicitors and door-to-door solicitors as enumerated
under subsection 11-1.1.
a. It is unlawful for any peddler, transient merchant, transient merchant
peddler, merchant peddler, canvasser, door-to-door solicitor, as
hereinbefore defined, or the persons owning, managing or operating a
new business to sell or offer for sale or dispose of any goods, wares,
merchandise or other commodities, or a service within the Township,
without first having obtained a license, as described hereinafter, for
identification purposes and without complying with the other provisions
of this section in the case of new businesses.
b. The license shall be of a kind known as an identification badge with a
provision for the insertion of a photograph one and one-half by two (1 1/
2 x 2) inches in size. Two (2) photographs of this size shall be provided
by the applicant-licensee, and there shall be a deposit of two ($2.00)
dollars to cover the cost of this badge, which deposit shall be returned
upon the return of the badge and forfeited, if the badge is not returned.
c. There shall be an investigation fee paid to the Township prior to the
issuance of the license to cover the cost of an investigation of the
applicant by the Police Department, to ascertain the honesty and
reliability of the applicant. Fingerprinting may be required as an
investigative tool, however, if the applicant provides proof that his or
her fingerprints are currently on file with any other municipality in the
State, or if in the alternative the applicant has appropriate documented
proof of a fingerprint clearance in another municipality, no more than
thirty (30) days prior to the application in the Township, then that shall
suffice as fingerprint clearance, provided that the clearance has been
verified through the State Police and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
d. The maximum waiting period to complete the investigative procedures
for any applicant shall be seven (7) days from the date of the
application. In instances of a renewal of a license, or where the
applicant has a fingerprint clearance dated not more than thirty (30)
days prior to the application, the waiting period shall be a maximum of
twenty-four (24) hours.
e. The applicant shall present, at the time of his or her application, in
addition to the photograph required for his or her identification badge,
a written statement relating to his or her past history of arrests or
convictions anywhere in the United States. All of the time periods
mentioned in this section shall not commence until the photograph and
the history of arrests and convictions, as well as the completion of the
application, are in the hands of the Township.
§ 11-1.2 EDISON CODE § 11-1.3
AO:326
§ 11-1.4. Exemptions from License Fee Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 5.40.040]
The following persons are exempt from the payment of a license fee, badge
requirements and, in the discretion of the Chief, the investigation
procedures, upon compliance with all other provisions of this section and
submission of applicable identification and documents to support their
claim to exemption:
f. Any person holding a peddler's or solicitor's license issued by the Chief
of Police under the authority of this article, or by the Clerk of the
County of Middlesex under the authority of N.J.S.A. 45:24-10, shall be
required to wear the identification badge on the lapel or somewhere on
the chest of the outermost garment being worn by such solicitor at all
times that he or she is conducting his business from door to door within
the corporate limits of the Township. The licensee shall produce such
license at the request of any official of the Township or at the request of
any person with whom he/she wishes to conduct business.
g. Each licensee shall restrict his/her peddling or soliciting activities
within the Township to the hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
from April 15 to October 15 and 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from October
16 to April 14, prevailing time, on Mondays through Saturdays and shall
notify the police officer on duty at least once in every week in which he/
she plans to conduct his/her activities. Such notification shall include a
statement of the general area of the Township in which the licensee
intends to conduct such activities and a schedule of dates and times
when such activities shall be conducted. The licensee shall notify the
police officer on duty of any change in area or in dates or times should
such changes be made during the week.
h. Where an applicant has previously been licensed pursuant to this
section, the investigation fee in paragraph c above may be waived in the
discretion of the Chief who must then make a determination that the
applicant is bona fide. Upon making such a determination the Chief
shall approve the application and notify the Supervisor.
a. Any charitable or religious organization or society, which is recognized
as tax exempt under the United States Internal Revenue Code, that
shall conduct sales of personal property where the proceeds thereof
shall be applied to the payment of the expenses thereof and to the
charitable or religious object for which the society exists. Satisfactory
proof of such tax exemption must be provided by the applicant;
b. Any person honorably discharged from the military services of the
United States, possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity with
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and N.J.S.A. 45:24-10;
c. Any person who is an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire department as
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and N.J.S.A. 45:24-10, possessing a license
in conformity with said law;
§ 11-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.4
AO:327
§ 11-1.5. Investigations and Approval of Persons Exempt from
License Fee Requirements. [1999 Code § 5.40.050; Ord. No.
O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
The investigation required by subsection 11-1.3 shall be limited to that
sufficient for the Chief of Police or his/her designee to make a determination
that the person or organization is bona fide. Upon making such a
determination, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall approve the
application and notify the Supervisor.
§ 11-1.6. Application for and Issuance of License. [1999 Code
§ 5.40.060]
d. Any public utility or its employees, which said public utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, that such employees shall display the identification
badge or card issued by their employer;
e. Any person selling fruits and farm products grown by himself or herself,
with or without the help of others;
f. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or
other articles or things, in the regular course of business, to the
premises of persons who had previously ordered the same or were
entitled to receive the same by reason of a prior agreement;
g. Wholesale salespeople calling on businesses;
h. Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to Federal,
State or local laws;
i. Any school, political or civic organization, benevolent society, service
club or organization, not for profit, which is located in the Township or
has a majority of its membership from the Township;
j. Any person who has obtained a charitable solicitor's permit.
a. All applications for licenses referred to herein shall first be made by
filing with the Supervisor an application blank which shall contain the
following information:
1. The name and social security number of the applicant and, in the
case of peddlers and solicitors, photographs and fingerprints;
2. The permanent home residence;
3. The name and addresses of the firm represented, the names and
addresses of the persons from whom goods making up the stock
were or are to be purchased;
4. Three (3) business references located in Middlesex County, New
Jersey, or, in lieu thereof, such evidence of good character and
business and responsibility of the applicant as will enable proper
§ 11-1.4 EDISON CODE § 11-1.6
AO:328
§ 11-1.7. Investigation of Applicant; Issuance or Denial of License.
[1999 Code § 5.40.070; Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No.
O.1722-2009]
evaluation of the applicant's character and responsibility by a
police investigator;
5. The place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding
three (3) years;
6. A description of the wares to be offered for sale, including an
approximate value and quantity of the personal property to be
exposed for sale in the Township;
7. The number of arrests, charges or convictions for misdemeanors or
crimes, the nature thereof and the disposition of said charges;
8. Where the applicant is to be employed by someone else, a letter
from the employer authorizing the applicant to act as its
representative;
9. In the case of an application for transient merchant-peddler
license, the names and addresses of each peddler and the place
where the business is to be carried on from;
10. The length of time for which the license is desired;
11. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle and its
license number, registration and insurance certification;
12. Two (2) photographs of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of the application, which photograph
shall clearly show the head and shoulders of the applicant and shall
measure one and one-half by two (1 1/2 x 2) inches.
b. The license issued shall not authorize any person except the designated
person named in such license to engage in business thereunder, and a
separate license must be obtained for every branch established or
separate place of business maintained; and each license issued shall
authorize the licensee obtaining it to conduct the business therein at
the location or place of business indicated thereon.
a. When the application is properly filled out and signed by the applicant,
the original and duplicate thereof shall be filed with the Supervisor. The
Supervisor shall refer the original to the Chief of Police or his/her
designee, who shall make or cause to be made within the time
limitations herein prescribed, such investigation of the applicant's
business responsibility and character as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public good.
1. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee shall endorse on such application his or
§ 11-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.7
AO:329
§ 11-1.8. Revocation of License. [1999 Code § 5.40.080]
her disapproval and his or her reasons therefor and shall return
the application to the supervisor. Any determination by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee that an application is unsatisfactory shall
be based on one (1) or more of the following findings with respect
to the applicant:
(a) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(b) Prior violation of an ordinance or law pertaining to solicitors
and canvassers;
(c) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct;
(d) Record of breaches of solicited contracts;
(e) Concrete evidence of bad character.
2. In the absence of any such finding, the Chief of Police or his/her
designee shall find the application satisfactory, shall endorse his or
her approval on the application and shall return the application to
the Supervisor.
b. If an application is found unsatisfactory by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee and he or she has endorsed his or her disapproval upon the
application, the Supervisor shall notify the applicant by mail that the
application is disapproved and shall deny the applicant a license. If an
application is found satisfactory by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee, the Supervisor shall issue a license.
a. Licenses issued under provisions of this section may be revoked by the
Director after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for license;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his or her business as peddler, huckster, vendor,
solicitor, itinerant vendor or commercial traveler;
3. Any violation of this section;
4. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
5. Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
b. The Supervisor, upon receiving information providing reasonable cause
to believe that the holder of any license issued hereunder has violated
any provision of this section or has been convicted of any violation
referred to in this section or has been indicted or charged with or for
§ 11-1.7 EDISON CODE § 11-1.8
AO:330
§ 11-1.9. Appeals. [1999 Code § 5.40.090; Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7;
Ord. No. O.1722-2009§ 2]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or his/her designee
in the denial of a certificate, as provided in this section, shall have the
right of appeal to the Director of Public Safety. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing with the Chief of Police or his/her designee within fourteen (14)
days after the notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such
person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for the appeal. The Director shall set a time and place for hearing
on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant
in the same manner as provided in this section for notice of hearing and
revocation. The decision of the Director of Public Safety on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive.
§ 11-1.10. Prohibited Conduct. [1999 Code § 5.40.100]
No person or license holder shall:
any crime or offense, or has been convicted of any crime or offense, may
forthwith temporarily suspend such license until a hearing is held by
the Director of Public Safety as provided herein, and the Director shall
have issued a determination thereon.
c. Notice of a hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, certified mail, return
receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
d. If the licensee has one (1) or more employees, the revocation hereunder
shall apply to the licensee and all employees determined to be in
violation of this section.
e. Upon revocation, the license shall be surrendered to the Director of
Public Safety or his or her designee.
a. Peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise except between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever occurs earlier, unless
specifically having been invited to a dwelling by an occupant thereof or
having previously made an appointment with an occupant;
b. Attempt to peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise or printed material
without first having identified himself or herself as a peddler, solicitor
or distributor registered with the Township and displaying his or her
certificate;
c. Have exclusive right to any location in the public streets or operate in
any congested area in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic or
of pedestrians or create a breach of the peace;
§ 11-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.10
AO:331
§ 11-1.11. Possession of License; Display. [1999 Code § 5.40.110]
Every person holding a license under this section shall be required to carry
the license with him or her or at his or her business premises while engaged
in the business licensed. He or she must produce the license upon the
request of any interested person.
§ 11-1.12. License Fees. [1999 Code § 5.40.120]
Nonrefundable license fees shall be ten ($10.00) dollars. No application
shall be processed unless accompanied by the license fee along with a fee
to defray the police investigation fee of twenty-six ($26.00) dollars, unless
this fee has been waived pursuant to paragraph c, subsection 11-1.3, and
a refundable deposit for the identification badge as provided in subsection
11-1.3.
License Type Fee
a. Solicitor (90 days) $100.00
b. Itinerant vendor ($50.00 per day/1 month maximum) $100.00
c. Itinerant vendor (Xmas/1 month maximum) $500.00
§ 11-1.13. Time Limit. [1999 Code § 5.40.130]
No license may grant the right to solicit for a period longer than ninety (90)
consecutive days.
d. Stand, hawk, peddle or solicit on the premises of any business
establishment, shopping center or mall without the written consent of
the owner or individual agency or organization responsible for the
management and/or operation of the same;
e. Enter or attempt to enter the land of any resident in the Township
where such resident has posted a notice prohibiting such entry;
f. Refuse to leave any private dwelling or property after having been once
requested to do so by the owner or occupant thereof;
g. Shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any soundmaking or
amplifying device upon any of the streets, parks or public places of the
Township or upon private premises where sound of sufficient volume is
emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard
upon private premises, for the purpose of attracting attention to any
merchandise or services, without first obtaining written authorization
for the same from the appropriate Township official;
h. Litter the streets, public places or public or private properties within
the Township with any merchandise or printed material.
§ 11-1.10 EDISON CODE § 11-1.14
AO:332
§ 11-1.14. Conflict with Other Laws. [1999 Code § 5.40.140]
In any case where the provisions of this Code impose a higher standard than
set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or under the laws of the
State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail,
but if the provisions of this Code impose a lower standard than any other
ordinance of the Township or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the
higher standard contained in any such other ordinance or laws shall prevail.
§ 11-1.15. Effect on Other Provisions. [1999 Code § 5.40.150]
No license or permit or other certification or compliance with this Code
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other local ordinance
applicable to any structure or premises or use of such structure or
premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner, operator, tenant
or occupant from complying with any such other provision or any official of
the Township from enforcing any such other provision.
§ 11-1.16. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.40.160]
§ 11-1.17. No Knock List. [1999 Code § 5.40.180]
The Division of Licenses and Permits shall maintain a "No Knock List" a
copy of which shall be provided to all persons or organizations required to
register pursuant to subsection 11-1.3 in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, the Division of Licenses and Permits shall charge a fee for
copy of the "No Knock List." All residents of the Township may register their
name, address and/or unit/apartment number with the Division of Licenses
and Permits to be placed on the "No Knock List," indicating that they do not
want persons so registered to approach their homes and/or seek personal
contact with the occupants of the registered home. It shall be unlawful for
any peddler, panhandler or solicitor to approach/or seek personal contact
with the occupants there if that residence is registered on the "No Knock
List." Registration on the "No Knock List" shall expire five (5) calendar years
following the end of the calendar year of registration, unless renewed by
a. Any peddler, transient merchant or itinerant vendor, transient
merchant-peddler, merchant peddler or solicitor who shall offer for sale
or sell any goods, wares, merchandise, other commodities or bankrupt
stock without first paying to the Township the license fee or fees as
herein required, or who shall fail to secure a license provided for
herein, or who shall make false or fraudulent representations therein,
or who shall fail or refuse or neglect to comply with the requirements of
this section in any part, shall, upon conviction thereof by the Judge of
the Municipal Court, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section
1-5, and each violation of any of the provisions of this section and each
day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense.
b. The penalties herein provided for shall be in addition to the right of
revocation or suspension provided for in subsection 11-1.7.
§ 11-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.17
AO:333
notifying the Division of Licenses and Permits accordingly. Anyone violating
this subsection shall be subject to the penalties established by subsection
11-1.16.
§ 11-2. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; POLITICAL CANVASSING.
§ 11-2.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.20.010]
As used in this section:
CHARITABLE NONPROFIT and PHILANTHROPIC — Means and includes
political, patriotic, religious, service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic
or fraternal corporations, organizations, associations, societies and the like,
not organized for private gain. Examples of nonprofit organizations include
veterans groups and organizations which assist the poor, the aged, the
sick, the physically handicapped or mentally retarded, or which aid victims
of fire, flood or similar catastrophes. This enumeration is intended to be
typical and shall not be construed as exclusive. All applicants shall provide
satisfactory proof of nonprofit status upon request, including but not limited
to evidence of tax exemption.
CONTRIBUTION — Means and includes alms, food, clothes, money,
subscription or property of any nature or kind.
PERSON or ORGANIZATION — Means any natural person, individual, firm,
copartnership, corporation, company, association, church religious
denomination, society, class or league and principal or agent thereof.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — Means the request, directly or indirectly,
of money, credit, property, financial assistance and other things of value
on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable and
philanthropic purpose as defined in this section. Solicitation shall be
deemed to be complete when made, whether or not the person making the
same receives any contribution.
§ 11-2.2. Canvassing or Soliciting in Connection with Political
Campaign or Charitable or Religious Organization. [1999 Code
§ 5.20.020; Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
a. Any person canvassing or soliciting in connection with a political
campaign or charitable or religious organization or society or any
representative of such organization or society, recognized as tax
exempt under the United States Internal Revenue Code, when such
canvassing or solicitation does not involve the sale or attempted sale of
merchandise, shall, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such
canvassing or solicitation, present himself or herself to the office of the
Chief of Police or his/her designee and shall provide said Chief of Police
or his/her designee with the following information:
1. The nature and anticipated duration of such canvassing or
solicitation;
§ 11-1.17 EDISON CODE § 11-2.2
AO:334
§ 11-2.3. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.20.030]
Any person violating the terms of this section, whether as principal, agent
or employee of another, shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 11-3. (RESERVED)
§ 11-4. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 11-4.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 5.68.010]
The purpose of this section is for the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of all businesses and commercial establishments to which the public
is invited in the interests of the protection of the employees. The provisions
and requirements of this section shall not apply to nor include any business
or commercial establishment issued a license or permit for on-the-premises
consumption of alcoholic beverages.
§ 11-4.2. Definition. [1999 Code § 5.68.020]
As used in this section:
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Means an establishment, enterprise or
business that sells to the general public goods, merchandise, food or
material.
2. The approximate number of persons who will be canvassing or
soliciting;
3. The name and address of the person in charge of such canvassing
or solicitation;
4. The full name and address of the political, charitable or religious
organization on behalf of which such solicitation or canvassing is to
be conducted;
5. The names, to the extent known, of the persons who are expected
to go from door to door or to distribute materials within the
Township.
b. The purpose of such registration is that the identity of persons going
door to door or distributing materials within the Township may be
established for the protection and maintenance of the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Township and to prevent dishonest
solicitation of funds in the Township. No permit or fees shall be
required.
c. Such canvassing or soliciting activities shall not be allowed after 9:00
p.m., local time.
§ 11-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.3
AO:335
§ 11-4.3. Permitted Hours; Conditions for Exception. [1999 Code
§ 5.68.030; Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009]
No retail establishment, as herein defined, to which the general public is
invited shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., prevailing time (2400 to 0600 hours) unless the following terms and
conditions are implemented and approved:
§ 11-4.4. Approval Required for Certain Hours of Operation. [1999
Code § 5.68.040]
All business establishments in the Township who desire to remain open
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (2400 hours to 0600 hours),
prevailing time, shall satisfy the Division of Police of Edison Township that
the measures required by this section are implemented prior to opening.
§ 11-4.5. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.68.050]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 11-5. AUCTIONEERS, PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS.
a. That there are at least two (2) employees on continuous duty in the
portion of the retail establishment to which the public is invited or one
(1) employee and the following:
1. That the retail establishment shall have in operation a video
camera in addition to a silent and/or audible burglar alarm system
which is connected to a central security monitoring system
designed to activate police response, and
2. That the video camera and burglar alarm system shall be approved
by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, Edison Township, or his
or her designee;
b. That the retail establishment shall implement the following crime
prevention measures:
1. Use of a drop safe on the premises;
2. The establishment shall post a window sign which is conspicuous
and asserts that a safe is located on the premises, but the safe is
not accessible to the employees of the establishment;
3. Signs indicating that the establishment does not keep more than
fifty ($50.00) dollars in cash in the register;
4. The exterior portion of the retail establishment, including the
parking area, shall be well lit throughout the night and early
morning hours.
§ 11-4.3 EDISON CODE § 11-5.1
AO:336
§ 11-5.1. License Required. [1999 Code § 5.04.010]
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to carry on or conduct the
business of porter, auctioneer, pawnbroker, junk shopkeeper, junk dealer,
billposter, keeper of bathhouses or scavenger within the Township without
having first obtained a license from the Township Clerk.
§ 11-5.2. Issuance of Licenses; Application Fee. [1999 Code
§ 5.04.020]
The Township Clerk is authorized to issue any such license upon the
payment by the applicant of the proper fee therefor, as hereinafter provided,
together with the sum of fifty ($0.50) cents for the cost and expense of
issuing such license.
§ 11-5.3. Term of License; Transfer Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 5.04.030]
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed, and it shall not be transferable.
§ 11-5.4. Exhibition of License. [1999 Code § 5.04.040]
Any person to whom such license is granted as herein provided is required
to exhibit such license whenever called upon to do so.
§ 11-5.5. Fees. [1999 Code § 5.04.050]
The license fees under this section shall be as follows:
§ 11-5.6. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.04.060]
Any person or persons violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 11-6. USED ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT PURCHASES AND SALES.
§ 11-6.1. License Required—Application. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
a. Porters, auctioneers, pawnbrokers, junk shopkeepers and junk dealers,
fifteen ($15.00) dollars per year.
b. Billposters, keepers of bathhouses and scavengers, ten ($10.00) dollars
per year.
c. Auto wrecking, auto scrapping or auto junkyards, one hundred
($100.00) dollars per year.
a. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall conduct or
operate the business of purchasing or selling used electronic equipment
from or to members of the public without first obtaining a license from
the Township Clerk.
§ 11-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.1
AO:337
§ 11-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT — For the purpose of this chapter, means any
device which is operated with the use of electricity. Examples of electronic
equipment include and are not limited to stereos, radios, hi-fi systems,
CD players, record players, car radios or stereos including tape players,
televisions, VCRs, telephones, cellular phones, audio speakers, radar
detectors, computers, fax machines, typewriters, copy machines,
calculators, microwave ovens, electric tools, mp3 players, ipods, satellite
radios and GPS devices. This enumeration is intended to be typical and is
not to be construed as exhaustive.
b. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall advertise for the
purchase or sale of used electronic equipment for members of the
public without first having obtained a license from the Township Clerk.
c. Application for such a license shall be on a form provided by the
Township Clerk and shall include the following information:
1. The name and address of the person, firm, corporation or other
legal entity conducting the business or advertising same;
2. In case of a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and
stockholders of the corporation;
3. In case of a limited liability company, the name and addresses of all
officers and members of the limited liability company;
4. The location at which the business is conducted and the hours of
operation thereof.
d. Upon receipt of an application form for a license completed pursuant to
paragraph c above, the Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of
Police who shall institute such investigation of the applicant's moral
character and business responsibility as he or she deems necessary for
the protection of public welfare. Upon completion of the investigation,
which in no case takes more than ten (10) days, the Chief of Police shall
return the application or a copy thereof to the Township Clerk,
accompanied by his or her recommendation as to whether the license is
issued or denied. If the recommendation of the Chief of Police is to deny
the license, grounds for such recommendation is stated. Grounds for
recommending the denial of the license include information indicating
that the applicant is not of good moral character or is of questionable
business responsibility, any recommendation of denial is given if the
applicant has been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty, fraud,
deceit, or misrepresentation. Upon receipt of the recommendation of
the Chief of Police, the Township Clerk shall issue or deny the license
accordingly.
§ 11-6.1 EDISON CODE § 11-6.3
AO:338
§ 11-6.3. Identification. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
All licensees require each person offering an item for sale to produce
identification and to sign a receipt for the item.
§ 11-6.4. Log Required. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
§ 11-6.5. Minors. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity conducting a business
as set forth in subsection 11-6.1 or advertising same, shall purchase any
electronic equipment from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
of age, except with the written consent of a parent or guardian of the person
under the age of eighteen (18).
§ 11-6.6. Bond Required. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
Each licensee delivers a bond to the Township Clerk executed by the
applicant as principal with a surety company authorized to do business
under the laws of the State of New Jersey as surety. The bond, to be
approved by the Director of Law, is the penal sum of ten thousand
($10,000.00) dollars, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances
of the Township of Edison in force or which may be adopted respecting
the conduct of this business and conditioned also that the bond is and
remains for the benefit of any person or persons who has received judgment
against any person licensed under this chapter by reason of any damage
sustained by any such person as having made a sale to such licensee, due to
dishonesty, fraud, or deceit practiced in effectuating purchase.
a. Every person, firm, corporation or other legal entity conducting a
business as set forth in this section or advertising same, shall maintain
a log or record of every article purchased or sold by him or her from or
to members of the public, which log includes the following information:
1. Name and address of purchaser and/or seller of electronic
equipment;
2. Date of purchase;
3. Detailed description of price paid;
4. Price paid for same by purchaser and/or seller of electronic
equipment;
5. Age of purchaser.
b. The person, firm, corporation or other legal entity that either purchases
or sells used electronic equipment shall make available the log for a
record for inspection to any law enforcement officer, upon demand,
without the need for advanced notice. The log or record is kept at the
business premises and is available for inspection during business hours.
§ 11-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.7
AO:339
§ 11-6.7. Fees. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ If10]
Fee for the initial application is one hundred ($100.00) dollars. Each annual
renewal fee is twenty-five ($25.00) dollars. If on the effective date of this
section, a person, partnership, or corporation has been in business pursuant
to subsection 11-6.1 of this section for a period of not less than three (3)
years, the fee for initial application is ten ($10.00) dollars and investigation
pursuant to the provisions of this section may be waived by the Township
Clerk.
§ 11-6.8. Retention of Merchandise. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
Every person, firm, corporation or other legal entity conducting a business
as set forth in subsection 11-6.1, or advertising same, who shall purchase
electronic equipment from members of the public, shall retain possession of
the items a minimum of twenty (20) days from the date of purchase before
altering the shape or content of same, reselling or otherwise disposing of
same.
§ 11-6.9. Exemption. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I; Ord. No.
O.1909-2015]
Nothing contained herein applies to (i) the wholesale purchase of electronic
equipment by regularly established businesses, from wholesale dealers and
suppliers, which purchases are made for retail sale to the public in the
regular course of business; or (ii) transactions involving the trade-in of
electronic equipment to a provider of commercial mobile services, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § (d), or to their authorized agents or retailers that
have contractual relationships with such providers to sell the providers'
authorized products and services, when the trade-in value of the used
electronics equipment, if any, is applied as a credit on a customer's account
or in a form of credit or a gift card that may only be redeemed with the
provider or its agents or retailers.
§ 11-6.10. Violation—Penalty. [Ord. No. O.1714-2009§ I]
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating the provisions
of this section, upon conviction thereof, is deemed a disorderly person and
forfeits and pays a fine of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or
is imprisoned in the Middlesex County Adult Correction Center for a period
of not more than ninety (90) days, or both. A separate offense is deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 11-7. AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
§ 11-7.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.12.010]
As used in this section:
10.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. O.1714-2009, codified herein as Section 11-6, was adopted
September 10, 2009.
§ 11-6.7 EDISON CODE § 11-7.1
AO:340
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Means a place of business whose primary
purpose is public recreation, such as skating rinks, bowling alleys, billiard
lounges, etc., but excluding bars and restaurants.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Means any table device or machine which may be
operated by the public for entertainment or amusement, whether the device
or machine is coin-operated or not and whether it registers scores or tallies
or not. Examples are pinball machines, bowling machines, mechanical grab
machines, Skee-Ball machines, pokerino machines, video machines,
jukeboxes, pool, bagatelle and billiard tables, video display booths and
similar devices. This enumeration is intended as an example of the kinds of
devices regulated and is not to be construed as an exclusive list.
DISTRIBUTOR — Means any person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other business entity which leases, rents or places, under
any kind of arrangement, within the Township one (1) or more amusement
devices in premises or locations owned or controlled by another.
LICENSED PREMISES — Means the entire premises owned or controlled
by the owner/operator.
OWNER/OPERATOR — Means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or any other entity which owns or controls a premises or •a
location within the Township in which any amusement device is displayed
for public patronage or is placed or kept for operation by the public.
PERSON — Means and includes any individual, corporation, company,
association, society, firm, partnership or joint-stock company as well as
individuals.
RETAIL FLOOR AREA — Means that open, unobstructed floor area to which
the public is customarily invited in the course of business transactions but
excluding floor areas used for restrooms and storage, office counter area,
etc., to which only employees are customarily allowed.
VIDEO DISPLAY BOOTH — Means any booth, enclosed for privacy and
designed for individual viewing of video entertainment, including but not
limited to movies or video tapes and including but not limited to coin or
token operated video equipment.
§ 11-7.2. License Required. [1999 Code § 5.12.020]
No person shall install, maintain, operate or possess in any stores, premises,
locations or buildings where business of any nature or character is
conducted or any other place wherein the public is invited or where the
public may enter, any amusement device without having first obtained an
amusement device license from the Township, after written application.
§ 11-7.3. Applications for Licenses. [1999 Code § 5.12.030]
Applications for amusement device licenses shall be made at the office of
the Supervisor of Licenses and Permits on forms supplied by that office.
§ 11-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7.3
AO:341
Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate license fee or it
will not be processed.
§ 11-7.4. Term; Fees. [1999 Code § 5.12.040]
§ 11-7.5. Revocation of License. [1999 Code § 5.12.050]
a. Licenses shall be renewed on January 1 of each year and shall expire on
December 31 of each year.
b. All license fees are for a fall year or any part thereof. Fees shall not be
prorated for applications covering less than the entire license period
specified above.
c. The license fees to be paid annually are as follows:
1. Jukebox: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
2. Roller skating rinks: one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
3. Video display booth: five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
4. All other amusement devices: fifty ($50.00) dollars.
d. Any or all civic, fraternal, religious or other nonprofit organizations
which are exempt from taxation under the Federal or State laws shall
be excused from the above fee requirement, provided that they present
sufficient evidence to establish their tax exempt status. Fee exempt
organizations shall still be responsible for filing applications with the
Division of Licenses and Permits.
a. Every license issued is subject to suspension or revocation by the
Township should any licensee operate any amusement device contrary
to the provisions of this section or any other laws, rules, or regulations
or fail to fully cooperate with any law enforcement officer or agency.
b. Any fraud, material misstatement or omission in the license application
or any information submitted therewith or the failure to notify the
Supervisor of Licenses and Permits, in writing, of any changes by
additions or deletions or amendments to this application or information
during the term of any license or renewal shall constitute sufficient
grounds for revocation of the license. A revocation hearing will be held
before the Director of Public Safety no sooner than ten (10) days after
service of notice of hearing either personally or by certified mail, prior
to revocation of the license.
c. Other grounds for suspension or revocation of a license include:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity;
§ 11-7.3 EDISON CODE § 11-7.5
AO:342
§ 11-7.6. Licenses Not Transferable. [1999 Code § 5.12.060]
§ 11-7.7. Regulations; Hours of Use for Persons under a Certain
Age. [1999 Code § 5.12.070; Ord. No. O.1718-2009§ I]
2. Conduct of the licensed activity in a manner that constitutes a
breach of the peace or menace to the public health, safety or
general welfare;
3. Habitual conduct of the users of the licensed premises in an
unlawful manner or in a manner that constitutes a breach of the
peace or a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
a. No license issued pursuant to this section may be sold, assigned,
mortgaged or otherwise transferred by the person to whom such
license is issued.
b. Change of ownership of any device shall automatically revoke such
license, except that an operator at any time may substitute one device
for a similar device without additional license fee, provided that he or
she first notifies the Division of Licenses and Permits.
a. There shall be only one (1) licensee at any one (1) premises where
machines are located.
b. The owner/operator of the premises shall be liable and responsible for
the proper operation of the devices, whether or not he or she is the
owner of it or has rented it. This section shall not relieve the owner or
distributor of the machine from liability or responsibility for violations
of any ordinance or law.
c. The operation of amusement devices shall be supervised by at least one
(1) person over twenty-one (21) years of age at all times.
d. No licensee shall permit any person to use an amusement device for
gambling or betting purposes.
e. No person shall provide prizes or awards in conjunction with the
operation of or as an inducement to use automatic amusement devices
except for such establishments which meet the following criteria:
1. All customers under the age of eighteen (18) must be accompanied
by an adult or guardian;
2. Fifty (50%) percent of the establishment's revenue must come from
non-gaming sources (i.e., food and beverage).
3. Forty (40%) percent of the floor area of the establishment must be
utilized for non-gaming purposes.
f. No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be allowed to
operate an amusement device during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 9:00
§ 11-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7.7
AO:343
§ 11-7.8. Conflict with Other Laws. [1999 Code § 5.12.080]
In any case where the provisions of this Code impose a higher standard than
set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or under the laws of the
State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail;
but if the provisions of this Code impose a lower standard than any other
ordinance of the Township or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then
the higher standard contained in any such ordinance or laws shall prevail.
§ 11-7.9. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.12.090]
Any person violating any provision of this section or failing to comply
therewith shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter I,
Section 1-5. Every day during which the violation or failure to comply occurs
or continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 11-8. POOLROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS AND CIGAR STORES.
§ 11-8.1. Definition. [1999 Code § 5.48.010]
As used in this section:
BOOTBLACKING PARLOR — Means a place or establishment where one (1)
or more chairs are placed in use, or to be used, for the purpose of shining
or polishing shoes or boots with polish or other material or composition or
mixture of any color whatsoever.
§ 11-8.2. License Required. [1999 Code § 5.48.020]
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall pursue the business or
occupation of keeping any billiard room, poolroom, cigar store,
bootblacking parlor, bowling alley (other than a bowling alley in an
incorporated club) or such other place as may exist, where other games of
skill may be carried on or conducted in the Township, until the proprietor
a.m. on any day and 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on any school day unless
accompanied by at least one (1) adult parent or guardian.
g. There shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises:
1. All required licenses and stickers;
2. Prohibited hours of operation for those under sixteen (16) years
unaccompanied by their adult parent or guardian. The sign letters
shall be in capitals and at least three (3) inches in height, on a
contrasting background.
h. Operators shall be responsible for complying with all sanitation and
rest room requirements as provided by this Code.
i. An adhesive seal shall be affixed to all machines licensed with Edison
Township to indicate compliance with this section.
§ 11-7.7 EDISON CODE § 11-8.2
AO:344
or proprietors thereof shall have first obtained from the Division of Licenses
and Permits, as herein provided, a license to carry on and conduct the same,
and shall have paid the amount of the license to carry on and conduct the
same, and shall have paid the amount of the license fee therefor as herein
fixed to the Division of Licenses and Permits.
§ 11-8.3. Annual License Fees. [1999 Code § 5.48.030]
§ 11-8.4. Issuance of Licenses; Term; Revocation; Hearing. [1999
Code § 5.48.040]
All licenses shall be granted and issued by the Director of Public Safety in
his or her discretion, and all such licenses shall be valid for the period of
one (1) year from the day of issue or of such shorter period as the Director
of Public Safety shall, in his or her discretion, designate as shown thereon,
unless they are sooner revoked; and all licenses shall be signed by the
Director of Public Safety and the Township Clerk. Such licenses shall bear
the date of issue, the name of the person or persons to whom issued, the
purpose for which they are severally issued and the location of the room
or building wherein the licensee is authorized to carry on and conduct
such business; and they shall not be transferable or valid to authorize the
licensee to carry on or conduct such business in any place or location other
than that shown on the license and set forth in the same; and the Director of
Public Safety shall have the power to revoke any such license, and in case
the Director of Public Safety shall determine that there is reasonable cause
to revoke any such license, he or she shall cause a notice to be served in
writing upon the licensee or other person in charge of the licensed place,
citing him or her to appear before such Director of Public Safety, at such
time and place as he or she may designate, to show cause why the license
should not be revoked, and such license shall be afforded a hearing before
a. The fees to be paid for such license to carry on and/or conduct any
billiard room, poolroom, cigar store, bootblacking parlor, bowling alley
(other than a bowling alley in an incorporated club) or such other place
as may exist, wherein other games of skill may be carried on or
conducted, respectively, are fixed as follows:
Type of Business Fee
1. Billiard room $25.00
2. Poolroom $25.00
3. Cigar store $2.50
4. Bootblacking parlor $2.50
5. Bowling alley (other than in an incorporated club) $100.00
6. Any other place as may exist wherein other games
of skill may be carried on or conducted
$2.50
b. Such license fees as are herein fixed and provided are imposed for
revenue.
§ 11-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-8.4
AO:345
the Director of Public Safety prior to the final revocation of his or her
license.
§ 11-8.5. Posting of License Required. [1999 Code § 5.48.050]
The license herein provided for shall be posted and displayed in a
conspicuous place in every billiard room, poolroom, cigar store,
bootblacking parlor, bowling alley (other than a bowling alley in an
incorporated club) or such other place as may exist, wherein other games of
skill may be carried on or conducted, licensed under the provisions of this
section.
§ 11-8.6. Hours of Operation. [1999 Code § 5.48.060]
Every establishment covered by this section, other than billiard rooms, pool
rooms, bowling alleys and licensed taverns, shall be closed at the hour of
12:00 midnight every night. Billiard rooms and pool rooms shall be closed
at the hour of 2:00 a.m.
§ 11-8.7. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.48.070; New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 11-9. EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, CONCERTS, CIRCUSES AND DANCE
HALLS.
§ 11-9.1. License Required. [1999 Code § 5.48.080]
It is unlawful for any person or persons or corporation to carry on or
conduct the business of traveling or other shows, theatrical performance,
plays, exhibitions, concerts, skating rinks, circuses, menageries, athletic or
scientific exhibitions or dance halls within the Township without having first
obtained a license from the Director of Public Safety.
§ 11-9.2. Issuance; Term; Revocation; Hearing. [1999 Code
§ 5.48.090]
All licenses herein provided for shall be granted and issued by the Director
of Public Safety in his or her discretion, and it shall be the duty of the
Director of Public Safety to adopt such rules and regulations as may be
reasonable to ensure the safety of the public patronizing such places named
in this section against fire or other disaster, and all such licenses shall be
valid for a period of one (1) year from the day and date or issue or of
such shorter period as the Director of Public Safety shall, in his or her
discretion, designate as shown thereon, unless they are sooner revoked; and
all such licenses shall be signed by the Director of Public Safety and the
Township Clerk. Such licenses shall bear the date of issue, the name of the
person, persons or corporation to whom issued, the purpose for which they
are severally issued and the location of the room or building wherein the
licensee is authorized to carry on or conduct such business or occupation,
§ 11-8.4 EDISON CODE § 11-9.2
AO:346
and they shall not be transferable or valid to authorize the licensee to carry
on or conduct such business in any place or location other than that shown
on the license and set forth in the same. The Director of Public Safety shall
have the power to revoke any such license and, in case the Director of
Public Safety shall determine that there is reasonable cause to revoke any
such license, he or she shall cause a notice in writing to be served upon
the licensee or other person in charge of such licensed place citing him or
her to appear before the Director of Public Safety, at such time and place
as he or she may designate, to show cause why the license should not be
revoked, and such licensee shall be afforded a hearing before the Director
of Public Safety prior to the final revocation of his or her license; provided,
however, that the Director of Public Safety shall have the power to cause
the license of any such place herein named in this section to be suspended
pending such hearing before him or her.
§ 11-9.3. Exhibition of License. [1999 Code § 5.48.100]
The license herein provided for shall be exhibited by any person, persons or
corporation at any time they may be called on to do so.
§ 11-9.4. Fees. [1999 Code § 5.48.110]
a. The fees to be paid for such license to carry on or conduct any traveling
or other shows, theatrical performances, plays, exhibitions, concerts,
skating rinks, circuses, menageries, athletic or scientific exhibitions or
dance halls, and also the place or places or premises in which or at
which said different kinds of businesses or occupations are to be
carried on or conducted, respectively, are fixed as follows:
1. Circus and carnival, with or without a menagerie, one hundred
($100.00) dollars each day.
2. Concert or entertainment charging twenty-five ($0.25) cents or
more for one (1) admission, ten ($10.00) dollars for each concert or
entertainment.
3. Concert or entertainment charging less than twenty-five ($0.25)
cents for one (1) admission, five ($5.00) dollars for each concert or
entertainment.
4. Athletic or scientific exhibition, ten ($10.00) dollars for each
exhibition.
5. Skating rink, ten ($10.00) dollars for one (1) year.
6. Theater or moving-picture or opera house, one hundred ($100.00)
dollars for one (1) year.
7. Dance hall having a seating capacity of less than five hundred (500)
people, fifteen ($15.00) dollars for one (1) year.
§ 11-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-9.4
AO:347
§ 11-9.5. Events for Charitable or Benevolent Purposes. [1999 Code
§ 5.48.120]
The provisions of subsection 11-9.4 shall not apply to any concert,
entertainment or exhibition or dance for any charitable or benevolent
purpose, and the Director of Public Safety shall have the authority to decide
whether a license is required under the provisions of this section.
§ 11-9.6. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.48.130]
Any person, persons or corporation violating the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I,
Section 1-5.
§ 11-10. (RESERVED)
§ 11-11. MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY
ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 11-11.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.65.010; Ord. No.
O.1779-2011]
As used in this section:
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Means and refers
to systems of activity structured touch which include, but are not limited
to, holding, applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of
the body by manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and
palpating skills to assess the body for purpose of applying therapeutic
massage, bodywork or somatic principles. Such applications may include,
but are not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or
hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external applications, external
application of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription
drugs, movement and neural myofascial education and education in selfcare
and stress management. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapies do
not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness, disease, impairment or
disability.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — Means any person,
male or female, who administers massage, bodywork and/or somatic
therapies for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Means any establishment or operation wherein massage, bodywork or
somatic therapies are administered or are permitted to be administered,
when such therapies are administered for any form of consideration.
8. Dance hall having a seating capacity of more than five hundred
(500) people, twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for one (1) year.
b. Such license fees as are herein fixed and provided are imposed for
revenue.
§ 11-9.4 EDISON CODE § 11-11.2
AO:348
§ 11-11.2. Permits Required. [1999 Code § 8.65.020; Ord. No.
O.1779-2011]
§ 11-11.3. Fees. [1999 Code § 8.65.030; Ord. No. O.1779-2011]
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment or out-call massage, bodywork
or somatic therapy service shall file an application with the Department
of Health upon form provided by said Department and pay a fee of five
hundred ($500.00) dollars. The permit to be issued shall be valid until
March 31 of the third year that the permit is in effect.
§ 11-11.4. Application for Massage, Bodywork or Somatic Therapy
Establishment Permit. [1999 Code § 8.65.040; Ord. No.
O.1624-2008§ 1; Ord. No. O.1779-2011]
Any person desiring a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy business
permit shall file a written application with the Department of Health on
a form to be furnished by the Department of Health. The applicant shall
accompany the application with a tender of correct fee as hereinafter
provided and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
a. Business Permit Required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate
any establishment or utilize any premises in the Township of Edison in
Middlesex County as or for massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment unless or until there has first been obtained a permit for
such establishment or premises from the Township of Edison in
accordance with the terms and provisions in this section.
b. Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapist Permit Required. No person
shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage, bodywork or
somatic therapist, employee or otherwise, unless he or she has a valid
and subsisting massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's permit
issued to him or her by the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs,
New Jersey Board of Nursing pursuant to the provisions of the
Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapist Certification Act, N.J.S.A.
45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:37-16 et seq., hereinafter referred to
the "Certification Act."
a. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
b. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
c. The business address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile,
where business is to be conducted.
d. A complete list of the names and addresses of all massage, bodywork
and somatic therapists and employees in the business and the name and
residence address of the manager or other person principally in charge
of the operation of the business.
§ 11-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-11.4
AO:349
§ 11-11.5. Building Requirements; Inspections. [1999 Code
§ 8.65.050; Ord. No. O.1779-2011; Ord. No. O.2003-2018]
e. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; concerning each stockholder holding more than ten (10%)
percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if
the applicant is a corporation; concerning the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business:
1. The name, completed residence address and residence telephone
number.
2. The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
3. Written proof of age.
4. Height, weight, sex and color of hair and eyes.
5. Two (2) front-face portrait photographs taken within thirty (30)
days of the date of the application and at least two by two (2 x 2)
inches in size.
6. The massage therapy or similar business history and experience,
including, but not limited to whether or not such a person has
previously operated in this or another city or state under a license
or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor
and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such
action or denial, suspension or revocation.
7. All criminal convictions other than traffic violations, disorderly
persons offenses and petty disorderly persons offenses shall be
reported on the applicant's application fully disclosing the
jurisdiction in which the crime was committed and circumstances
thereof. The applicant shall execute a waiver and consent to allow a
fingerprint and criminal background check by the Police
Department. Upon completion of the background check, the Police
Department, in its discretion and based upon the circumstances of
the offense or nature of the crime, shall make a recommendation in
writing to the Department of Health as to whether the applicant
may receive a license.
f. The names and addresses of three (3) adult residents of the County who
will serve as character references. These references must be persons
other than relatives and business associates.
a. The Department of Health, upon receiving an application for a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment permit, shall refer the
application to the Department of Planning and Engineering, the Fire
Department, the Police Department, the Health and Human Services
§ 11-11.4 EDISON CODE § 11-11.5
AO:350
§ 11-11.6. (Reserved)
Former subsection 11-11.6, Application, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1999 Code § 8.65.060, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. O.1779-2011.
§ 11-11.7. Employment of Massage, Bodywork and Somatic
Therapists. [Ord. No. O.1779-2011]
Every massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall only
employ massage, bodywork and somatic therapists that have a current
Certification issued under the Certification Act which shall be displayed
as required in subsection 11-11.8. Every massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment shall maintain a photocopy of said Certifications for
all massage, bodywork and somatic therapists that are currently in their
employ and shall maintain said Certifications for one (1) year after the
last date of employment of each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist
and the same shall be kept at the licensed establishment and shall be
made available upon demand to the Township Department of Health, its
employees and any law enforcement officer, investigator and/or agency.
§ 11-11.8. Display of Permits and Certifications. [1999 Code
§ 8.65.080; Ord. No. O.1779-2011]
The massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall display
his/her permit in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the
establishment. The massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment
shall ensure that the Certificate issued under the Certification Act for
each and every massage, bodywork or somatic therapist employed in the
establishment is displayed in an open and conspicuous place on the
premises of the establishment.
Department, which departments shall inspect the premises proposed
to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written
recommendations to the Division of Licensing and Permits concerning
compliance with the codes that they administer.
b. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall be
issued a permit or be operated, established or maintained in the
Township unless an inspection by the Health Officer, Building Subcode
Official, and Fire Inspector reveals that the establishment complies
with the minimum requirements of the building and health codes for
businesses operating in the Township of Edison.
c. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall be
located within 1,000 feet of a place of worship, school, public use or
residential zone established pursuant to Chapter 37-2.1 of the Code, or
within 500 feet of another such use. All distances shall be measured in a
straight line from the outer boundary of such properties.
§ 11-11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-11.9
AO:351
§ 11-11.9. Operating Requirements. [1999 Code § 8.65.090; Ord.
No. O.1779-2011]
a. Every portion of the massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean
and operated in a sanitary condition.
b. Prices rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
c. All employees, including massage, bodywork or somatic therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, non-transparent outer garments.
Dressing rooms must be available on the premises. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and be self-closing. If the dressing
room is also used as the therapy/massage room, then adequate
procedures shall be in place to safeguard the privacy of the client. In no
case shall these doors be locked when both a client and any employee
are present.
d. All massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be
provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity,
which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
e. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand upon or touch with any part of
his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual or
genital area of any other person.
g. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapist, employee or operator shall
perform, or offer to perform any act which would require the touching
of the patron's sexual or genital area.
h. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry-heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
i. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massage, bodywork or somatic therapies shall be kept in clean, closed
containers or cabinets.
j. Animals, except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work area.
§ 11-11.9 EDISON CODE § 11-11.9
AO:352
§ 11-11.10. Inspections. [1999 Code § 8.65.100; Ord. No.
O.1779-2011]
The Department of Health and Human Services, and/or the Department of
Planning and Zoning shall, from time to time, at least twice a year, make
an inspection of each massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment
granted a permit under the provisions of this section for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of this section are complied with. Such
inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner.
It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer
access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner.
§ 11-11.11. Sleeping Quarters. [1999 Code § 8.65.110; Ord. No.
O.1779-2011]
No part of any quarters of any massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters, nor shall any person sleep in such massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly
related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of a massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or
other separate businesses or clubs.
§ 11-11.12. Prohibited Acts. [1999 Code § 8.65.120; Ord. No.
O.1779-2011]
k. Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash his or her
hands in hot running water, using proper soap or disinfectant before
administering a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy to each patron.
a. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly,
but not exclusive of laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or exposing and public
communication of obscene material; laws which relate to the
commission of sodomy; relating to the commission of adultery; and
proscribing fornication; nor shall any owner or manager tolerate in his
or her establishment an activity or behavior which violates this section.
b. Any conviction of a bodywork or somatic therapy establishment or, any
employee thereof, of a violation of the aforementioned statutes and
codes shall devolve upon the owner or manager of the establishment, it
being specifically declared that, following such a conviction of the
owner or the manager of the establishment shall be prosecuted as an
accessory to such a violation and the required permits will be
automatically revoked.
§ 11-11.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-11.13
AO:353
§ 11-11.13. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.65.130; Ord. No.
O.1779-2011]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 11-12. TATTOO, BODY ART AND BODY PIERCING.
Ord. No. O.1824-2013 amended Section 11-12 of the 2007 Code in entirety.
§ 11-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1824-2013]
All terms used in this section shall have the same definition ascribed to them
in N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.1 et seq. unless otherwise defined herein.
§ 11-12.2. Permits; Prohibitions; Exceptions. [Ord. No.
O.1824-2013]
§ 11-12.3. Fees. [Ord. No. O.1824-2013]
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a tattooing,
body art or body piercing business including any expansion and or
alteration of a premises shall file an application with the Department of
Health Division of Licensing and Permits upon the form provided by said
Department Division and pay a fee of five hundred ($500.00) dollars. The
permit to be issued shall be valid until March 31 of the third year that the
permit is in effect.
§ 11-12.4. Application. [Ord. No. O.1824-2013]
Any person or business desiring a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a
tattooing, body art or body piercing business shall file a written application
with the Department of Health Division of Licensing and Permits on a
form to be furnished by the Department of Health Division of Licensing
and Permits. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender
a. Permit Required; Prohibitions. No person or business shall operate any
establishment or utilize any premises in the Township of Edison for
providing tattooing, body art or body piercing services unless or until
there has first been obtained a permit for such establishment or
premises from the Township of Edison in accordance with the terms and
provisions in this section. Temporary establishments for purposes of
product demonstration, industry trade shows, educational reasons and/
or any other reason shall also require a permit per N.J.A.C. 8:27-10.1 et
seq. and as provided herein.
b. Exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person or business to perform
tattooing, body art or body piercing services within the Township,
except that the same may be performed for medical purposes by a
physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of New Jersey.
§ 11-11.13 EDISON CODE § 11-12.4
AO:354
of correct fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the
following:
§ 11-12.5. Building Requirements; Inspections. [Ord. No.
O.1824-2013]
The Department of Health Division of Licensing and Permits, upon receiving
an application shall refer the application to the Zoning Officer, the
Department of Planning and Engineering, the Fire Department, the Police
Department, the Health and Human Services Resources Department, which
departments shall inspect the proposed premises and shall make
recommendations to the Division of Licensing and Permits concerning
compliance with the codes that they administer. The Department of Health
Division of Licensing and Permits may impose conditions upon the permit
after reviewing the aforementioned recommendations, further no permit
shall be issued unless a zoning permit is obtained from the Zoning Officer
indicating the establishment is a permitted use in its proposed location.
Nothing herein including any of the aforementioned recommendations shall
be construed to limit the enforcement of any law, rule or regulation at any
time.
§ 11-12.6. Display of Permit. [Ord. No. O.1824-2013]
The establishment shall display their permit in an open and conspicuous
place on the premises of the establishment.
§ 11-12.7. Operating Requirements: Inspections. [Ord. No.
O.1824-2013]
a. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
b. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
c. The business address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile,
where business is to be conducted.
d. A complete list of the names and addresses of all employees of the
business and the name and residence address of the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business and
number at which they can be reached in case of emergency.
e. Comply with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27, specifically N.J.A.C.
8:27-2.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 8:27-3 et seq.
a. Operating Requirements. Permittees shall comply with all requirements
of N.J.A.C. 8:27 and shall ensure that all employees also comply with all
requirements of N.J.A.C. 8:27. Permittees shall maintain the following
information on all employees: full legal name, social security number, a
clear and legible photocopy of their driver's license, address and
§ 11-12.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-12.7
AO:355
§ 11-12.8. Temporary Permits. [Ord. No. O.1824-2013]
§ 11-12.9. Power to Prohibit Not Limited. [Ord. No. O.1824-2013]
This section shall not limit the power of the Governing Body or the Board
of Health, or any other Township employee to pursue any and all legal and
equitable remedies to prevent the practice of tattooing, body art or body
piercing in the Township.
§ 11-12.10. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1824-2013]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall
be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
Each day's operation shall constitute a separate violation, and each act of
tattooing, body art or body piercing shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 11-13. BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS.
telephone number, and shall maintain the same for three (3) years after
the employee no longer works for the permittee.
b. Inspections. The Department of Health and Human Services Resources,
and/or the Department of Planning and Zoning shall, from time to time,
at least twice a year, make an inspection of each establishment granted
a permit under the provisions of this section for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of this section and N.J.A.C. 8:27 and
all applicable laws, rules and regulations are complied with. Such
inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such
inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any
manner.
a. Temporary permits shall only be issued for purposes of product
demonstration, industry trade shows, educational reasons and/or any
other reason shall also require a permit per N.J.A.C. 8:27-10.1 et seq.
The fee for a temporary permit shall be one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
The permit to be issued shall be only for the times noted on the permit.
b. Any person or business desiring a temporary permit to maintain,
operate or conduct a tattooing, body art or body piercing business shall
file a written application with the Department of Health Division of
Licensing and Permits on a form to be furnished by the Department of
Health Division of Licensing and Permits. The applicant shall
accompany the application with a tender of correct fee and all
documentation and information required by N.J.A.C. 8:27-10.1 et seq.
c. All other provisions of this Section and N.J.A.C. 8:27 shall be complied
with by the permittee.
§ 11-12.7 EDISON CODE § 11-13.1
AO:356
§ 11-13.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.64.010]
As used in this section:
BARBERSHOP or BEAUTY PARLOR — Means and includes all such
premises that are commonly known by the terms "barbershop,"
"hairdressing establishment," "manicuring parlor" and "beauty parlor,"
respectively; includes all premises or portions wherein the business of
shaving, clipping, cutting, trimming, singeing, shampooing, massaging,
manicuring, dressing, adorning or beautifying the human hair, face, scalp
or hands is conducted for fee, charge or hire.
§ 11-13.2. License Required. [1999 Code § 8.64.020]
No barbershop or beauty parlor shall be conducted or maintained in the
Township without a license, application for same shall be made to the
Division of Licenses and Permits approved by the Division of Health.
§ 11-13.3. License Fee. [1999 Code § 5.16.060]
The license fee shall be fifty ($50.00) dollars per year for each
establishment or place of business and shall be paid to the Division of
Licenses and Permits on the first day of September for the ensuing year.
§ 11-13.4. Schools Excepted from License Requirement. [1999 Code
§ 8.64.030]
No license under this section shall be required for barber schools or beauty
culture schools which are regulated as such by the Department of
Education, but such schools shall be operated and maintained in conformity
with the regulations of this section.
§ 11-13.5. Sanitation Requirements. [1999 Code
§§ 8.64.040—8.64.150]
a. Ventilation and Lighting. Every public barbershop, hairdressing
establishment, manicuring parlor and beauty parlor shall be properly
and adequately ventilated and lighted.
b. Cleanliness of Walls, Ceilings, Furniture and Fixtures. The walls,
ceilings, furniture and other fixtures and all other exposed surfaces in
every such establishment shall be kept clean and free from dust.
c. Cleanliness of Floors. The floors of every such establishment shall be
thoroughly swept or mopped each working day. All hair droppings upon
the floor shall be removed as soon as practicable and in such manner as
not to cause a nuisance.
d. Washing Facilities. Every such establishment shall be provided with
suitable and adequate washing facilities with hot and cold running
water; sinks or washbasins must be of nonabsorbent material, properly
trapped, flushed and sewer- or septic-tank-connected.
§ 11-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-13.5
AO:357
§ 11-13.6. Regulations Applicable to Barbershops. [1999 Code
§§ 5-016.030—5.16.050]
e. Washable Coat or Uniform Required. Attendants shall wear, while
attending any patron in any such establishment, a clean, washable
outer coat or uniform.
f. Hand Washing. Attendants shall wash their hands thoroughly with soap
and hot water before attending any person.
g. Prohibition Regarding Communicable Diseases. No person who is
affected with any infectious disease in a communicable form shall
attend any person in any such establishment.
h. Towel Requirements. No towel shall be used in any such establishment
for more than one (1) person without being laundered.
i. Astringents in Stick Form Prohibited. No alum or other astringent in
stick form shall be used in any such establishment.
j. Common Use of Certain Articles Prohibited. The use of powder puffs,
sponges, soap or shaving cups in common or for more than one (1)
person is prohibited in any such establishment.
k. Implements to be Clean and Sanitary. No implement shall be used on or
for a patron unless it is clean and sanitary.
l. Headrests. The headrest of a chair used to serve a patron shall be first
covered with a freshly laundered towel or a single-service paper
covering.
a. Hours of Business. No barbershop shall open for business earlier than
8:30 a.m., nor shall any barbershop close later than 6:00 p.m.
throughout the year, except on Saturdays and days preceding the
following legal holidays, to wit: New Year's Day, Decoration Day, July
Fourth, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, when they
shall close not later than 7:00 p.m. This section shall not apply to
existing home occupation operations.
b. Interior of Shop to be Open to View. During the hours and days when
the barbershops are closed under the provisions of this section, the
entire interior of the shop shall be open to full view from the public
street; and no other business shall be conducted on said premises when
it is closed as specified under the provisions of this section.
c. Regulation by Board of Health. All premises licensed hereunder shall be
subject to rules and regulations imposed by the Board of Health of the
Township
§ 11-13.5 EDISON CODE § 11-13.7
AO:358
§ 11-13.7. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.16.070]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 and/or
revocation of license.
§ 11-14. (RESERVED)
§ 11-15. MOTOR VEHICLE SALES LOTS.
§ 11-15.1. License Required. [1999 Code § 5.32.010]
It is unlawful for any person or persons, copartnership or corporation to
engage in the business of selling or exchanging any motor vehicle upon any
open lot in the Township without first obtaining a license therefor as herein
provided.
§ 11-15.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.32.020]
As used in this section:
BUSINESS OF SELLING OR EXCHANGING MOTOR VEHICLES — Means
and includes the offering of motor vehicles for sale or exchange by
exhibiting, storing, parking, locating or keeping such motor vehicles upon
an open lot, as aforesaid, with the intent to sell or exchange such motor
vehicles.
OPEN LOT — Means any lot, tract or parcel of land within the township
not enclosed in a substantial permanent building, and shall not include any
lot, tract or parcel of land upon which is erected a substantial permanent
building used as a public garage wherein is conducted the business of
public motor vehicle repair or public storage of motor vehicles, but shall
include any lot, tract or parcel of land adjacent to the lot, tract or parcel of
land upon which such garage is erected.
§ 11-15.3. Application for License. [1999 Code § 5.32.030]
Application for licenses to conduct the business of selling or exchanging
motor vehicles upon an open lot shall be made to the Division of Licenses
and Permits and shall be accompanied by the license fees hereinafter
stated. Such applications shall be made upon forms to be prepared by
the Division of Licenses and Permits and shall set forth: the full name or
names of the applicant or applicants, with his, her, their or its post office
address; an accurate description of the open lot whereon the business is
to be conducted, including a sketch of such location; compliance with the
zoning ordinance; the portion of the lot to be used and the number of square
feet to be devoted to such business; the name or names of the owner or
owners of such open lot, with his, her, their or its post office address.
§ 11-15.4. License Fees; Proration; Issuance to Certain Persons
Prohibited. [1999 Code § 5.32.040]
§ 11-13.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-15.4
AO:359
§ 11-15.5. Fencing Requirements. [1999 Code § 5.32.050]
Within ten (10) days after any such license is granted hereunder, the area
included in the license shall be enclosed by a fence, which fence shall
be not less than eighteen (18) inches in height and shall be of sturdy
construction conforming to the requirements of the building code. There
shall be no openings for entrance or exit in such fence along the street line
except where the curb has been lowered in accordance with the rules of
the Township Engineer's Office or, where the licensed premises front on
a County road, then from the County Engineer's Office, and such opening
or openings shall not exceed in number or width the portions of the curb
so lowered; provided that where the street curb has not been lowered,
an entrance to the licensed premises through such fence not exceeding
four (4) feet in width, shall be permitted. All such fences shall be at all
times maintained and kept in proper repair during the period covered by
the license. No fence shall be required where a building wall other than a
residence building wall marks the boundary of the area licensed.
§ 11-15.6. Prohibited Hours of Operation. [1999 Code § 5.32.060]
No person, persons, firm or corporation shall conduct, operate or carry on
the business of an open-air parking station for the sale or exchange of motor
vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 11-15.7. Location of Vehicles Restricted. [1999 Code § 5.32.070]
No motor vehicle shall be exhibited, stored, parked or located for sale or
exchange under the license issued hereunder within ten (10) feet of any
building occupied as a residence.
a. The annual license fees for the license aforesaid shall be:
1. For each open lot having an area of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet or less, three hundred ($300.00) dollars.
2. For each open lot having an area of more than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet, five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
b. The Supervisor of Licenses and Permits shall issue such license under
his or her hand and the seal of the Township. Such license shall run for
a period of one year commencing November 1st and ending October 31
of any year. If at the time of the application for a license under the
provisions of this section, less than six (6) months of the licensed year
has expired, the applicant shall be required to pay the full fee for the
year; if six (6) months shall have expired, the applicant shall be
required to pay one-half (1/2) of the fee for the year.
c. No license shall be issued to any person convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude.
§ 11-15.4 EDISON CODE § 11-15.8
AO:360
§ 11-15.8. Assignment or Transfer of License. [1999 Code
§ 5.32.080]
No license issued hereunder shall be assigned unless application therefor is
made to the Division of Licenses and Permits and its approval obtained, and
no license shall be transferred to a different location than that for which
issued unless application therefor is made to the Division of Licenses and
Permits and its approval obtained.
§ 11-15.9. Vehicles to be Located on Licensed Premises. [1999 Code
§ 5.32.090]
No motor vehicle shall be exhibited, stored, parked, located or kept under
the license issued hereunder except upon the premises described in the
application therefor, and this shall not be construed to include the sidewalk
or street or streets upon which the premises abut.
§ 11-15.10. Purpose. [1999 Code § 5.32.100]
This section is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue as well as for the
regulation and control of the business sought to be licensed hereunder.
§ 11-15.11. Suspension or Revocation of License; Notice. [1999
Code § 5.32.110]
The Supervisor of Licenses and Permits of the Township may suspend or
revoke at any time any license issued hereunder after public hearing, on
which five days' notice in writing shall be given to the licensee by serving
the same personally upon him or by mailing the same to the address shown
in the application for such license, if the licensee shall have violated any of
the terms of this section.
§ 11-15.12. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.32.120]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
in addition to the suspension or revocation of his or her license as
hereinbefore provided, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section
1-5, and every day of such violation shall be deemed and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 11-15.13. Enforcement; Prosecution of Violations. [1999 Code
§ 5.32.130]
It shall be the duty of the Division of Licenses and Permits or its
representative to supervise the operation of all such open-air parking
stations and to prosecute all violations thereof in the Municipal Court.
§ 11-16. PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM BUSINESSES.11
11.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1999 Code
§§ 5.44.010 — 5.44.060.
§ 11-15.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-16.1
AO:361
§ 11-16.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
PAWNBROKER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association or
corporation lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; or
purchasing personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated
price; or doing business as furniture storage warehouseman and lending
money on goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral
security.
PERSON — Shall mean individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associates, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PLEDGE — Shall mean an article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker in
the course of his business.
PLEDGER — Shall mean a person who delivers the pledge into the
possession of a pawnbroker, unless such person discloses that he is or was
acting for another, and in such an event "pledger" means the disclosed
principal.
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS — Shall mean items comprised of gold,
silver, platinum, palladium and alloys thereof, gems, coins, containing
precious metals and all forms of previously owned jewelry which contain
precious metals.
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS BUYER — Shall mean a person engaged in
the business of purchasing metals, gems, coins, containing precious metals
and all forms or previously owned jewelry, either as a primary business
or in connection with another business, from any person who is not in
the business of selling precious metals as required under N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1
to 51:6A-8 including but not limited to business commonly referred to as
"jewelry stores."
SECONDHAND GOODS — Shall mean all forms of previously owned goods,
including but not limited to: antiques, furniture, watches, china, crystal,
paintings, precious metals and gems and goods containing precious metals
and gems.
§ 11-16.2. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
The purpose and intent of this Section 11-16 is to provide licensing and
regulation of individuals dealing in precious metals, gems, secondhand
goods and pawn brokering to protect the residents of Edison, and those
transacting business in the Township of Edison as permitted, in part by
N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq. Further, the licensing and regulations of these
individuals will further assist the Edison Police Department and others in
recovering stolen goods. In addition, in regard to precious metals and gems,
this Section 11-16 shall be complied with in addition to the laws, rules and
§ 11-16.1 EDISON CODE § 11-16.2
AO:362
regulations as contained in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1
et seq.
§ 11-16.3. License Requirement. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
Any person, partnership or corporation in the full- or part-time business or
purchasing gold, silver, precious metals and gems in Edison Township shall
maintain a written record of all purchases, precious metals or jewels in the
Edison Township must, prior to engaging in such business, be duly licensed
by the Township. The licensing procedure is to be accomplished as follows.
§ 11-16.4. Registration Form. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
a. The business entity shall authorize a representative to complete a
registration application.
b. The registration application shall be made available to persons wishing
to secure same through the Township Clerk's office.
c. The registration shall thereafter be filed with the Chief of Police or his
designee.
d. The registration form shall be executed by that person or persons who
are responsible for the day-to-day operation of the business. Where a
corporation is involved, the president of the corporation shall sign
same, and, where partnerships are involved, the managing partner
shall sign same.
e. The registration form shall contain the following information:
1. The names and current addresses and telephone numbers of all
principals of the business. If the business is a corporation, then the
information shall include the names and current addresses and
telephone numbers of all stockholders.
2. The place or places where the business entity shall operate from, as
well as a listing of the hours when the entity proposes to conduct
business.
3. The names and addresses of three (3) business references.
4. A statement by the applicant that no principal of the business entity
has any arrests or convictions of any crimes. In cases of a
corporation, the certification shall apply to all stockholders. If there
is an arrest or conviction record, same must be disclosed.
5. A list of business and home addresses of all principals of the
business for the past five (5) years.
6. The registration must also include a photograph of the person who
will manage the day-to-day operation of the business, and that
individual must also agree to be fingerprinted by the Division of
Police.
§ 11-16.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-16.5
AO:363
§ 11-16.5. Effect on Existing Business. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
As to those business entities which are governed by this section and who
are already doing business in the Township prior to the effective date of this
section, then the businesses shall be licensed within thirty (30) days of the
effective date of this section.
§ 11-16.6. Fee; Term. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
The annual fee for the license shall be one hundred ($100.00) dollars. All
such licenses shall be issued for a period of one (1) year commencing
January 1 and expiring December 31 next following the date of issuance,
and there shall be no rebate for any lesser time. The license shall be
conspicuously exhibited upon the premises licensed thereunder.
§ 11-16.7. Record Required. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
Any person, partnership or corporation in the business of buying precious
metals or gems who buys, attempts to buy or offers to buy precious metals
or gems on the basis of bulk value from any person who is not in the
business of selling precious metals or gems in Edison Township shall
maintain a written record of all purchases and shall be subject to this
section.
§ 11-16.8. Form of Record. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
The record shall be in a book, non-loose-leaf form, with all pages numbered
in sequence. All entries shall be made in pen or ink. There shall be no spaces
between entries, and each entry shall be numbered in sequence.
§ 11-16.9. Contents of Record. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
The record shall contain the following information:
§ 11-16.10. Identification of Seller. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
The purchaser shall require that the seller present two (2) current and
reliable forms of identification. One of the forms of identification shall
bear a photograph of the seller. The record shall reflect the nature of the
identifications presented.
a. Date of sale.
b. Name and address of seller, sex, date of birth, telephone number, social
security number if available.
c. Detailed description of items purchased including the weight of any
precious metal purchased.
d. Purchase price.
§ 11-16.5 EDISON CODE § 11-16.11
AO:364
§ 11-16.11. Availability of Record for Inspection. [Ord. No.
O.1737-2010§ I]
The purchaser shall make the record available for inspection to any law
enforcement officer, upon demand, without the need for advance notice. The
record shall be kept at the purchaser's business premises. The records shall
be maintained for two (2) years from the date of purchase.
§ 11-16.12. Inspections. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
Each dealer doing business in Edison Township shall deliver to the Chief of
Police or his designee, on forms prescribed by the Edison Township Division
of Police a description of all items purchased, received or sold, within
twenty-four (24) hours of the completion of the transaction, except for
transactions conducted on Saturday in which said list shall be delivered to
the Police Department by no later than 12:00 noon of the Monday following.
§ 11-16.13. Prohibition. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
No dealer shall sell, melt, change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received for a period of ten (10) days from the date the
notification is made to the Chief of Police or his designee. All such items
shall remain on the premises where the purchase was made until the
expiration of the time period set forth herein.
§ 11-16.14. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1737-2010§ I]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 11-17. TOBACCO SALES.
§ 11-17.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.136.010]
As used in this section:
HEALTH OFFICER — Means the administrative officer of the Edison Health
Department and/or his or her authorized representatives.
LICENSED PREMISES — Means any place licensed by the State of New
Jersey to primarily sell at retail beer, wine or mixed spirits for consumption
on the premises.
PERSON — Means an individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Means any product made from the tobacco plant for the
purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
§ 11-16.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-17.1
AO:365
TOBACCO RETAILER — Means any person or entity that operates a store,
stand, booth, concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made to
purchasers for consumption or use and shall mean a person or entity that
owns or operates a vending machine and/or a vending machine location.
VENDING MACHINE — Means any automated, self-service device which,
upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — Means the room, enclosure, space or
area where a tobacco vending machine is installed and operated.
§ 11-17.2. Sale of Tobacco to Minors Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 8.136.020]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1 and N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51.4, it is unlawful for
anyone, including a tobacco retailer, to sell, give or permit to be sold or
given to a person under nineteen (19) years of age tobacco in any form.
§ 11-17.3. Identification Required. [1999 Code § 8.136.030]
It is unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell or permit tobacco products to
be sold to any individual under the age of nineteen (19) years, unless the
seller has a reasonable basis for determining that the buyer is of legal age
(nineteen (19) or over).
§ 11-17.4. Sale of Tobacco by Persons under Eighteen (18)
Prohibited. [1999 Code § 8.136.040]
It is unlawful for any tobacco retailer to allow, suffer or permit the sale of
tobacco products on his or her premises by any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years.
§ 11-17.5. Restrictions on Tobacco Vending Machines and Sales.
[1999 Code § 8.136.050]
a. It is unlawful for a tobacco retailer to offer for sale or to sell any tobacco
product through a vending machine in this Municipality, except in the
following instances:
1. In any premises or portion thereof to which access by minors is
expressly prohibited by law or by the expressed policy of the owner
of the premises; provided, however, that the tobacco vending
machine is:
(a) Located fully within such premises or section of premises from
which minors are prohibited,
(b) Not less than twenty (20) feet distant from all entrance and/or
exitways. If twenty (20) feet is not practical, the machine may
be placed in a location, approved by the Health Officer or his or
§ 11-17.1 EDISON CODE § 11-17.5
AO:366
her designee, which is less than twenty (20) feet distant but
sufficiently restrictive as to effectively limit access by minors,
(c) Under the visual supervision of the tobacco retailer or his or
her adult employee, so that all purchases from the machine are
readily observable;
2. In commercial buildings or industrial plants or portions thereof
where the public is generally not given access and where such
machines are intended for the use of the adult employees therein or
other adults, provided that the tobacco vending machine is:
(a) Located within the immediate vicinity of or in plain view of and
under the control of a responsible employee of nineteen (19)
years of age or older,
(b) Not located in a coat room, rest-room waiting area or similar
unmonitored area and is inaccessible to the public when the
establishment is closed;
3. In any premises or portion thereof where the principal use is for the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to the New Jersey
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., where
access by persons under nineteen (19) years of age is prohibited by
law, provided that the tobacco vending machine is:
(a) Located fully within such premises or section of premises from
which minors are prohibited,
(b) Not less than twenty (20) feet distant from all entrance and/or
exitways. If twenty (20) feet is not practical, the machine may
be placed in a location, approved by the Health Officer or his or
her designee, which is less than twenty (20) feet distant but
sufficiently restrictive as to effectively limit access by minors.
b. In all other instances, locations and places, a tobacco vending machine
shall be permitted to operate only if the operation of the machine to
vend tobacco products is possible only by the activation of an electronic
switch or other device which is controlled by the tobacco retailer or his
or her designated adult employee and only after the tobacco retailer or
his or her adult employee has made the reasonable determination that
the person wishing to use the tobacco vending machine is nineteen (19)
years of age or older. The electronic switch or device shall operate in
such a fashion that the vending machine shall remain in the "off"
position until activated for each individual sale.
c. All vending machines, regardless of their location, shall display a sign
affixed to the machine, in a form designated by the Township
Department of Health, which advises a purchaser that it is a violation of
State law and the ordinances of the Township to sell any tobacco
product to a person under nineteen (19) years of age. The sign shall
further list the penalties for illegal sale as provided by this section.
§ 11-17.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-17.6
AO:367
§ 11-17.6. Location Near School Property Restricted. [1999 Code
§ 8.136.060]
It is unlawful for a tobacco retailer to operate a tobacco vending machine
in any premises or portion thereof located within three hundred (300) feet
of any public or private school or other property used primarily for school
activities.
§ 11-17.7. Self-Service Promotion Displays Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 8.136.070]
No tobacco product shall be offered for sale by the use of self-service
displays which allow a purchaser to select a tobacco product by themselves
without the same being dispensed by an adult employee.
§ 11-17.8. Tampering with Machines or Devices. [1999 Code
§ 8.136.080]
It is unlawful for any tobacco retailer responsible for the operation of
a tobacco vending machine to remove, disconnect or otherwise disable
or permit another person to remove, disconnect or otherwise disable the
remotely activated electronic switch or device on a tobacco vending
machine in a location where subsection 11-17.5 provides for a vending
machine to be so equipped.
§ 11-17.9. Seizure of Unauthorized Machines. [1999 Code
§ 8.136.090]
A tobacco vending machine which is not permitted under this section may
be seized, forfeited and disposed of in the same manner as other unlawful
property seized under N.J.S.A. 2C:64-1 et seq. Any machine so seized shall
be returned to its owner upon payment of the reasonable costs incurred in
connection with the seizure and any fine imposed by the Municipal Court.
§ 11-17.10. Tobacco Paraphernalia. [1999 Code § 8.136.100]
a. No person, directly or indirectly, acting as an agent or otherwise, shall
distribute for commercial purposes at no cost, or at minimal cost, or
with coupons or rebate offers, or sell, give or furnish to a minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years, cigarette rolling papers, pipes or other
tobacco paraphernalia utilized to consume tobacco, either from a
vending machine or by retail counter sales.
b. Verification Required. Prior to the sale of any such item, the retailer
shall first verify, by means of photographic identification containing the
bearer's date of birth, that the person purchasing the product is
eighteen (18) years of age or older. Verification by photographic
identification shall not be required for any person over the age of
twenty-six (26).
§ 11-17.6 EDISON CODE § 11-17.10
AO:368
§ 11-17.11. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 8.136.110]
§ 11-17.12. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.136.120]
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person charged
with violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars
nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each offense.
c. Violations and Penalties. Any retailer that violates this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars.
a. Whenever the Health Officer or his or her designee or any Police Officer
or other law enforcement officer reasonably believes there exists a
violation of this section, he or she may issue a summons and complaint
not later than sixty (60) days after discovery of the alleged violation.
The complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable
particularity the nature of the violation, including reference to the
subsection of this section alleged to have been violated. The complaint
may be personally delivered or may be sent by certified mail and
regular mail to the alleged violator.
b. The Health Officer or his or her designee or any other person charged
with enforcement of this section, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premises or place as may be necessary for the
proper enforcement hereof.
c. It is unlawful for any person to oppose or otherwise obstruct the Health
Officer or his or her designee in the performance of duties hereunder,
and he or she may request the assistance of a law enforcement agency
or peace officer when necessary to execute his or her official duty in a
manner prescribed by law.
a. Each sale of tobacco to a minor shall constitute a separate offense.
b. The Board of Health, in addition to the monetary penalties prescribed
herein, may suspend the retail food establishment license of any person
or entity convicted of a second or subsequent violation of this section
within any two-year period for not more than one (1) day and for not
more than three (3) days for any third or subsequent offense, pursuant
to the authority of the Board to license and regulate food
establishments, as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31c.
c. The Municipal Court of this Municipality, in addition to the monetary
penalties prescribed herein, may order the suspension of the operation
of any nonretail food business convicted of a second or subsequent
violation of this section within any two-year period for not more than
one (1) day and for not more than three (3) days for any third or
subsequent offense.
d. Any second or subsequent conviction of a violation of this section within
any two-year period shall be subject to a penalty of not less than five
§ 11-17.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-17.12
AO:369
§ 11-18. PUBLIC EVENT PERMITS.
§ 11-18.1. Definition. [1999 Code § 12.20.010]
As used in this section:
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT — Means any event, including but not limited
to a circus, carnival, fair, festival, concert or exhibition, expected to be
attended by one thousand (1,000) or more people at any one (1) time.
§ 11-18.2. Special Permit Required; Prohibitions. [1999 Code
§ 12.20.020]
§ 11-18.3. Applications; Procedure for Granting Special Permits;
Fee. [1999 Code § 12.20.030]
hundred ($500.00) dollars nor more than the maximum penalty stated
in Chapter I, Section 1-5
a. No person, group of persons, partnership, association or corporation or
any combination thereof shall maintain, conduct, promote or operate on
any lands or premises within the Township, other than in established
theaters, auditoriums or other places licensed or permitted for public
occupancy as limited by law, any use thereof for the purposes of
entertaining the general public if a fee or admission is charged or
voluntary contributions solicited, except pursuant to a special permit
issued therefor by the Township as hereinafter provided.
b. No owner, lessee, licensee or other person, partnership, association or
corporation having any right to or interest in any real property within
the jurisdiction of the Township shall license, rent, lease or otherwise
permit the use of such real property or any part thereof for the use of
any mass gathering if a fee or admission is charged or voluntary
contributions solicited other than in established theaters, auditoriums
or other places licensed for public occupancy as limited by law, except
pursuant to a special permit issued therefor by the Director of Public
Safety as hereinafter provided.
a. The Director of Public Safety shall issue a special permit herein upon
written application made by such person, partnership, association or
corporation or combination thereof who proposes to maintain, conduct,
promote or operate such public entertainment, together with the
owner, lessor or licensor who proposes to rent, lease, license or
otherwise permit such public entertainment, hereafter designated as
the "applicant."
1. The applicant shall file a verified application with the Director of
Public Safety at least fifteen (15) days before the first day of
advertising and at least ninety (90) days before the first day of the
public entertainment.
§ 11-17.12 EDISON CODE § 11-18.3
AO:370
§ 11-18.4. Application Information. [1999 Code § 12.20.040]
b. All applications shall be in such form as prescribed hereunder and shall
be accompanied by the required filing fee of one thousand ($1,000.00)
dollars. The fee shall be waived for bona fide nonprofit service
organizations.
c. The Director of Public Safety shall, within thirty (30) days issue a
permit upon such terms and conditions to ensure the public health,
safety and welfare. If the Director of Public Safety rejects the
application, it shall set forth in writing the reason for the rejection.
a. The application shall be signed by all persons having a financial interest
in the event and by the property owners on whose property the
proposed event is to take place.
b. The permit application shall include the following information:
1. The applicant's full name, residence, telephone number, post office
address and whether such applicant is an individual, partnership,
firm, corporation or a governmental unit or agency of the State or
local government. All applicants shall submit a financial statement
with their application, except that such statement shall not be
required of a unit of State or local government;
2. A diagrammatic sketch plan of the proposed site of the public
entertainment showing the locations and dimensions of the
proposed service roads, potable water facilities, sanitary facilities,
sewage disposal facilities, medical service facilities, distribution of
security personnel and provisions for food storage, as well as
camping facilities and projected plans for enclosure, if necessary, of
the proposed site;
3. A statement of the purposes of the gathering and a program of
events scheduled;
4. If the property on which the gathering is to take place is not owned
by the applicant, then the names of the lessor or licensor and a
copy of the lease or license between the owner and the applicant;
5. A statement of the number of persons expected to attend such
event and the duration of such attendance;
6. The specific details, including certified copies of contracts entered
into or provisions relating to:
(a) Food and drink;
(b) Sanitary facilities;
(c) Transportation and parking facilities;
§ 11-18.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-18.4
AO:371
(d) Security and protection of surrounding area, including specific
reference to the number of guards or special police assisting in
the control of traffic and supervision of those attending. The
contract should indicate the number of security guards in
shifts to cover the event from a period of three (3) days prior to
the event until the area is cleaned and evacuated after the
event. Such provisions shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Division of Police;
(e) On-site medical facilities and hospital care;
(f) Janitorial services and post-gathering trash removal. A
contract indicating the number of janitorial and clean-up
personnel in shifts to cover the area prior to the event, during
the event and until the area is evacuated;
(g) Outline of the action to be taken to ensure the cleanup and
restoration of the area at which such event takes place within
forty-eight (48) hours after the close of the event;
(h) Provisions for fire prevention and safety as recommended and
approved by the Township Division of Fire.
7. A statement containing the names of licensed ticket printers to be
used and the plans for assuring the return of monies upon the
termination or cancellation of the events as well as the means of
notifying potential and existing ticket holders of such cancellation;
8. Examples of proposed advertising of the event, if any;
9. Bond or other arrangement.
(a) A certified copy of a bond or verified evidence of other suitable
financial arrangements, as hereinafter required, must be
attached to the application to include:
(1) Reimbursement to ticket purchasers in the event of
termination or cancellation of the event of or failure of the
applicant to conduct the event as proposed and advertised,
(2) Clean up and restoration of the area at which such event
takes place within forty-eight (48) hours after the close of
the event,
(3) Payment to any volunteer organizations of the Township
who have agreed to provide services for the event.
(b) The bond or other suitable financial arrangements shall be in
accordance with the following formula: number of tickets
printed times admission fee for each ticket printed plus two
($2.00) dollars per printed ticket equals minimum amount of
bond or other security;
§ 11-18.4 EDISON CODE § 11-18.4
AO:372
§ 11-18.5. Hours of Operation. [1999 Code § 12.20.050]
All public entertainment events shall cease operations no later than 12:00
midnight.
All applicants shall be subject to the Edison Noise Regulations found in
Chapter X, Police Regulations except the hours for loudspeakers and public
address systems shall be extended to the hour of 12:00 midnight.
§ 11-18.6. Compliance with the Township Ordinances. [1999 Code
§ 12.20.060]
All applicants shall be subject to Edison Township zoning and/or planning
ordinances and secure necessary approvals from Edison Township Zoning
and/or Planning Boards if warranted.
§ 11-18.7. Appeal Process. [1999 Code § 12.20.070]
Denial of a public entertainment permit by the Public Safety Director shall
be appealable to the Edison Township Council no later than ten (10) days
from the date of denial.
§ 11-19. RAFFLE AND BINGO LICENSES.
§ 11-19.1. Sunday Games of Chance. [1999 Code § 5.68.060]
10. An insurance policy covering liability, personal property and bodily
damage in such amounts to be fixed by the Director of the Division
of Public Safety.
c. Designated representatives of the Township Divisions of Police and Fire
and Department of Health shall be permitted to inspect at any time the
site of the event for the purpose of investigating the application and for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section.
d. The applicant, prior to the event, shall post a bond suitable to the
Director of Public Safety as the amount and surety, pursuant to
paragraph b9 above.
e. A fee of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars shall accompany each
application unless exempt under subsection 11-18.3.
a. Operation on Sundays Permitted. Organizations, societies and
associations duly licensed to hold and operate legalized games of
chance under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 5:8-50
et seq. are authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-58 to
hold, conduct and operate authorized games of chance in the Township
on Sundays.
§ 11-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-19.2
AO:373
§ 11-19.2. Issuing Authority. [Ord. No. O.1538-2006]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to act as the "issuing
authority" to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses.
§ 11-19.3. License Fees. [Ord. No. O.1538-2006]
The License Fees for Raffle and Bingo Licenses shall be the same as
established by the State of New Jersey.
§ 11-19.4. Instant Raffle Licensing Fees. [Ord. No. O.1541-2006]
§ 11-20. FIREWORKS PERMIT.
§ 11-20.1. Permit Required; Application; Fee. [Ord. No.
O.1533-2006]
Any applicant seeking a permit to display or discharge fireworks must
submit an application at least twenty-one (21) days prior to date of the
display or discharge of the fireworks. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2, et
seq., each application shall be accompanied by a three hundred thirty-one
($331.00) dollar permit fee.
§ 11-20.2. Firework Property Damage Bond. [Ord. No. O.1533-2006]
At the time the firework permit application is submitted, the applicant
will be required to post a cash bond in the amount of two thousand five
hundred ($2,500.00) dollars to cover the payment of any potential damages,
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 21:3-5.
§ 11-20.3. Escrow Fee. [Ord. No. O.1533-2006]
At the time the firework permit application is submitted, the applicant
will be required to post a cash escrow fee in the amount of five hundred
($500.00) dollars for legal review of the fireworks permit application and
expenses associated with the drafting of any resolution authorizing
Township Council to grant any such fireworks permit.
a. Instant raffle games shall mean a non-draw raffle game in which a
player purchases shares, tickets, or rights to participate and the winner
is determined by a previously determined prize designation which has
been obscured from the player's view until a tab or other opaque
covering has been removed.
b. No qualified organization shall conduct an instant raffle without first
obtaining a license from the Township. The organization is required to
pay the State Legalized Games of Chance license fee. The Municipal
license fee will be exempt.
§ 11-19.2 EDISON CODE § 11-20.4
AO:374
§ 11-20.4. Application Review. [Ord. No. O.1533-2006]
Upon receipt of the firework permit application, the Township Attorney
will review the application to ensure that the applicant has appropriate
insurance to conduct such a display. Additionally, each application will be
forwarded in accordance to N.J.S.A. 21:3-3 to the Chief of the Division
of Police and Chief of the Division of Fire for review. Both the Chief of
the Division of Police and the Chief of the Division of Fire must make
a determination that the planned fireworks display is safe and that the
discharge of fireworks does not pose a hazard to anyone's property and/or
person(s).
§ 11-20.5. Council Approval. [Ord. No. O.1533-2006]
Upon successful application review, the Department of Law will be required
to draft a resolution authorizing the Township Council to issue the fireworks
permit. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(a)5(iii), the Township Council
has the sole authority to issue a permit to discharge or display fireworks.
The resolution must pass by a majority vote.
§ 11-20.6. Permit Issuance. [Ord. No. O.1533-2006]
Upon the passage of the resolution authorizing the Township Council to
issue a fireworks permit, the Chief Fire Inspector will issue a fireworks
permit to the applicant. The permit shall be issued in accordance to N.J.S.A.
21:3-4 entitled "Contents of applications for permits; approval of storage
place; permit nontransferable."
§ 11-21. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.
§ 11-21.1. Findings and Purpose. [1999 Code § 8.20.010]
The Edison Township Council finds and declares that:
a. The handling, storage, use, processing and disposal of toxic chemicals,
radioactive materials and hazardous wastes may endanger the public
health, safety and welfare of citizens of this Township and may result in
these substances entering the ground and waters of Edison Township.
b. It is necessary for the protection of the citizens of this Township that
persons and entities that handle, store, use, process or dispose of toxic
chemicals, radioactive materials and hazardous wastes in the Township
identify themselves and disclose the identity, amount and location of
those substances.
c. Disclosure is necessary to ensure quick and appropriate response
created by the handling, storage, use, processing or disposal of toxic
chemicals, radioactive material and hazardous wastes so that the
source of such chemicals, materials and wastes may be identified
quickly in the event of an emergency and so that the Township may
§ 11-20.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-21.1
AO:375
§ 11-21.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.20.020]
As used in this section:
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Means:
§ 11-21.3. Registration Certificates Required. [1999 Code
§ 8.20.030]
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct, engage in or
carry on any business, trade, occupation or activity, within the Township,
which involves the handling, storage, transportation, use, processing or
disposal of hazardous substances without having first complied with the
provisions of this section and obtained a registration certificate therefor as
is herein provided. This certificate must be renewed on an annual basis.
The period shall run from April 1 to March 31. Any department may issue a
summons for failure to register as required by this section.
§ 11-21.4. Forms to Be Kept on File; Application. [1999 Code
§ 8.20.040]
Forms for registration and applications therefor shall be prepared and kept
on file by the Division of Licenses and Permits. Applications shall be made
in writing to the Division of Licenses and Permits which shall issue the
registration certificate.
§ 11-21.5. Standards for Granting Registration Certificate. [1999
Code § 8.20.050]
acquire information on the location of persons and entities using or
storing such chemicals, materials or wastes.
a. Petroleum and petroleum compounds;
b. All pesticides designated as "prohibited," "restricted" or "specially
restricted" pursuant to New Jersey Pesticide Control Act of 1971,
N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et seq. at N.J.A.C. 7:30-2.1 et seq.;
c. Substances identified as hazardous by the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency at 40 R.F. 59961, December 30, 1975, proposed
pursuant to Section 311 (b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977
(33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the list of toxic pollutants designed by
Congress or the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section
307 of that Act.
a. Qualifications of any applicant for a certificate or renewal thereof to
determine whether the applicant has complied with the general laws
and statutes of the United States of America, the State of New Jersey
and this Code, shall be made in accordance with the following
standards:
§ 11-21.1 EDISON CODE § 11-21.5
AO:376
§ 11-21.6. Inspections. [1999 Code § 8.20.060]
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of any activity, business or occupation are provided for or
required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance
with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the
duty of the management in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or employee of
the Township who is authorized or directed to make such inspection, at any
reasonable time that admission is requested.
§ 11-21.7. Posting of Registration Certificate. [1999 Code
§ 8.20.070]
Certificates issued under this section shall be posted at the place of
business shown on the certificate in a conspicuous place. The certificate
shall remain posted for the duration of the licensing year when issued and
so long as the registered business is in operation.
§ 11-21.8. Purpose of Fees; Legislative Intent. [1999 Code
§ 8.20.080]
The fees herein imposed for registration certificates may be revenueproducing
in nature, but such fees are intended primarily to cover the costs
of inspections and registration of such businesses and to ensure compliance
with the laws of the State and the ordinances of this Municipality. It is
the legislative intent of this section to ensure the fact that all businesses
1. Police regulations and laws;
2. The zoning ordinance of the Township of Edison;
3. The Building Code;
4. The Health Code;
5. The Fire Prevention Code;
6. The reports of all municipal officers required under this section;
7. Other general laws and public health statutes and codes of the
State of New Jersey applicable to this Municipality;
8. The history of the applicant regarding past violations and the
applicant's continued compliance with registration requirements.
b. A complete copy of these reports shall be maintained in the files of the
Edison Division of Fire.
c. Any violations which are discovered shall be abated, it being the
responsibility of the appropriate department and that department alone
to enforce violations to its code.
§ 11-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-21.8
AO:377
of whatsoever kind and wheresoever located in this Township shall be
inspected annually to obtain compliance with the laws as aforesaid.
§ 11-21.9. Fees. [1999 Code § 8.20.090]
The registration fee to be paid for conducting or engaging in the business,
trades or activities set forth in the registration certificate required section
shall be ten ($10.00) dollars, the name used being a designation of such
business, trade or activity required to be registered. This fee is to be
collected when the application is accepted or the application shall not be
processed. There shall be no prorated fee for applicants for a partial year.
§ 11-21.10. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.20.100]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any subsection of this section, shall, upon conviction, be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. Every day of noncompliance
with this section shall constitute a separate offense and subject to
punishment as provided by this subsection.
§ 11-22. HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTORS.
§ 11-22.1. Purpose and Policy. [1999 Code § 5.24.010]
The Municipal Council of the Township finds that there are often complaints
made by homeowners and commercial property owners and proprietors
against home remodelers and other businesses and individuals engaged in
the practice of restructuring, altering, rebuilding or otherwise replacing
existing home structures and commercial properties.
It is the purpose of this section to protect the home owner and commercial
property owner against abuse, frauds and deceptive practices in order to
regulate these businesses and individuals in the home and commercial
property remodeling business.
§ 11-22.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.24.020]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — Means any structure containing no more than four (4)
residences or dwelling units.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Means a business or proprietorship operating
in a store or other commercial structure that provides, sells or in any way
engages in the business of providing a product or service to the general
public.
CONTRACTOR — Means any person or salesman, other than a bona fide
employee of the owner, who owns, operates, maintains, conducts, controls
or transacts a home improvement business and who undertakes or offers
to undertake or agrees to perform any home improvement or solicits any
contract therefor, whether or not such person is licensed or subject to the
§ 11-21.8 EDISON CODE § 11-22.2
AO:378
licensing requirements of this section and whether or not such person is a
prime contractor or sub-contractor with respect to the owner.
DIAMETER OF BREAST HEIGHT (D.B.H.) — Means the diameter of tree
measured at breast height, approximately four and one-half (4.5) feet from
the ground.
DIRECTOR — Means the Business Administrator and/or his or her designee.
HOME IMPROVEMENT — Means the construction, demolition, repair,
replacement, remodeling, alteration, conversion, rehabilitation, renovation,
modernization, improvement or addition to any land or building, or that
portion thereof which is used or designed to be used as a residence or
dwelling place and shall include but not be limited to the construction,
erection, replacement or improvement of swimming pools, driveways,
terraces, patios, porches, garages, closets, kitchens, bathrooms, fire
protection devices, alarm systems, water softeners, heaters, purifiers, solar
heating or water systems, aluminum and vinyl siding, carpentry, cesspool
and septic tanks, masonry, roofing and other improvements to structures or
upon land which is adjacent to a dwelling house.
a. Home improvement shall not include:
1. The construction of a new home building or work done by a
contractor in compliance with a guarantee of completion of a new
building project;
2. The sale of goods or materials by a seller who neither arranges to
perform nor performs directly or indirectly any work or labor in
connection with the installation of or application of the goods or
materials;
3. Residences owned by or controlled by the State or any municipal
subdivision thereof;
4. Painting or decorating of a building, residence, home or apartment,
when not incidental or related to home improvement work as
herein defined.
b. Without regard to the extent of affixation, home improvement shall also
include the installation of air conditioning systems, storm windows, fire
or burglar alarms, or communication systems, the insulation of a
structure or the demolition of a structure.
c. Home improvement shall also include any persons engaged in the
business of tree pruning, tree and/or stump removal upon land which is
adjacent to a dwelling.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACT — Means an agreement, whether
oral or written, or contained in one (1) or more documents, between
a contractor and an owner; or contractor and a tenant; regardless of
the number of residence or dwelling units contained in the building in
which the tenant resides, provided that the work is to be performed
in, to or upon the residence or dwelling unit of such tenant, for the
§ 11-22.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-22.2
AO:379
§ 11-22.3. License Required. [1999 Code § 5.24.030]
§ 11-22.4. License Fees; Terms of Licenses. [1999 Code § 5.24.040]
performance of a home improvement, and includes all labor, service and
materials to be furnished and performed thereunder.
HOME IMPROVEMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Means any shop,
establishment, place or premises where the home improvement
business is transacted or carried on.
LICENSEE — Means a person permitted to engage in the home
improvement business under the provision of this section.
OWNER — Means any homeowner, condominium unit owner, tenant,
or any other person who orders, contracts for or purchases the home
improvement services of a contractor or the person entitled to the
performance of the work of a contractor pursuant to a home
improvement contract.
PERSONS — Means an individual, firm, company, salesman,
partnership or corporation, trade group or association.
SALESPERSON — Means any individual who negotiates or offers to
negotiate a home improvement contract with an owner or who solicits
or otherwise endeavors to procure in person a home improvement
contract from an owner on behalf of a contractor, or for himself or
herself should the salesman be also the contractor, whether or not
such person is licensed or subject to the licensing requirements of this
section.
TREE — Means any deciduous or coniferous species which reaches a
typical mature height of ten (10) feet or more. An individual tree for
the purpose of this section has a D.B.H. of four (4) inches or greater.
A specimen with multiple trunks will be considered an individual tree
with a D.B.H. of one-half (1/2) of the sum of the diameters of the trunks.
a. No person shall solicit, canvass, sell, perform or obtain a home
improvement contract as a contractor salesman from an owner without
a license therefor.
b. A license issued pursuant to this section may not be construed to
authorize the licensee to perform any particular type of work or engage
in any kind of business which is reserved to qualified licensees under
separate provisions of State or local law, nor shall any license or
authority other than as it is issued or permitted pursuant to this section
authorize engaging in the home improvement business.
a. License to conduct home improvement business; salesperson's license.
b. All licenses will be issued for a one-year period unless the license shall
be suspended or revoked by the director pursuant to this section.
§ 11-22.2 EDISON CODE § 11-22.4
AO:380
§ 11-22.5. Licenses Not Assignable; Posting; Duplicate; Director's
Powers. [1999 Code § 5.24.050]
c. The fee for the licenses required under this section shall be two
hundred ($200.00) dollars. The fee for duplicate licenses required
under this section shall be twenty ($20.00) dollars. Fees for aforesaid
licenses shall be approved by the Municipal Council and published in
the Municipal Clerk's office by June 1 of each year and be effective on
July 1 of each year. Licenses not issued on or before July 1 of the
calendar year shall be issued on a pro-rated basis as follows:
Date of Issue for License Fee
1. July, August, September $200.00
2. October, November, December $150.00
3. January, February, March $100.00
4. April, May, June $50.00
a. No license shall be assignable or transferable.
b. Every license shall, within ten (10) days after a change of control in
ownership or of management or of change of address or trade name,
notify the director of each change.
c. A license issued hereunder shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous
place in the place of business of the licensee.
d. A duplicate license may be issued for one lost or mutilated and shall
bear the word "duplicate" stamped across its face.
e. Business Administrator. In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere
prescribed in this section, the Business Administrator shall have the
power:
1. To appoint an adequate number of assistants, inspectors and other
employees as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section, to prescribe their duties, and to fix their compensation
within the amount appropriated therefor;
2. To examine the qualifications and fitness of applicants for licenses
under this section;
3. To keep a record of all licenses issued, suspended or revoked;
4. At any time to require reasonable information of an applicant or
licensee, and may require the production of books of accounts,
financial statements, contracts or other records which relate to the
home improvement activity, qualification or compliance with this
section by the licensee provided, however, that such information
and production of records is required of him or her pursuant to its
regular business and functions under this section;
§ 11-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-22.5
AO:381
§ 11-22.6. Application for License. [1999 Code § 5.24.060]
§ 11-22.7. Rules and Regulations. [1999 Code § 5.24.070]
The Business Administrator may make such rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section, as may be necessary with
respect to the form and content of applications for licenses, the reception
thereof, the investigation and examination of applicants and their
qualifications, and the other matters incidental or appropriate to his or
her powers and duties as prescribed by this section and for the proper
administration and endorsements of the provisions of this section, and to
amend or repeal any such rules and regulations.
§ 11-22.8. Prohibited Acts. [1999 Code § 5.24.080]
The following acts are prohibited:
5. To adopt rules and regulations related to the identification of
salesperson.
a. An application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made to the
Business Administrator and/or his or her designee on a form prescribed
by him or her.
b. A separate license shall be required for each piece of business.
c. The application shall be filed only by the actual owner of a business,
shall be in writing, signed and under oath; it shall contain the office
address of the business; the name and residence address of the owner
or partner and if a corporation, trade group, or association, the names
and resident address of the directors and principal officers.
d. The Business Administrator may require the names and residence
addresses of any employees of an applicant in addition to the name of
insurance carriers as well as the description of the insurance policies
covering the business for the most recent three (3) years, a list of the
five (5) most recent jobs performed by the prospective licensees as well
as a list of material suppliers, in addition to any other information which
the Business Administrator may deem advisable.
e. Each applicant shall be over eighteen (18) years of age and of good
character.
f. The application will be reviewed and the applicant notified as to
whether a license will be issued within seven (7) business days of the
Township's receipt of the application.
g. All licensees must provide evidence of liability insurance in a minimum
Combined Single Limit (CSL) amount of one hundred thousand
($100,000.00) dollars.
§ 11-22.5 EDISON CODE § 11-22.8
AO:382
a. Abandonment or willful failure to perform, without justification, any
home improvement contract, commercial business or storefront
improvement project or other such project engaged in or undertaken by
a contractor or willful deviation from or disregard of plans or
specifications in any material respect with the written consent of the
owner;
b. Making any substantial misrepresentation in the solicitation or
procurement of a home improvement contract or commercial property
or making any false promise of character likely to influence, persuade
or induce;
c. Any fraud in the execution of, or in the material alteration of any
contract, mortgage, promissory note or other document incident to a
home improvement or commercial property transaction;
d. Preparing or accepting any mortgage, promissory note, or other
evidence of indebtedness upon the obligations of a home improvement
or commercial property improvement transaction with knowledge that
it recites a greater monetary obligation than the agreed consideration
for the home improvement or commercial property improvement work;
e. Directly or indirectly publishing any advertisement relating to home
improvement or commercial property improvement which contains an
assertion, representation, or statement of fact which is false, deceptive,
or misleading, provided that any advertisement which complies with
the then existing rules, regulations or guidelines of the Federal Trade
Commission shall not be deemed false, deceptive, or misleading; or by
any means of advertising or purporting to offer the general public any
home improvement or commercial property work with the intent not to
accept contracts for the particular work or at the price which is
advertised to the public;
f. Failure to notify the Director of any change or control in ownership,
management or business name or business name or location;
g. Conducting a home improvement or commercial property repair
business in any name other than the one in which the contractor is
licensed;
h. Willful failure to comply with any order, demand, rule, regulation, or
requirement made by the Director pursuant to provisions of this
section;
i. As part of or in connection with the inducement to make a home
improvement or commercial property improvement contract, no person
shall promise or offer to pay credits or allow to a buyer any
compensation or reward for the procurement of a home improvement or
commercial property improvement contract with others;
j. No salesperson:
§ 11-22.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-22.8
AO:383
§ 11-22.9. False or Fraudulent Representations. [1999 Code
§ 5.24.090]
Any contractor, canvasser or seller of home improvements and commercial
property repairs who shall knowingly make any false or fraudulent
representations or statements to be made in respect to the character of
any sale, or the party authorizing the same, or as to the quality, condition,
or value of any property offered by him or her for sale shall be deemed in
violation of this section and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in
accordance with subsection 11-22.13.
1. May concurrently represent more than one (1) contractor in the
solicitation or negotiation of any one (1) home improvement or
commercial property improvement contract from an owner. The use
of a contract form which fails to disclose a named contractorprincipal,
whether for the purpose of offering the contract to
various contractors other than the one the salesperson purported
to represent in negotiation or otherwise, is prohibited. No
salesperson may be authorized to select a prime contractor on
behalf of the owner,
2. Shall accept or pay any compensation of any kind, for or on account
of a home improvement transaction, from or for any person other
than the contractor whom he or she represents with respect to the
transaction;
k. As a part of or in connection with the inducement to enter any home
improvement or commercial property contract:
1. No person shall promise or offer to pay, credit or allow to any
owner, compensation or reward for the procurement or placing of a
home improvement business contract or commercial property
contract with others.
2. No contractor or salesman shall offer, deliver, pay, credit or allow to
the owner any gift, bonus award, or merchandise, trading stamps,
or cash loan as an inducement to enter a home improvement or
commercial business improvement contract.
3. A contractor or salesperson may give items to prospective
customers for advertising or sales promotion purposes where the
gift is not conditioned upon obtaining a contract for home
improvement or commercial property improvement, provided no
such item shall exceed a cost value of five ($5.00) dollars and no
owner and/or other person shall receive more than one (1) such
item in connection with any one (1) transaction.
§ 11-22.8 EDISON CODE § 11-22.10
AO:384
§ 11-22.10. Contracts to Comply with Law. [1999 Code § 5.24.100]
Any home improvement contract or commercial property improvement
entered into between a contractor and an owner shall comply with the
provisions of the Home Repair Financing Act.
§ 11-22.11. Exceptions. [1999 Code § 5.24.110]
No contractor's license shall be required in the following instances:
§ 11-22.12. Investigations. [1999 Code § 5.24.120]
a. An individual who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages
or salary;
b. A plumber, electrician, architect, professional engineer or any other
such person who is required by State or municipal ordinance to attain
standards of competency or experience as a prerequisite to engaging in
such craft or profession and who is acting exclusively within the scope
of the craft or profession for which he is currently licensed pursuant to
such other law;
c. Any retail clerk, clerical, administrative or other employee of a licensed
contractor, as to a transaction on the premises of the contractor;
d. This section shall not apply to or affect the validity of a home
improvement contract or commercial property improvement contract
otherwise within the purview of this section which is made prior to the
effective date of the respective provisions of this section governing such
contracts;
e. Any home improvement or commercial property improvement, where
the aggregate contract price for all labor, materials and other items is
less than two hundred ($200.00) dollars. This exemption does not apply
where the work is only part of a larger or major operation, whether
undertaken by the same or a different contractor, or in which a division
of the operation is made in contracts of amounts less than two hundred
($200.00) dollars for the purpose of evasion of this provision or
otherwise.
a. Edison Township Contractor Review Board. There is established the
Township Contractor Review Board which shall be comprised of the
Township Engineer, Housing Inspector, and the Township Code
Enforcement Officer, as well as two (2) members of the private sector
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Municipal
Council to serve on the Board for a period of time for up to one (1) year.
b. Any licensee who is aggrieved by a license revocation, denial or
suspension imposed under this section may file a notice of appeal with
the Township Contractor Review Board according to the procedure set
forth in paragraph d below.
§ 11-22.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-22.12
AO:385
§ 11-22.13. Violation; Penalty. [1999 Code § 5.24.130]
c. Any homeowner or commercial property owner who has a complaint
against any licensee may file a written notice of complaint with the
Township Contractor Review Board according to the procedure set
forth in paragraph d below.
d. Appeals.
1. A notice of appeal must be filed by an aggrieved licensee within ten
(10) calendar days of either the license revocation, denial or
suspension. A homeowner may file a notice of complaint at any time
during the pendency of the home improvement contract or within
thirty (30) days of completion of the work performed by the
licensee under the contract.
2. Within seven (7) calendar days of the receipt of either a notice of
complaint or a notice of appeal, the Township Contractor Review
Board will schedule a hearing to occur within the next fifteen (15)
calendar days, at which hearing the parties will have the
opportunity to be heard on the matter. The notice of hearing shall
be served either personally or by registered mail and shall state the
date and place of hearing and set forth ground or grounds of the
action under appeal. Any license revocation or suspension which is
appealed under this procedure shall be stayed pending the decision
of the Township Contractor Review Board.
3. The hearing referred to above will be conducted in the presence of
the Township Contractor Review Board and will be recorded
verbatim via audio tape. A majority decision of the Township
Contractor Review Board shall be made upon the completion of the
hearing and shall be final.
e. Any notice of complaint filed by a homeowner or commercial property
and any notice of appeal filed by an aggrieved licensee shall contain the
name of the licensee, date of occurrence of the act complaint of, as well
as a description of the act or acts complained of.
f. No member of the Township Contractor Review Board shall receive any
compensation for participation on this Board.
g. The costs associated with administration by the Township Contractor
Review Board will be part of the budget under the control of the
Director of Planning and Engineering.
h. The Director of Planning and Engineering also may certify a question of
policy with respect to the administration of this section to the Township
Contractor Review Board at any time the Director deems advisable. In
this function, the Township Contractor Review Board will answer the
inquiry and advise the Director of its determination. Any such
determination will be merely advisory to the Director rather than
mandatory.
§ 11-22.12 EDISON CODE § 11-22.13
AO:386
§ 11-23. through § 11-26. (RESERVED)
§ 11-27. ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 11-27.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 8.04.010; Ord. No. O.1992-2017]
The purpose of this section is:
a. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
b. The Business Administrator shall have authority to revoke or suspend
any license issued pursuant to this section or to deny the renewal of a
license for any one (1) or more of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, bribery in securing a license;
2. The making of any false statement as to a material matter in any
application for a license;
3. The person or the management personnel of the contractor are
untrustworthy or not of good character;
4. The business transactions of the contractor have been or are
marked by a practice of failure to timely perform or complete its
contracts or the manipulation of assets or accounts, or by fraud or
bad faith, or is marked by an unwholesome method or practice of
solicitation of business from owners;
5. Failure to display the license as provided in this section;
6. Failure to comply with any demand or requirement lawfully made
by the Director;
7. When an agent or employee of a licensee has been guilty of an act
or omission, fraud, misrepresentation and the licensee has
approved or had knowledge thereof or has later ratified said act,
omission, fraud or misrepresentation.
a. To continue providing valuable services of police, fire and other
emergency services of the Township in protecting the lives and
property of its citizens and businesses by monitoring and responding to
burglar and fire alarms as well as other emergencies;
b. To establish standards and regulations for various types of local
burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices, whether by direct
telephone line, radio, dial telephone or other means;
c. To reduce the increasing number of false alarms generated by
businesses and residences within the Township, directly or indirectly
§ 11-22.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-27.1
AO:387
§ 11-27.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.04.020; Ord. O.1607-2008 § 7;
Ord. No. O.1722-2009; Ord. No. O.1992-2017]
As used in this section:
ALARM CONSOLE — Means the console and/or component devices that
comprise a system for giving visual or audio indications, or both, located in
the communications center.
ALARM DEVICE — Means any type of alarm system providing local and/
or remote warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril that alerts
neighbors and/or to which police, fire or other emergency services are
expected to respond. This refers to burglar alarms, fire alarms, smoke
alarms, local alarms and all such other alarms except those that are
designed to alert only the occupants of an individual residential unit.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Means any alarm, device or combination of
devices installed in one (1) or more buildings at a location other than the
alarm console.
ALARM USER — Means the person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure, facility or part thereof where an alarm system is maintained.
AUTO DIALING DEVICE — Means a device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a special telephone number,
designated by the Director of Public Safety, at the communications center
indicating a need for emergency response.
COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — Means the facilities within the jurisdiction
of the Edison Township Department of Public Safety designed to receive and
dispatch emergency response.
COORDINATOR — Means the Chief of Police or his/her designee who will
process initial alarm permit applications and alarm permit fees; bill and
collect administrative charges for excessive false alarms; and issue
summons for failure to register an alarm system and/or failure to pay
administrative charges.
DIAL ALARM — Means any alarm device which when activated
automatically or electronically selects a telephone line connected to a
central alarm station or to the Edison Communications Center, reporting
either a line or prerecorded message requesting assistance.
EXCLUDED ALARMS — Means any smoke detector installed within a
residence designed to warn the occupants of the presence of smoke.
reported to and responded to by the paid and/or voluntary emergency
services of the Township;
d. To promote improved maintenance of alarm systems. Failure to
properly maintain alarm systems and train personnel in their proper
operation are the primary causes of false alarms responded to by the
various emergency services of the Township.
§ 11-27.1 EDISON CODE § 11-27.2
AO:388
FALSE ALARM — Means any alarm activated by the inadvertence,
negligence or unintentional act of someone other than an intruder and
includes, as well, alarms caused by the malfunctioning of the alarm device
or other irrelevant equipment.
LOCAL ALARM — Means any alarm which when activated produces a
signal, such as a store burglar alarm actuating bell, siren or similar device,
which purpose is the attracting of attention to the premises. Alarms
installed in halls, lobbies or other common areas of multiple dwellings are
local alarms, but smoke alarms installed within residential units of any
primary dwelling shall not be deemed a local alarm.
OCCUPANT — Means any person in possession of premises in or upon which
an alarm system exists.
PERMITTEE — Means any person possessing a valid Edison Township alarm
permit.
PERMIT YEAR — Means and run from May 1 to April 30.
SUBSCRIBER — Means any person owning, leasing or otherwise obtaining
the benefits of an alarm device or local alarm within the scope of this
section.
VIOLATIONS — Means and includes, but is not limited to, summonses
issued and answerable in Municipal Court for failure to obtain permits for
alarm systems or pay administrative fees and/or charges. A summons may
be issued by Police and Fire personnel or as directed by the Director of
Public Safety.
§ 11-27.3. Scope. [1999 Code § 8.04.030; Ord. No. O.1992-2017]
a. The provisions of this section shall apply to any person who operates,
leases, maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to
notify Township emergency services or a private alarm company, or
alert persons in the area of the alarm of any type of alarm condition.
b. The terms of this section shall in no way prohibit alarm companies from
providing services by private sources to other residences or offices
within or without the Township.
c. Any person having an alarm system of any type, as defined in this
section, within the Township shall be responsible for the registration
thereof in accordance with the provisions of this section. Smoke alarms
installed within a residential dwelling that are designed to notify the
occupant(s) of smoke are exempt from registration under this section.
d. The Coordinator is designated as the municipal official responsible for
supervising and administrating the provisions of this section, including
maintenance of records of false alarms and issuance of notices of
violations.
§ 11-27.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-27.4
AO:389
§ 11-27.4. Alarm Consoles: Registration Required; Renewal Fees.
[1999 Code § 8.04.040; Ord. No. O.1532-2006; Ord. No.
O.1992-2017]
a. All persons having an alarm device installed within the Township are
required to register with the Coordinator. Alarm types requiring
registration include, but are not limited to, local alarms, dial alarms,
burglar alarms, fire alarms, common alarms in stairways, halls and
lobbies of multiple dwellings and alarms connected to central stations
or the communications center but exclude car alarms and smoke alarms
installed within an individual residential unit designed to notify the
occupants of a smoke condition. If an alarm shall hereafter be found to
be in operation without being registered, the owner and/or occupant of
the building shall be sent a notice, in writing, by the Coordinator
requiring compliance with the terms of this section. If the owner and/or
occupant shall fail to comply within ten (10) days after receipt of such
notice, he or she shall be liable to the penalties set forth in this section.
All alarms governed by this section shall be subject to the false alarm
procedures and penalties set forth in this section.
b. Each special permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed as
having submitted to the inspection of the alarm system by appointment
at reasonable hours by the Police Department and shall accept the
responsibility for the proper operation of the alarm system up to and
including the line connection, if any, to the communications center.
c. Application for alarm permits covered by this section shall be made in a
form approved by the Coordinator and the permit approved by the
Coordinator. All information submitted by permittees in compliance
with this section shall be held in the strictest confidence and shall be
deemed a record exempt from disclosure pursuant to State Statute, and
any violation of confidentiality shall be deemed a violation of State law.
d. All permittees who desire to utilize the alarm console in the
communications center must register and obtain a separate alarm
permit for each connection to the alarm console. As part of the
application for an alarm permit, the permittee shall provide an
agreement to release the Township and its officers, agents and
employees from any and all liability and agree to indemnify and save
harmless the Township and its officers, agents and employees for or on
account of any acts or omissions directly or indirectly related to the
installation, operation or maintenance of the alarm console and the
connection of the applicant's alarm system thereto.
e. All persons registering alarms in accordance with paragraph a above
shall pay a one-time twenty ($20.00) dollar registration fee payable to
the Township of Edison. All persons utilizing the alarm console in the
communication center in accordance with paragraph e shall pay a fee of
fifty ($50.00) dollars per annum for each and every connection to the
alarm console. No Federal, State, County or Township owned and
operated facility nor any religious institutions or facility owned or
§ 11-27.4 EDISON CODE § 11-27.4
AO:390
§ 11-27.5. Dial Alarms. [1999 Code § 8.04.050; Ord. No.
O.1992-2017]
§ 11-27.6. Maintenance and Operation. [1999 Code § 8.04.060; Ord.
No. O.1992-2017]
§ 11-27.7. False Alarms. [1999 Code § 8.04.070; Ord. No.
O.1532-2006; Ord. No. O.1992-2017]
operated by New Jersey Transit shall be required to pay the fee
established by this section.
a. Dial alarms must be of the type accepted by the Federal
Communications Commission and connected in a manner approved by
Federal Communications Commission regulations.
b. All dial alarms that directly notify any Edison Township emergency
service shall be coded to dial a special number provided by the Police
Department. In addition, the system must be coded to notify a third
party who shall be named in the registration required by this section.
c. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the communications center in the event that a false
alarm occurs.
d. The contents of any recorded message from a dial alarm system must
be intelligible and in a format approved by the Coordinator. Messages
shall not exceed fifteen (15) seconds, and the time gap between delivery
shall be approximately ten (10) seconds.
e. Dial alarms shall provide an automatic line seizure feature in the event
that the authorized lines in the communications center are busy with an
incoming or outgoing call.
a. The sensory mechanism of all alarms shall be adjusted so as to suppress
false indications and not be actuated by impulses due to pressure
changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noises, rattling or
vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to general
alarms.
b. All components of the alarms shall be maintained by the owner in good
repair. When evidence exists that there has been a failure to comply
with the operational requirements to the statute, the Coordinator is
then authorized to demand that such device be disconnected until such
time as compliance with such requirements are re-established.
c. All personnel shall be trained in the proper operation of the alarm
system as well as procedures for notifying the private alarm central
station or the communications center for those systems connected to
the alarm console.
§ 11-27.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-27.7
AO:391
§ 11-27.8. Appeals. [1999 Code § 8.04.080; Ord. O.1607-2008 § 7;
Ord. No. O.1722-2009§ 2; Ord. No. O.1992-2017]
Whenever, under the provisions of this section, the Chief of Police or his/
her designee, or any other authorized representatives he or she may have
designated, are empowered to make a decision with respect to installation,
operation and maintenance of any alarm equipment, or with respect to the
issuance or denial of any application relating thereto, any person aggrieved
by the decision may, within ten (10) days following the decision, file a
written appeal therefrom with the Business Administrator of the Township
who shall conduct a hearing to affirm and shall have the power to affirm,
modify or reverse the decision appealed from. This appeal shall not apply to
violations under subsection 11-27.4.
§ 11-27.9. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.04.090; Ord. No.
O.1992-2017]
a. All false alarms shall be monitored by the owner, as it is not the
responsibility of the Township of Edison to monitor or notify owners of
false alarms. The first, second and third false alarm in any given permit
year will be without an administrative charge.
b. For the fourth and fifth false alarm in any given permit year, an
administrative charge of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per false alarm
shall be issued.
c. For the sixth, seventh and eighth false alarm in any given permit year,
an administrative charge of fifty ($50.00) dollars per false alarm shall
be issued.
d. For the ninth and all subsequent false alarms in any given permit year,
an administrative charge of one hundred ($100.00) dollars per false
alarm shall be issued.
e. The above notwithstanding, whenever any person shall be levied an
administrative penalty for nine (9) or more false alarms per year in any
two (2) consecutive years, any subsequent violation in any year, an
administrative charge of one hundred ($100.00) dollars per false alarm
shall be issued.
f. All Federal, State, County or Township owned and operated facilities
and all religious institutions and facilities owned or operated and New
Jersey Transit shall be exempt from the payment of false alarm fee(s).
a. Failure to register an alarm within ten (10) days of receipt of a written
warning to register the alarm system shall result in the issuance of a
summons answerable in Municipal Court and a fine not to exceed one
hundred ($100.00) dollars.
b. Failure to pay the administrative charge(s) for false alarms within thirty
(30) days shall result in the issuance of a summons answerable in
§ 11-27.7 EDISON CODE § 11-27.9
AO:392
§ 11-28. TOWING REGULATIONS.
§ 11-28.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 5.72.010; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
This section shall set forth the non-discriminatory and non-exclusionary
regulations governing towing agencies engaged in the business of removing
and storing motor vehicles at the request of any Township of Edison
employee in the performance of his/her duties. This section shall apply to
any property, whether public or private. This section is in accordance and as
authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 entitled "Regulation of operators engaged
in removal of motor vehicles." This section shall regulate the following, but
not be limited to:
§ 11-28.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.72.020; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
As used in this section:
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR — Means the Business Administrator of the
Township of Edison, or his/her designee.
Municipal Court and a fine, in addition to the administrative charge, not
to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
a. A schedule of fees or other charges which a towing agency may charge
vehicle owners for towing services, storage services, recovery services,
clean up services, and any other towing related services as required/
requested by the Township of Edison, or any combination thereof;
b. Minimum standards of a towing agency performance, including but not
limited to standards concerning the adequacy of equipment and
facilities, availability and response time, and the security of the vehicles
towed or stored;
c. The designation of the Municipal Officers and divisions to enforce the
provisions of this section in accordance with due process of law;
d. The requirement that such regulations and fee schedules of individual
towing agencies shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours of the Municipality and the towing agency.
e. Exception: This section shall not apply to the following:
1. Towing services requested by the Division of Police when such
services shall result in a Police Impoundment;
2. Towing services rendered to any vehicle owned, leased, or operated
by the Township of Edison.
f. This section shall only apply to towers acting in the capacity of towing
agencies for the Township of Edison.
§ 11-27.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.2
AO:393
CHIEF OF POLICE — Shall mean the Chief of the Township of Edison's
Division of Police, or his/her designee.
COMMUNICATIONS PERSONNEL — Means any on-duty 9-1-1
Telecommunicator/ Dispatcher of the Edison Division of Police.
CRUISING — Means the driving of an empty tow truck to and fro along a
public street at a slow rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting
tows; and/or the unsolicited response to any Police incident of a motor
vehicle accident or disabled vehicle.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY — Means the Director of the Department
of Public Safety of the Township of Edison as defined by the Municipal Code
of the Township of Edison, or his/her designee.
GARAGE KEEPER'S LEGAL LIABILITY — Means the protection of
customers' vehicles and property under various conditions pertaining to
specific garage functions.
HEAVY-DUTY — Means a gross weight of at least thirty-two thousand
(32,000) pounds.
LIGHT-DUTY — Means a gross weight up to ten-thousand (10,000) pounds.
MEDIUM DUTY — Means a gross weight of over ten-thousand (10,000)
pounds but less than thirty-two thousand (32,000) pounds.
PERSONS — Means and includes a firm, copartnership, association and
corporation, and the singular or plural and the masculine, feminine or
neuter thereof, unless the contrary is clearly expressed.
POLICE OFFICER — Means any on-duty sworn officer of the Edison Division
of Police.
TOWING AGENCY — Means any person or entity owning or operating a tow
truck service for compensation.
TOW TRUCK — Means a motor vehicle equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds or similar equipment designed for the towing or
recovery of vehicles and other objects.
WAITING TIME — Means the additional time a tow operator spends at
the scene other than the time required for the actual tow and/or recovery.
Examples of waiting time may include but are not limited to EMS services
which must be performed and/or police investigations.
WINCHING — Means the process of moving a motor vehicle by the use of
additional chains, nylon slings, snatch blocks and/or additional lengths of
winch cable from a position that is not on a roadway or not in a position
for direct hook up by conventional means for loading onto a tow vehicle.
Winching is not pulling a vehicle onto a tilt bed or carrier, nor lifting a
motor vehicle with a conventional tow sling. Winching fees shall be billed
per quarter hour per man.
§ 11-28.3. Administering and Enforcing Agencies. [1999 Code
§ 5.72.030; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
§ 11-28.2 EDISON CODE § 11-28.3
AO:394
§ 11-28.4. Tow Truck License Required; Expiration; Fee; Application
Amendments. [1999 Code § 5.72.040; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
a. General jurisdiction and responsibility shall be the Chief of Police or
his/her designee. The Chief of Police shall have jurisdiction and
responsibility of:
1. Inspection of tow trucks operating under this section;
2. Examination, investigation and recommendation of approval or
rejection of applications for tow trucks requesting to operate under
this section;
3. Enforcement of the provisions of this section.
b. General Jurisdiction and Responsibility of Collector of Revenue. The
Municipal Clerk shall have jurisdiction and responsibility of issuing of
applications, finger print forms and collection of fees. The Business
Administrator shall issue such license approval after the satisfactory
compliance by the applicant with the requirements of this section, and
the recommendation of approval by the Chief of Police.
a. No towing agency or person, while acting as an official towing agency
for the Township of Edison shall operate a tow truck upon or along any
property in the Township of Edison, until the owner thereof shall obtain
a license therefor.
b. Nothing in this subsection or other subsections of this section shall be
construed to require the licensing of any tow truck to perform any
services other than those governed by this section.
c. All towing agency and tow truck licenses shall be issued by the
Collector of Revenue and shall be issued to expire June 30th, next
exceeding the date of issuance unless it is sooner suspended or revoked
by the Business Administrator.
d. The annual fee to be paid for such license shall be the sum of six
hundred ($600.00) dollars for up to the first two (2) light-medium duty
tow trucks, or one (1) heavy-duty tow truck, per agency, as applicable,
and an additional one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars per light-medium
duty tow truck, and/or two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars per heavyduty
tow truck, thereafter, as applicable. No portion of said fee shall be
prorated for any portion of a year.
e. Licenses shall be for a three-year period commencing on July 1 and
terminating three (3) years thereafter.
f. During the term of any license, a licensee shall file an update for any
changes in vehicles and or employees. The amended application shall
include a copy of the current license, and detail the reason for the
amendment. Changes in vehicles shall require an application
amendment fee of forty-five (45.00) dollars. Changes in employee-
§ 11-28.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.4
AO:395
§ 11-28.5. Applications for Licenses. [1999 Code § 5.72.050; Ord.
No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
drivers shall require an application amendment fee of twenty-five
($25.00) dollars per employee-driver added. The licensee shall not
permit a new vehicle or new employee to operate any tows authorized
under this license until the amendment has been filed and approved.
Changes in towing agency ownership shall be ineligible for amendment
applications.
a. Applications for tow truck licenses shall be filed with the Township
Clerk not later than April 1 of the pre-licensure year.
b. Applications for licenses for tow trucks shall be made by the owner,
lessee or bailee thereof, upon forms to be furnished by the Township
Clerk, and such application shall contain the name, business address,
and telephone number of the applicant. If the application is made on
behalf of a corporation, it shall state the name and address of the
officers and directors thereof and the name and address of its
registered agent, including a listing of the names and addresses of
every stockholder holding more than ten (10%) percent of the stock of
the corporation; the application shall have affixed thereto an affidavit to
be sworn to by the applicant.
c. Each application shall also contain the following information:
1. The year, make, type and model number of each tow truck used in
said business, its vehicle identification number (VIN), New Jersey
registration number (license plate) and the name and address of
the registered owner and operator;
2. The address(es) where the tow truck(s) is/are regularly garaged.
3. The names, addresses and New Jersey driver license numbers of all
employee-drivers of the vehicles identified. An abstract of each
employee-driver's New Jersey driver's license, not more than sixty
(60) days old at time of submission;
4. Each employee operating under this license is able to read and
write the English language and is a resident of the United States;
5. Each employee operating under this license is not addicted to the
use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors;
6. Any and all convictions which the owner, agent or any employeedriver
thereof has been convicted and, if the corporation, or any
officer thereof has been convicted, stating the name, if any, and
location of the courts and the dates on which such convictions were
had and the penalties imposed therefor.
7. Any and all successful civil complaints filed against the owner,
agent thereof, the corporation, or any officer thereof for deceptive
§ 11-28.4 EDISON CODE § 11-28.5
AO:396
§ 11-28.6. Investigation of Applicants; Administering Official
Authorized to Grant or Refuse Licenses. [1999 Code § 5.72.060; Ord.
No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
business practices, including but not limited to insurance fraud,
price gouging, or other similar complaint or offense. This shall not
be construed to be limited to substantiated complaints with regard
to towing services.
8. An original Letter of Authorization for the Edison Police
Department to conduct a full and complete criminal and driver
license background check on each owner, agent thereof, and
employee-driver. The owner(s) and the corporation shall also
include an Authorization for the Edison Police Department to an
investigation into the insurance coverage for the corporation, as it
applies to this license. Each employee must execute his own Letter
of Authorization. Blanket authorizations are not permitted.
9. The experience of the owner, the employee-drivers, and the
corporation in the towing of vehicles for hire; including all relevant
employment history.
10. The location, size and security features of the storage lot or space
in which towed vehicles will be stored, including the number of
vehicle spaces available;
11. The name and address of the operator's insurance carrier(s) and
the policy numbers of all insurance policies issued for the business,
the business premises and the vehicles identified in the application.
12. A certification signed by the owner (or agent thereof) that a
document detailing the towing and storage services and fees
supplied under this license will be posted in the public area of the
towing agency's premises in plain view for the duration of this
license, in compliance with this section.
13. A certification granting permission to the Chief of Police or his/her
designee to conduct inspections of the tow trucks and towing
agency for the purpose of determining compliance with this
section.
14. Any other information as the Township of Edison shall deem
appropriate and necessary to properly evaluate the towing agency
for this license.
a. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall conduct or cause to be
conducted such investigation as he/she deems necessary to determine
the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application,
and the applicant's compliance with this section. This investigation may
include a full and complete criminal and driver license background
check on each owner, agent thereof, and employee-driver. At the
discretion of the Chief of Police or his/her designee, applicants and/or
§ 11-28.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.6
AO:397
§ 11-28.7. Appeal of Application Denial. [1999 Code § 5.72.070; Ord.
No. O.2021-2018]
their employee-drivers may be required to submit fingerprints to
complete the background investigation(s). Any fees relating to the
fingerprint checks shall be borne by the applicant.
b. The applicant, or an employee-driver, may be refused if such
investigation reveals any of the following, or if the applicant or any
employee refuses to permit such investigation:
1. Conviction of any crime of the fourth degree or higher, possession
or use of a controlled dangerous substance; and other crimes
against the person or crimes involving moral turpitude. Any plea
arrangement which results in Pre-Trial Intervention, Conditional
Discharge, or any other similar diversionary trial settlement may
be viewed as a conviction to the original charge/offense.
2. Conviction of operating a motor vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicating liquor or drug (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50); leaving the scene of
an accident (N.J.S.A. 39:4-129); failure to report an accident
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-130); reckless driving (N.J.S.A. 39:4-96) and
possession of a controlled dangerous substance in an automobile
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-49.1).
3. Successful civil complaints filed against the owner, agent thereof,
the corporation, or any officer thereof for deceptive business
practices, including but not limited to insurance fraud, price
gouging, or other similar complaint or offense.
c. Upon completion of the background checks, the Chief of Police shall
render a decision on the applicant.
1. A decision to grant the license shall be forwarded, in writing, to the
Business Administrator.
2. A decision to refuse the license shall be forwarded, in writing, to
the applicant and Business Administrator. The Chief of Police shall
document the reasons thereof. The denial may be as narrow as to
restrict any one employee from performing tows under this license,
to a total denial for the entire applicant.
d. Only one (1) approval shall be granted to a towing agency or its affiliate.
For the purpose of this section, "affiliate" shall mean any towing agency
in which there is a common ownership of more than ten (10%) percent
or any common officer or director.
a. Upon receipt of a denial of a license, or partial denial, the applicant may
file an appeal with the Business Administrator. The appeal must be filed
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the decision. Such appeal shall be
submitted in writing and shall document the applicant's position for
approval of the license.
§ 11-28.6 EDISON CODE § 11-28.7
AO:398
§ 11-28.8. Inspection of Tow Trucks and Facilities. [1999 Code
§ 5.72.080; Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009; Ord.
No. O.2021-2018]
§ 11-28.9. Issuance of License; Posting Required. [1999 Code
§ 5.72.090; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
b. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Business Administrator shall review all
documentation relating to this application. Such review may include
interviews with the interested parties. The Business Administrator shall
issue a final decision within thirty (30) business days of receipt of the
appeal. The decision of the Business Administrator is final and binding.
No further appeals are permitted.
a. No tow truck or towing agency covered by the terms of this section
shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected
and examined by the Chief of Police, or someone delegated by him or
her to conduct such examination, and found to be in compliance with NJ
Title 39 statues and in a sanitary condition. Any tow truck or towing
agency found to be in violation of Title 39 or unsanitary shall not be
licensed. The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of tow trucks and
towing agencies.
b. The Police Department shall maintain due vigilance over all tow trucks
and towing agencies licensed under this section and see that they are
kept in a condition of safety and sanitation, and to this end shall have
the right, at any and all times, to inspect any and all such licensed
vehicles and storage facilities and shall maintain a record in writing of
the report of all such inspections.
a. The Edison Police Department, upon approval of the tow truck license,
shall issue a Certificate of License to the applicant. The licensee shall
prominently display the Certificate of License in the public portion of
his/her business premises. The license shall remain displayed for the
entire duration of the license term. Replacement Certificate of License
shall be provided upon written application of the licensee and payment
of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
b. The Township of Edison shall provide one (1) vehicle decal for each tow
truck authorized to operate under the applicant's license. The licensee
shall prominently display the vehicle decal on each authorized tow
truck in a location to be determined by the Director of Public Safety.
The decal shall remain displayed for the entire duration of the license
term. Replacement vehicle decals shall be provided upon written
application of the licensee and payment of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
for each decal.
c. Any license issued under this section is nontransferable. Changes in
ownership shall require an entire new application filing.
§ 11-28.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.9
AO:399
§ 11-28.10. Insurance Requirements; Indemnity. [1999 Code
§ 5.72.100; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
d. The towing agency must provide to all vehicle owners at the scene of an
accident a rate card with information on claiming a vehicle, the name of
the business, its owner, tower's license number, the business location,
telephone numbers and hours of operation to the public. The card shall
also state the rates for towing services. The towing agency may use a
standard business card with the required additional information.
a. Each towing agency shall maintain, during the term of their license, the
following minimum insurance coverage, naming the Township of Edison
as an additional insured:
1. Automobile Liability Insurance, in an amount not less than one
million ($1,000,000.00) dollars combined single limit, covering
each vehicle utilized by the operator in his business.
2. Workmen's Compensation Insurance, as required by the State of
New Jersey, including employer's liability coverage with a limit of at
least one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars.
3. Comprehensive, General Liability Insurance, in an amount of not
less than one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for personal injuries,
per occurrence, and one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for
property damage, per occurrence, including premises operations
and products/completed operations.
4. Garage Keepers and Garage Liability Insurance, in an amount not
less than one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars.
5. All policies of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing for
collision coverage for vehicles in tow.
b. All policies of insurance shall contain an endorsement requiring that at
least fifteen (15) days' notice shall be given to the Township of Edison in
the event of any material change in or cancellation of the policy.
c. The operator shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township of Edison
from any claims for injury or property damage arising out of, or in any
way related to, the operation of any tow truck, towing service or
storage yard, pursuant to this section. The towing agency shall further
defend the Township of Edison at the operator's expense, in connection
with any claim, suit or action, brought against the Township of Edison,
and arising out of the operation of any tow truck, towing service or
towing yard, pursuant to this section.
d. All policies of insurance shall be issued by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, and shall remain in
full force and effect during the entire term of the license. The Township
of Edison shall be named as additional insured on all policies of liability
insurance.
§ 11-28.9 EDISON CODE § 11-28.10
AO:400
§ 11-28.11. Register of Vehicles. [1999 Code § 5.72.110; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
§ 11-28.12. Revocation and Suspension of Licenses Authorized.
[1999 Code § 5.72.120; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
Licenses granted under the preceding subsections of this section may be
revoked or suspended at any time by the Business Administrator, if a tow
truck or storage facility shall not be in a safe and sanitary condition and
kept in conformity with the terms of this section, or for the violation of any
of the provisions of this section or any of the rules and regulations made by
the Director of Public Safety.
§ 11-28.13. Duties of the Towing Agency. [1999 Code § 5.72.130;
Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
e. No license shall be issued until an approved applicant files insurance
certificates verifying all of the above requirements. The Insurance
Certificates shall be filed with the Collector of Revenue.
f. Any licensee who has a lapse in any insurance policy, for any reason
whatsoever, shall have his/her license immediately suspended. Upon
notice of lapse of coverage, the Collector of Revenue shall immediately
serve notice of suspension upon the licensee, with copy of said notice
provided to the Business Administrator and the Director of Public
Safety. The suspension shall remain in effect until such time as the
insurance is restored.
a. The Police Department shall keep a register of each tow truck licensed
under this section, together with the license number and description,
make and dimensions of such vehicles and the date and a complete
record of inspections made thereof.
b. The Police Department shall keep a register of each towing agency
licensed under this section, together with photographs of the vehicle
storage area and the customer waiting room, and the date and a
complete record of inspections made thereof.
a. The towing agency must operate a legitimate towing agency business
premises within six miles of the Edison Township Municipal Complex
located at 100 Municipal Boulevard, Edison, New Jersey. The towing
agency must respond to a call for service from the Edison Police
Department within the following time parameters: [Amended
9-25-2019 by Ord. No. O.2051-2019]
1. 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. - light-medium duty tow trucks must be on
location within 20 minutes from receipt of the call and heavy-duty
tow trucks must be on location within 30 minutes from receipt of
the call. This requirement applies every day of the year, regardless
of holidays, unless such response time is prevented by
extraordinary conditions of weather or other extraordinary
§ 11-28.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.13
AO:401
§ 11-28.14. Storage Facilities. [1999 Code § 5.72.140; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
circumstances resulting in obstruction of general access to the
scene.
2. 8:01 p.m. to 5:59 a.m. - light-medium duty tow trucks must be on
location within 25 minutes from receipt of the call and heavy duty
tow trucks must be on location within 35 minutes from receipt of
the call. This requirement applies every day of the year, regardless
of holidays, unless such response time is prevented by
extraordinary conditions of weather or other extraordinary
circumstances resulting in obstruction of general access to the
scene.
b. In the event that towing agency fails to arrive within the prescribed
time from receipt of a call from the Edison Police Department, the
Edison Police Department shall be permitted to secure the services of
an alternate towing agency. In the event of said circumstance, the first
called towing agency shall not be entitled to any fee for their late
response or costs and expenses incurred as a result thereof.
c. In the event that a towing agency is called by the Edison Police
Department, and prior to the towing agency actually hooking a vehicle
or providing any type of service at scene to which it was called, the
Edison Police Department shall be permitted to change the towing
agency due to findings and/or procedure in a police investigation. The
first called towing agency shall be placed as next to be called on the
towing list. The first called towing agency shall not be entitled to any
fee for their response or costs and expenses incurred as a result
thereof.
a. Each towing agency shall maintain storage facilities conforming to the
following standards and requirements:
1. Towing agency shall have sufficient space to accommodate at least
15 vehicles, adequately safeguarded against vandalism and theft,
in which to hold towed vehicles of absent drivers or owners, until
such time as said vehicles are claimed or are disposed of in
accordance with the law.
2. All storage facilities shall be owned, operated and/or under the
control of the operator, and shall be located no more than six miles
from the Edison Township Municipal Complex located at 100
Municipal Boulevard, Edison, New Jersey. [Amended 9-25-2019
by Ord. No. O.2051-2019]
3. No towed vehicle may be stored upon a public street, sidewalk,
public right-of-way or alley. All towed vehicles must be stored by
the towing agency within the storage area as described within this
section.
§ 11-28.13 EDISON CODE § 11-28.14
AO:402
§ 11-28.15. Equipment. [1999 Code § 5.72.150; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
4. Customer service waiting area shall be neat and clean. A restroom
facility shall be available during normal business hours.
a. Tow trucks shall be equipped and of sufficient size, weight and
configuration to safely tow all makes of domestic and foreign
automobiles, light duty trucks and vans.
b. Tow trucks shall be equipped with sufficient emergency warning lights.
c. The name, address and telephone number of the operator shall be
permanently affixed to the left and right sides of each tow truck.
d. All operators on the rotating list shall provide and maintain the
following minimum equipment: two (2) light duty towing vehicles (one
(1) of which may be a flat-bed, roll back vehicle), with a gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR) of eleven thousand (11,000) pounds, and a lifting
device with a minimum capacity of four (4) tons.
e. Tow trucks will be equipped with tow sling type bars, with rubber
straps, and wheel lifts, with safety straps for lifting, to prevent damage
to towed vehicles, and steering locks for towing vehicles from the rear.
f. Jumper cables and/or Jump Box
g. A minimum of one (1) five (5) pound CO2 dry powder fire extinguisher.
h. One (1) reflective traffic safety vest for each employee at an incident
location.
i. A minimum of one (1) broom, one (1) shovel and one (1) debris/refuse
container.
j. A wireless telephone for communication with the Police
Communications Center.
k. A minimum of five (5) gallons of Absorbent material on each towing
vehicle at all times.
l. Jack (for changing tires)
m. A minimum of one (1) Tire Chock
n. Lock out Kit (for making entry into locked vehicles)
o. A minimum of two (2) Snatch Blocks
p. Towing lights
q. A minimum of two (2) Tire Skates
r. Ratchet Straps for proper tie down (flatbed/rollback)
§ 11-28.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.15
AO:403
§ 11-28.16. Minimum Operation Standards. [1999 Code § 5.72.160;
Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
s. J-Hooks, Miniature J-Hook, T-Hook and Cluster Hooks (flatbed/rollback)
t. Assorted tools, hand or power for road service, changing tires etc.
a. Towing agency shall, at all times, employ a sufficient number of
employees to comply with the minimum operational requirements.
b. All drivers of the operator shall be not less than the age of eighteen (18)
years and must have a valid, current New Jersey State Driver's License
and shall be in good health and of high moral character.
c. All employees shall be clean, neat, and make a good appearance.
Smoking shall not be permitted in any tow truck or in the customer
service area of any storage facility without the permission of the
customer.
d. The towing agency shall be responsible for the towing of vehicles, from
all streets, alleys, public easements, thoroughfares, public, quasi-public
places, and private property, including parks, playgrounds, including
rivers, lakes and streams, anywhere within the Township of Edison.
e. In all underwater recoveries of a non-emergent nature (threats to life or
public safety), it shall be the responsibility of the towing agency to be
either certified or assisted by a New Jersey certified underwater
specialist for the proper towing of such vehicles.
f. The operator shall be responsible to clean up all broken glass and
debris at the scene of accidents and remove same from the scene. All
vehicles must be equipped with a broom, shovel and container to
remove debris. Clean up shall be performed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-56.8. "Definitions: removal of disabled motor vehicles by towing
services under contract; failure to remove debris surrounding vehicle;
penalty."
g. The towing agency is not required to remove any debris or material
which may be hazardous, such as oil, gasoline, kerosene, or other
petroleum or chemical products, or debris material which the service is
not equipped to remove. When the towing agency is equipped to
remove such debris, it shall dispose of said debris in full accordance
with all applicable State and Federal Statutes. The towing agency shall
be entitled to an additional hazardous debris disposal fee when this
service is properly performed.
h. The towing agency shall verbally detail the anticipated expense to the
vehicle operator prior to rendering any service. This regulation may be
waived when the vehicle operator is unable to speak with the towing
agency employee at the scene due to a medical condition, or when the
operator has been removed from the scene prior to the towing agency's
arrival.
§ 11-28.15 EDISON CODE § 11-28.16
AO:404
§ 11-28.17. Rotating Lists; Districts; Specific Needs. [1999 Code
§ 5.72.170; Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009; Ord.
No. O.2021-2018]
1. When the towing agency was unable to provide this notification at
the scene, they must attempt to contact the vehicle owner, operator
or lessee by telephone within twenty-four (24) hours of the tow. If
the towing agency encounters an answering machine, a detailed
message left on the machine shall constitute compliance.
2. In the event telephone contact is unsuccessful, the towing agency
shall send written notification of the towing and storage charges
and information on how to obtain release of the vehicle to the
registered owner. This notification shall be sent by Certified Mail
with Return Receipt Requested. A copy of the notice shall be sent
via regular mail to the Edison Police Department Traffic Bureau.
3. Failure of the towing agency to comply with this provision shall
restrict their storage fees to the first twenty-four (24) hours.
i. Towing agency must ensure that all its authorized agents agree to
follow the instruction and/or order of the Police Officer at the towing
scene.
a. The Chief of Police shall create towing districts within the Township.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have sole discretion as to
district boundaries. Changes to boundary lines shall only be permitted
at the commencement of the license year.
b. The Chief of Police is authorized to create lists for specific towing needs
such as heavy duty tow trucks.
c. The Chief of Police shall create rotating towing lists to be utilized by the
Communications Personnel. The list shall be created by district, by
specific need at the commencement of each license year.
Communications Personnel shall always use the appropriate rotation
list when a tow truck is requested under this section. Communications
Personnel shall record each tow by date, time, location and towing
agency.
1. Any towing agency that fails to/or is unable to respond shall be
recorded as non-respondent and the Communications Personnel
shall advance to the next towing agency on the list.
2. Exception to the rotation list shall only occur when the customer
specifically requests the use of their own towing service, and this
request shall not place an undue burden upon any roadway of the
Township. Communications Personnel shall record each customer
request tow by date, time, location and towing agency.
§ 11-28.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.18
AO:405
§ 11-28.18. Subcontracting. [1999 Code § 5.72.180; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
Towing agency shall not assign calls to other tow companies not on the
Township of Edison's Tow list. Subcontracting of any services under this
section is allowed when a towing agency is in a temporary need of an
additional tow vehicle or extraordinary circumstances require specialized
and unique recovery and transport services. A copy of the subcontractors
invoice must be provided to the patron at the time the vehicle is released.
The towing agency shall require the subcontractor to abide by all minimum
operation standards established in Subsection 11-28.16. The subcontractor
must also follow the fees established in subsection 11- 28.19. If a vehicle
needs to be stored that vehicle must be towed to the originally called towing
agency's storage lot.
§ 11-28.19. Fees Established. [1999 Code § 5.72.190; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
a. Roadside service (tire change, deliver gas, jump-start or lock out) (no
tow).
1. Road service between 0800 hours to 1700 hours — Monday
through Friday, Holidays excluded: $60.
2. Road service at all other times: $70.
3. Tow agency may add $0.75 per gallon of fuel delivered on a road
service call. Fuel receipts must be kept with copy of invoice and on
file at towing agency.
4. Axel and/or drive shaft removal and reinstall: $55.
5. Air up brake system: $45.
b. Towing.
1. Standard towing and flatbed service under 10,000 lbs. between
0800 hours to 1700 hours — Monday through Friday, holidays
excluded: $90.
2. Standard towing and flatbed service under 10,000 lbs. at all other
times: $110.
3. Standard towing: 10,000 lbs — 32,000 lbs between 0800 hours to
1700 hours — Monday through Friday, holidays excluded: $210.
4. Standard towing: — 10,000 lbs — 32,000 lbs at all other times:
$250.
5. Standard towing: — more than 32,000 lbs between 0800 hours to
1700 hours — Monday through Friday, holidays excluded: $375.
6. Standard towing: — more than 32,000 lbs at all other times: $425.
[Amended 9-25-2019 by Ord. No. O.2051-2019]
§ 11-28.18 EDISON CODE § 11-28.19
AO:406
c. Vehicle up righting/crane/winching, in addition to any roadside service,
towing, and waiting fees associated with the following New Jersey
Traffic Report (NJTRI) Sequence of Event Codes shall be billed as
follows:
Non-Collision
Fire/Explosion
Other Non-Collision
Collision w/Non-Fixed Object
Pedalcycle
Pedestrian
Deer
Other Animal
Parked MV
Other Object [Non-Fixed]
Collision with Fixed Object
Impact/Attenuator
Guide Rail
Median Barrier
Traffic Sign Post
Overhead Sign Support
Light Standard
Utility Pole
Other Post
Curb
Fence
Tree
Unknown
1. Under 10,000 lbs: $80.00
2. 10,000 lbs —— 32,000 lbs: $150.00
3. More than 32,000 lbs: $200.00
Uprighting/Crane/Winching services in addition to any roadside
service, towing and waiting fees associated with the following New
Jersey Traffic Report (NJTRI) Sequence of Event Codes shall be
billed at a rate of $20.00 per one-quarter (1/4) hour per man:
Non-Collision
Overturn [Rollover]
Immersion
§ 11-28.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.19
AO:407
Jackknife
Ran Off Road
Downhill Runaway
Cargo Loss or Shift
Separation of Units
Collision w/Non-Fixed Object
Railway Train
MV in Transport
MV in Transport, Other Roadway
Collision with Fixed Object
Bridge/Pier/Abutment
Bridge Parapet End
Bridge Rail
Culvert
Ditch
Embankment
Other Fixed Object
d. Waiting Time. In addition to any Roadside Service, Towing, and Vehicle
Up Righting/Crane/Winching:
1. Under 10,000 lbs: $40.00 per hour, billable in quarter hour
increments.
2. 10,000 lbs - 32,000 lbs: $ 80.00 per hour, billable in quarter hour
increments.
3. More than 32,000 lbs: $120.00 per hour, billable in quarter hour
increments.
e. Mileage. There shall be no mileage fees added to any tow when the
vehicle is towed within the Township of Edison or to the towing
agency's storage facility. Otherwise, vehicles will be assessed the
following charges, measured from the point of vehicle pickup to
customer site or storage facility.
1. Under 10,000 lbs: $3.50 per mile
2. 10,000 lbs - 32,000 lbs: $4.50 per mile
3. More than 32,000 lbs: $5.50 per mile
Vehicles towed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles from point of
vehicle pickup to customer site or storage facility shall be charged
at a negotiated predetermined rate between the towing agency and
customer.
§ 11-28.19 EDISON CODE § 11-28.19
AO:408
§ 11-28.20. Holidays Established. [1999 Code § 5.72.200; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
The following days shall be recognized as holidays under this section: New
Year's Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving
Day; Christmas Day.
f. Debris Clean Up. When site cleanup is required, the following fees shall
be assessed to each vehicle(s) that the debris emanated from:
1. Under 10,000 lbs: $35.00
2. 10,000 lbs — 32,000 lbs: $50.00
3. More than 32,000 lbs: $65.00
g. Storage. Storage Fees can only be assessed for days when the facility is
open and staffed for processing the release of vehicles for not less than
seven and one-half (7.5) hours per day except Saturday. Tower shall be
open for at least four (4) hours on Saturday for the release of vehicles.
All other days shall be non-fee days unless the tower is open and staffed
for processing the release of vehicles for at least four (4) hours.
1. No storage fee shall be assessed when the vehicle is retrieved
within six (6) hours of the tow.
2. Under 10,000 lbs: $40.00 per day, billable in 6-hour increments.
3. 10,000 lbs to 32,000 lbs $50.00 per day, billable in 6 hour
increments.
4. 32,001 lbs and above: $80.00 per day, billable in 6-hour
increments.
h. Hazardous Debris Disposal Fees. The towing agency may assess the
costs for hazardous debris disposal fees when this service is provided
under this section. When applicable, these fees shall be assessed at a
direct cost plus five (5%) percent handling expense.
i. Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested. The towing agency may
assess the costs for sending Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested
for providing notification of towing and storage fees to the vehicle
owner, operator or lessee when required under this section. When
applicable, these fees shall be assessed at direct cost.
j. There shall be no fees imposed other than those specified in this
section.
k. Towing agencies shall accept cash, major credit cards, and in-state
personal and in-state business checks (starter and third party checks
excluded) as payment for any and all services provided under this
section.
§ 11-28.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-28.21
AO:409
§ 11-28.21. Customer Access to Towed Vehicles. [1999 Code
§ 5.72.210; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
Prior to payment in full for all services rendered by the towing agency,
the towing agency shall permit a customer access to their towed vehicle
to retrieve important personal papers and effects, including but not limited
to wallets, purses, insurance documents, identification and banking
documents. Customers shall not be permitted to remove vehicle parts,
license plates, or other physical property stored in or on the vehicle. All
tow agencies must also allow insurance company representatives and or
adjusters access to stored vehicles during normal business hours without
charge.
§ 11-28.22. Towing Agency Record Keeping. [1999 Code § 5.72.220;
Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
§ 11-28.23. Changes of Ownership to Revoke License. [1999 Code
§ 5.72.230; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
Changes in ownership or title to any towing agency or vehicle licensed
under this section shall automatically revoke the license for such tow
trucks.
a. Each towing agency shall maintain a record keeping system as required
by the Township of Edison and the laws of the State of New Jersey; at a
minimum, the record keeping system shall include:
1. The date and time of request for towing.
2. The date and time the vehicle was towed.
3. The address from where the vehicle was towed and address to
where the vehicle was towed.
4. The name of the towing operator performing service, complete
breakdown of charges (winching, man hours, clean up etc.)
5. Complete dates of storage of said vehicle, and all charges assessed
to or paid by the owner of each vehicle.
6. The date of release of said vehicle, including by whose
authorization, and the name and address of the person obtaining
said vehicle from storage. (It shall be required that the towing
operator obtain a signed release for said vehicle from storage).
b. Records shall be maintained for two (2) calendar years.
c. The Police Department shall inspect these records prior to every license
renewal application, and not less than one (1) additional inspection
during each license term. The Police Department shall not be required
to provide more than twenty-four (24) hours notice of any such
inspection.
§ 11-28.21 EDISON CODE § 11-28.24
AO:410
§ 11-28.24. Refusal to Pay Fees Prohibited. [1999 Code § 5.72.240;
Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
It is unlawful for a vehicle owner; operator or bailee of any vehicle referred
to herein to refuse or fail to pay his/her fees as established in this section.
§ 11-28.25. Confusing Vehicle Color Schemes or Names Prohibited.
[1999 Code § 5.72.250; Ord. No. O.2021-2018]
No vehicle covered by the terms of this section shall be licensed whose
color scheme, or name, monogram or insignia to be used thereon, shall be
in conflict with or, in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety, imitate any
color scheme, monogram, name or insignia, used by any other person, firm,
municipality or corporation operating a tow truck or towing agency, in such
manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.
§ 11-28.26. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.72.260; Ord. No.
O.2021-2018]
Any person not having been duly licensed as a tow truck, or any person
whose license as such driver has been revoked or suspended and who,
during the time such revocation or suspension is in effect, identifies himself
upon the streets of this Township, or who shall violate any other provision
of this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated
in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 11-29. (RESERVED)
§ 11-30. TAXICABS.
Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. O.1673-2008
§ 11-30.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
As used in this section:
CRUISING — Means the driving of an empty taxicab to and fro along a
public street at a slow rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting
passengers.
DRIVER — Means any person who drives or otherwise operates a taxicab
within Edison Township.
OWNER — Means any person, corporation or association in whose name
title to any taxicab is registered with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission, or who appears in such records to be the conditional vendee
or lessee thereof.
PERSONS — Means and includes any individual, copartnership, association,
corporation or joint stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers
appointed by any court whatsoever and the singular or plural and the
masculine, feminine or neuter thereof, unless the contrary is clearly
expressed.
§ 11-28.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.1
AO:411
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — Means, in reference to Edison
Township, the location of the main place of business of the taxicab service
in Edison Township where taxicab service is conducted, where taxicabs are
dispatched, or where taxicab drivers report for duty.
PUBLIC TAXICAB STAND — Means a section of a public street or public
place set apart for the exclusive use of a limited number of taxicabs, when
such section is distinctly marked as such by a metal sign attached to a
stanchion on the curb or other conspicuous place or by clearly visible marks
upon the surface of the street or public place.
STREET — Shall be defined as provided for by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1, being:
includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public place.
TAXICAB — Shall be defined as provided for by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1, being: any
automobile or motor car, commonly called taxi, engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire which is held out, announced or advertised
to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the streets or
public highways of this state, and particularly accepts and discharges such
persons as may offer themselves for transportation from points or places to
points or places within or without the state. Additionally, the terms "taxi"
"cab" or "taxicab" shall be understood to be a taxicab as defined herein.
TAXI METER — If so used by a taxicab owner or required herein, means
a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire is
mechanically calculated either for the distance traveled, for waiting time,
or both, and upon which such charge shall be plainly indicated by means of
figures.
§ 11-30.2. Administering and Enforcing Agencies. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
a. General Jurisdiction and Responsibility of the Chief of Police. The Chief
of Police or a designee shall have jurisdiction and responsibility for:
1. Conducting examinations of taxicabs; taxicab inspection
certification and/or vehicles inspection reports issued by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission;
2. Examination and approval or rejection of applications for both
taxicab and operator licenses;
3. Acting as Enforcement Agent under the provisions of this section.
4. Taking of fingerprints of any applicant (owner or operator) and
conducting background investigations as to the applicant's fitness
for the issuance of any license hereunder.
b. General Jurisdiction and Responsibility of Township Clerk. The
Township Clerk or designee in the Clerk's Office, shall have jurisdiction
and responsibility for the issuance of licenses, the collection of fees,
and certification of insurance compliance. The Township Clerk shall
issue such license after the Chief of Police has approved the issuance of
§ 11-30.1 EDISON CODE § 11-30.2
AO:412
§ 11-30.3. Taxicab License Required. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
§ 11-30.4. Applications for Licenses. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
§ 11-30.5. Classes and Number of Licenses to Be Issued. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
There are hereby established the following classes of taxicab licenses as
follows:
the license and signed the license, after the satisfactory compliance by
the applicant with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. and this
section, the payment of the aforesaid fee, the submission of a current
certificate of insurance and a signed statement from the Township
Zoning Officer certifying that the taxicab service is not operating in a
residential zone and that the taxicab business has sufficient off-street
parking for any and all taxicabs to be used in the business and for the
issuance of a taxicab owner's license, approval by the Township Council
as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.
c. General Jurisdiction of Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall have
jurisdiction and responsibility of investigation and certification that the
taxicab business is not operating in a residential zone and that the
taxicab business has sufficient off-street parking for any and all taxicabs
to be used in the business.
a. No person shall operate any taxicab within the Township unless both
the owner of the taxicab, the individual taxicab and the driver thereof
are licensed pursuant to this section.
b. Nothing in this subsection or other subsections of this section shall be
construed to require the licensing of any taxicab:
1. Operating from an office outside the Township which enters the
Township and responds to a specific call by a patron within the
Township; or
2. Carrying persons from one point outside the Township to any point
within the Township.
a. Applications for any form of licenses shall be made upon forms
approved by the Chief of Police and to be furnished by the Clerk's Office
and shall verify the correctness thereof by his/her oath or affirmation.
He/she shall file the completed application with the Clerk together with
the full amount of the proper fee hereinafter fixed.
a. Taxicab Driver's License. This license shall entitle the person named
therein to operate within the Township any taxicab duly licensed
hereunder. There is no limit on the number of Taxicab drivers that will
be licensed or limit of number of drivers per taxicab business.
§ 11-30.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.5
AO:413
§ 11-30.6. Inspection of Taxicabs. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
No vehicle covered by the terms of this section shall be approved for
a license until inspection documentation issued by the Motor Vehicle
Commission has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined by
the Chief of Police or someone delegated by him or her to conduct such
examination, and found to be in a thoroughly safe and sanitary condition
and otherwise fit for the transportation of passengers. No tinting or
obstructions shall be added to any windows of the taxicab vehicle that
restricts the view of the interior of the vehicle, excluding such tinting
or obstructions that are original manufacturer's installed equipment. Any
vehicle found to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers shall not
be licensed. The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of taxicabs and their
appurtenances and for the construction and condition of fitness for the safe
and adequate transportation of passengers.
§ 11-30.7. Issuance of Licenses; Posting Required. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
b. Taxicab Owner's License. This license shall entitle the owner of a
taxicab business therein described to be operated in the Township by a
driver duly licensed hereunder and to operate taxicabs as permitted
herein, provided that each taxicab is licensed as provided herein. The
holder of a taxicab owner's license shall be permitted to license taxicab
vehicles up to the number of taxicab vehicles as provided herein. There
is no limit on the number of taxicab owner's licenses that will be issued,
however, no person or business shall hold or control more than one (1)
taxicab owner's license. Any person who holds or controls any taxicab
owner's license shall actively use the license, or the license shall be
revoked.
c. Taxicab Vehicle License. This license shall entitle the holder of a taxicab
owner's license therein described to operate the individual taxicab
vehicle therein described in the Township by a driver licensed
hereunder. The license issued for an individual taxicab vehicle is only
for that specific taxicab vehicle and shall not be transferred to another
taxicab vehicle or taxicab owner. The Township will issue up to eighty
(80) taxicab vehicle licenses. There is no limit on the number of taxicab
vehicle licenses that a person holding a taxicab owner's license will be
issued, however, any person who holds or controls any taxicab owner's
license shall actively use any taxicab vehicle license issued to that
business or the taxicab vehicle license shall be revoked.
a. The Township Clerk, upon approval of a taxicab driver's license, taxicab
owner's license or taxicab vehicle license, shall issue to the applicant a
card approved by the Chief of Police. A card for a taxicab driver's
license or taxicab owner's license shall bear the name of the applicant,
and the official license number. A card for a taxicab vehicle license shall
bear the official license number of the taxicab, date of inspection of the
§ 11-30.5 EDISON CODE § 11-30.7
AO:414
§ 11-30.8. Posting of Taxicab Fares. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
No licensed taxicab shall be operated in the Township unless and until there
is prominently displayed in the interior thereof, within the full view and
access of any passengers, a complete list of fares, fees or rates charged
for transportation of passengers ("fares"), which fares so displayed, and no
other, shall be those to be charged any passenger. Said fare listing shall be
submitted with the owner's license application and any change in the fares
during the year shall be filed with the Township before the new fares can be
charged to passengers.
§ 11-30.9. Compliance with Statute Required; Insurance
Requirements-Taxicabs. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
Each applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall, together with his/her
application, submit the insurance policy or certificate in lieu thereof,
showing coverages in the amount of:
same, the information contained on the taxicab owner's license of
the owner of the individual taxicab and a notice that in case of any
complaint the Police Department shall be notified. All licenses shall at
all times be and remain the property of the Township and on direction of
the Chief of Police shall at once be surrendered to the Township Clerk.
b. The taxicab driver's license of the driver operating the taxicab and the
taxicab vehicle license shall be at all times in full view of and plainly
legible to any passenger seated on the rear seat of such taxicab. No
taxicab driver's license card other than that of the driver actually
operating the taxicab at the time shall be displayed therein. No taxicab
vehicle license card other than that of the individual taxicab shall be
displayed therein.
c. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-2 the owner of a taxicab shall cause to be
displayed on the body of the vehicle the taxicab vehicle license number
issued to that vehicle by the Township. The number shall be three (3)
inches in height and located in the center of the rear quarter panels on
the driver and passenger sides and the rear center line of the trunk of
the vehicle. Each taxicab shall display on each rear door of the Taxicab
the name of the municipality or municipalities which has issued the
taxicab a taxi license in letters three (3) inches in height.
a. One hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars per person and three
hundred thousand ($300,000.00) dollars per occurrence to satisfy all
claims for damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered by any
person as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the taxicab upon any public street; and,
b. Five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars to satisfy any claim for damages to
property of any one (1) person resulting from an accident and a sum of
not less than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars to satisfy all claims for
damages to property of all persons on account of such accident by
§ 11-30.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.9
AO:415
§ 11-30.10. Power of Attorney for Taxicab Owners. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
Each applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall, together with his/her
application, submit the Power of Attorney required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-5
and to the Motor Vehicle Commission; and shall provide any other
documentation and/or information required by Title 48 Public Utilities,
Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the Statutes of
New Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation.
§ 11-30.11. Certificate of Compliance for Taxicab Operators. [Ord.
No. O.1836-2013]
The Township Clerk shall issue in duplicate a certificate of compliance upon
the submission of the required insurance policy or bond showing that the
owner of the taxicab has complied with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A.
48:16-6. The certificate shall recite the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy or bond, a description of the
taxicab insured and its registration number. The duplicate certificate shall
be filed with the Motor Vehicle Commission before any car is licensed as
a taxicab. The original certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place
within the taxicab.
§ 11-30.12. Register of Vehicles. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
The Township Clerk shall keep a register of all taxicab driver licenses,
taxicab owner licenses and taxicab vehicle licenses together with the
applications and approvals required herein.
§ 11-30.13. Continued Inspection of Taxicabs by Police. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
The Police Department shall maintain due vigilance over all taxicabs and
see that they are kept in a condition of safety and sanitation for the
transportation of passengers, and to this end shall have the right, at any and
all times, to inspect any and all such licensed vehicles and taxi meters and
shall maintain a record in writing of the report of all such inspections.
reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such taxicab
upon any public street,
or in the amount as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3, whichever is greater; and
shall provide any other documentation and/or information required by Title 48
Public Utilities, Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the
Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation. Said insurance shall
remain in full force and effect at all times the Owner and/or Vehicle is licensed
by the Township of Edison. A blanket bond or insurance policy as permitted by
N.J.S.A. 48:16-4 may also be submitted. Additionally, the owner shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Borough, its officers, agents or employees, from any
and all loss, costs, damages and/or expenses suffered by any person or to any
property arising from the owner's negligence.
§ 11-30.9 EDISON CODE § 11-30.14
AO:416
§ 11-30.14. Revocation and Suspension of Licenses. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
§ 11-30.15. Taxicab Renewal: Continuation of Background Check
Required. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
§ 11-30.16. License Required; Qualifications; Application;
Additional Rules. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
a. Licenses granted under the preceding subsections may be revoked at
any time by the Chief of Police for not more than twenty (20) days, if the
vehicle shall not be in a safe and sanitary condition for the
transportation of passengers and kept in conformity with the terms of
this section, or for the violation of any of the provisions of this section or
any of the rules and regulations made by the Chief of Police.
b. Any licensee whose license is suspended pursuant to paragraph a of
this subsection shall be given a hearing before the Chief of Police
during the twenty (20) day period of suspension upon at least five (5)
days' notice in writing.
c. After the hearing, the Chief of Police shall determine whether the
qualifications of the licensee have been so adversely affected as to
require an extension of the suspension or a revocation of the license.
d. If the Chief of Police determines that further suspension or a revocation
is not warranted, he shall reinstate the suspended license as soon as
practicable.
a. The Chief of Police shall cause a background check to be completed in a
manner consistent with N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and this section. The taking of
fingerprints from an owner whose prints are already on file may not be
required, as determined by the Chief of Police.
a. Taxicab Driver's License.
1. No person shall drive a taxicab until he or she have made
application, upon a form provided by the Township Clerk and
approved by the Chief of Police, for a taxicab driver's license, paid
the required fee and shall have procured such license from the
Township Clerk. Every applicant for a license to drive a taxicab
shall furnish satisfactory evidence that he or she has received a
driver's license under the State Motor Vehicle Law. Each applicant
for a driver's license under the terms of this section must conform
to the following regulations:
(a) Be of the age of twenty-one (21) years or over;
(b) Present the certificate of a reputable physician showing that he
or she has been examined within sixty (60) days, that he or she
is of sound physique, with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of mind or
§ 11-30.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.16
AO:417
body which might render him or her unfit for the safe operation
of a taxicab;
(c) Be able to read and write the English language and be a
resident of the United States;
(d) Not be addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors;
(e) Fill out upon such form to be provided by the Township Clerk a
statement giving said applicant's full name, residence for the
preceding five (5) years, age, color, height, weight, color of
eyes and hair, place of birth, place of previous employment,
whether married or single, whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, how long the
applicant has been a licensed automobile driver of the State of
New Jersey, whether his or her automobile driver's license has
ever been suspended or revoked, and, if so, for what cause,
whether the applicant has ever been licensed to operate a
taxicab by another municipality and if the same has ever been
suspended or revoked, and, if so, for what cause, and such
other reasonable information as may be required. All
applications herein shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant and filed with the Township Clerk.
2. At the time of filing his/her application, applicant shall be
fingerprinted by the Township Police and said fingerprints shall be
submitted to the Bureau of Identification, New Jersey State Police
for a report of applicant's criminal record, if any. Any and all costs
of this process shall be borne by the applicant.
3. At the time of filing his/her application, the Township Police shall
obtain a Motor Vehicle Driver's Abstract. Any and all costs of this
process shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Provide any other documentation and/or information required by
Title 48 Public Utilities, Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines
and Jitneys of the Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or
regulation.
5. The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish from
time to time such additional rules and regulations, not inconsistent
herewith, as may be necessary and reasonable, governing the
issuance of any license provided for in this section.
b. Taxicab Owner's License.
1. No person shall operate a taxicab business until he or she shall
have made application, upon a form provided by the Township
Clerk and approved by the Chief of Police, for a taxicab owner's
license, paid the required fee and shall have procured such license
from the Township Clerk. Each applicant for a license under the
terms of this section must conform to the following regulations:
§ 11-30.16 EDISON CODE § 11-30.16
AO:418
(a) Be of the age of twenty-one (21) years or over;
(b) Be able to read and write the English language and be a
resident of the United States;
(c) Not be addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors;
(d) Fill out upon such form to be provided by the Township Clerk a
statement giving said applicant's full name, residence for the
preceding five (5) years, age, color, height, weight, color of
eyes and hair, place of birth, place of previous employment,
whether married or single, whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, how long the
applicant has been a licensed automobile driver of the State of
New Jersey, whether his or her automobile driver's license has
ever been revoked, and, if so, for what cause, the color scheme
or name, monogram or insignia to be used on the vehicles to be
used as taxicabs, the address from which the applicant intends
to conduct the operation of the taxicab business sought to be
licensed, and a complete schedule of hours and days of
operation of the place of business, and such other reasonable
information as may be required. All applications herein shall be
signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the
Township Clerk.
(e) If the address from which the applicant/owner intends to
conduct the operation of the taxicab business sought to be
licensed is within the Township of Edison, the applicant shall
also secure a zoning permit indicating that the taxicab
business use is permitted at such location and complies with all
applicable zoning requirements or has received the
appropriate approvals (such as variances, etc.) prior to the
processing of the taxicab owner's license.
2. At the time of filing his/her application, applicant shall be
fingerprinted by the Township Police and said fingerprints shall be
submitted to the Bureau of Identification, New Jersey State Police
for a report of applicant's criminal record, if any. Any and all costs
of this process shall be borne by the applicant.
3. At the time of filing his/her application, the Township Police shall
obtain a Motor Vehicle Driver's Abstract. Any and all costs of this
process shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Provide any other documentation and/or information required by
Title 48 Public Utilities, Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines
and Jitneys of the Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or
regulation.
5. The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish from
time to time such additional rules and regulations, not inconsistent
§ 11-30.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.16
AO:419
herewith, as may be necessary and reasonable, governing the
issuance of any license provided for in this section.
c. Taxicab Vehicle License.
1. No licensed taxicab owner shall operate a taxicab vehicle until he
or she shall have made application, upon a form provided by the
Township Clerk and approved by the Chief of Police, for a Taxicab
Vehicle License, paid the required fee and shall have procured such
license from the Township Clerk. Each applicant for a license under
the terms of this section must conform to the following regulations:
(a) Each vehicle must be properly registered for taxicab use with
the State of New Jersey;
(b) The title to each vehicle must be in the name of the licensed
taxicab owner requesting the individual vehicle to be licensed;
(c) The licensed taxicab owner requesting the individual vehicle to
be licensed shall not be in excess of the total number of
vehicles permitted to be licensed under his taxicab owner's
license as provided herein;
(d) Fill out upon such form to be provided by the Township Clerk a
statement giving said applicant's full name, Township taxicab
owner's license, and such other reasonable information as may
be required. All applications herein shall be signed and sworn
to by the applicant and filed with the Township Clerk.
2. Provide any other documentation and/or information required by
Title 48 Public Utilities, Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines
and Jitneys of the Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or
regulation.
3. The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish from
time to time such additional rules and regulations, not inconsistent
herewith, as may be necessary and reasonable, governing the
issuance of any license provided for in this section.
d. Denial, Revocation or Suspension of Licenses. In addition to the
provisions of Chapter XI of the general licensing chapter covering
causes for which licenses may be revoked, the Township Council may in
their discretion refuse to issue or renew, or may after notice and
hearing revoke or suspend any license issued hereunder for any of the
causes or reasons listed below.
1. License of any Class. Any license of any class or renewal thereof
may be denied, revoked or suspended if any applicant or licensee:
(a) Has been convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction.
(b) Has been more than once convicted of being a disorderly
person.
§ 11-30.16 EDISON CODE § 11-30.16
AO:420
(c) Has been found guilty of a violation of Title 39, "Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Regulations" of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
(d) Violates any provision of this section or any ordinance of the
Township.
(e) Has any judgment unsatisfied of record against him or her
arising out of an automobile accident in any place, or arising
out of the operation of a taxicab in the Township of Edison or
any other place.
(f) Failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and adequate
taxicab service.
(g) Has not complied fully with all requirements of this section.
(h) Any misrepresentation of any material fact made or disclosed
in the application shall be cause for refusal to issue the license
and/or revocation of the license and/or the imposition of the
penalty provided for in this section.
(i) Any other basis provided for in Title 48 Public Utilities,
Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the
Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation.
2. Taxicab Driver's License. Any taxicab driver's license may be
denied, revoked or suspended, in addition to the above causes for
any of the following reasons:
(a) If the licensee or applicant has in any degree contributed to
any injury to person or damage to property, arising out of
negligent operation of a motor vehicle or a taxicab in the
Township of Edison or any other place.
(b) Has any communicable or contagious disease.
3. Taxicab Owner's License. Any taxicab owner's license may be
denied, revoked or suspended, in addition to the above causes, for
any of the following reasons:
(a) If the policy of insurance required by Title 48 Public Utilities,
Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the
Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation, or as
required herein has once lapsed or such coverage is not
maintained at all times.
(b) If the owner is a corporation or other business entity required
to be authorized to do business under the laws of the State and
is not so authorized. No license shall be granted to operate a
taxicab business to any person or to any partnership or
corporation who is not, or the members or officers of which,
are not persons of good moral character.
§ 11-30.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.16
AO:421
§ 11-30.17. Issuance of License; Term. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
(c) If the address from which the applicant/owner intends to
conduct the operation of the taxicab business sought to be
licensed is within the Township of Edison, and the applicant
has not secured a zoning permit indicating that the business is
permitted at such location prior to the processing of the
taxicab owner's license as required herein.
4. Taxicab Vehicle License. Any taxicab vehicle license may be denied,
revoked or suspended, in addition to the above causes, for any of
the following reasons:
(a) If the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed, by reason of
unsafe or unsanitary conditions, is dangerous to the safety or
health of the occupants or others.
(b) If the policy of insurance required by Title 48 Public Utilities,
Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the
Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation, or as
required herein has once lapsed or such coverage is not
maintained at all times.
e. Appeal of Denial, Revocation or Suspension of Licenses.
1. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity aggrieved by
the denial, revocation or suspension of a license under this section
may appeal such denial to the Township Council.
2. Any appeal hereunder shall be filed in writing and served on the
Township Clerk within ten (10) days of the license denial,
revocation or suspension, and if revocation or suspension was
made by the Chief of Police pursuant to subsection 11-30.14, the
appeal shall be made within ten (10) days after the hearing before
the Chief of Police and his/her decision as provided for in
subsection 11-30.14.
3. At the time such appeal is filed, the appellant shall pay to the
Township Clerk a nonrefundable fee of one hundred seventy-five
($175.00) dollars and a written statement of the basis for the
appeal.
4. Any such appeal will be scheduled for hearing within thirty (30)
days of the filing of the appeal, provided, however, that the appeal
may be adjourned or continued by the Township Council for good
reason.
a. Upon satisfactory compliance with the above section, and approval by
the Chief of Police and Resolution of the Township Council there may be
issued by the Township Clerk to the applicant the requested license
which shall contain a photograph and signature of the licensee. Any
license so issued may be suspended upon recommendation of the Chief
§ 11-30.16 EDISON CODE § 11-30.17
AO:422
§ 11-30.18. Change of Address — Loss of Records — Taxicabs. [Ord.
No. O.1836-2013]
Any change of address of any owner or driver licensed under the provisions
of this chapter must be reported in writing, to the Division of Police within
seventy-two (72) hours of such change. The loss of operator license or
taxicab license must be reported to the Division of Police within twentyfour
(24) hours of such loss. In the event any licensed driver terminates his
or her employment as a driver or ends employment with one Edison based
company and joins another Edison Township based company, he or she shall
return the original license and any other paper or document in his or her
possession furnished to him or her by the Division of Police within seventytwo
(72) hours of such termination.
§ 11-30.19. Renewal of Licenses. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
of Police, for the cause of the violation of this section or the regulations
made thereunder or any applicable law, rule or regulation. A suspended
driver or owner may request a hearing before the Township Council to
appeal said suspension.
b. The term of each class of license shall be as follows:
1. A taxicab driver's license shall be issued as of the date of approval
and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which it
was issued, and shall not be transferable.
2. A taxicab owner's license shall be issued as of the date of approval
and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which it
was issued, and may be transferable to a related business entity,
such as in the case of a change in the form of a business entity or
the purchaser or sale of all or part of a business entity, provided
that the new owner complies with subsection 11-30.16 regarding
applications and subsection 11-30.20 regarding fees.
3. A taxicab vehicle license shall be issued as of the date of approval
and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which it
was issued, and may be transferable to a related business entity,
such as in the case of a change in the form of a business entity or
the purchaser or sale of all or part of a business entity, provided
that the new owner complies with subsection 11-30.16 regarding
applications and subsection 11-30.20 regarding fees.
a. When applying for the renewal of any license required by this section,
the holder of such license shall make such application upon a form to be
furnished by the Township Clerk. The Chief of Police shall cause a
background check to be completed in a manner consistent with law. The
taking of fingerprints from a driver whose prints are already on file may
not be required.
§ 11-30.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.19
AO:423
§ 11-30.20. Fees for Licenses. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
§ 11-30.21. Fares Not to Exceed Fixed Rates. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
§ 11-30.22. Changes of Ownership to Revoke License. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
Changes in ownership or title to any taxicab business or taxicab vehicle
licensed under this section shall automatically revoke the license for such
taxicab owner's license or taxicab vehicle license. The purchaser of such
taxicab business and/or vehicle(s) must apply for a license authorizing the
operation of the business and/or vehicle as heretofore set forth.
b. Applications for any license renewal shall be filed with the Township
Clerk no sooner than November 1 and no later than December 1 of the
year proceeding the year for which application is being made. All
applications for renewals shall be acted upon prior to any consideration
being given to new applications, which shall be considered in the order
of their filing with the Township Clerk on a first come/first served basis
received after it is determined that there is a license of any class
available, except for taxi owner's licenses which is available shall be
issued as provided for in section 11-30.20d. Any existing License for
which an application for renewal is not made by December 1 shall be
deemed forfeited and shall be available to a new applicant, and any
application for renewal received after December 1 of any year shall be
treated as an application for a new license.
a. The sum of one hundred ($100.00) dollars shall be charged for the
issuance of each taxicab driver's license or the renewal thereof.
b. The sum of five hundred ($500.00) dollars shall be charged for the
issuance of each taxicab vehicle license or the renewal thereof.
c. The sum of one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars shall be charged for the
issuance of each taxicab owner's license or the renewal thereof.
d. The cost for a lost or destroyed license of any class shall be twenty-five
($25.00) dollars.
a. The holder of every taxicab owner's license shall file a schedule of rates
with the Township Clerk's Office. The prices that may be charged by the
owners or drivers of taxicabs for the transportation of passengers for
hire, shall not exceed the rates filed with the Township Clerk and
approved by the Chief of Police and may not be changed or modified
without written approval from him or her.
b. All prices charged shall be subject to a twenty-five (25%) percent
discount for persons over the age of sixty-two (62).
§ 11-30.19 EDISON CODE § 11-30.23
AO:424
§ 11-30.23. Rules of Conduct for Licensees - Taxicabs. [Ord. No.
O.1836-2013]
a. No person other than the licensed driver of the taxicab shall drive or sit
in the compartment of the taxicab reserved for the driver, nor shall the
driver engage in cruising as defined in subsection 11-30.1; nor shall any
driver or owner invite or permit loitering within or near his or her
taxicab, nor solicit, drive or divert prospective patrons of any business
establishment to any other similar establishment.
b. Smoking shall not be permitted in any taxicab without the permission of
the passenger.
c. No operator of any taxicab, whether licensed or not by the Township of
Edison, shall use a horn, siren, whistle, bell or other device capable of
emitting audible sound in order to pick-up customers, or hawk, sell or
otherwise advertise their services.
d. All taxicab drivers, when operating their taxicabs, shall be clean and
neat of dress.
e. Every taxicab driver shall, upon the completion of each and every trip,
make a search of the taxicab for any property lost or inadvertently left
therein and any such property, unless sooner claimed by or delivered to
the rightful owner, shall be taken to the Police Division within six (6)
hours of the finding thereof.
f. All taxicab drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests
of passengers as to speed and the route to be taken. Where such
requests are not made by the passenger, such driver shall use lawful
and reasonable speed and the most expeditious route to be taken to
such passenger's destination.
g. No driver of any taxicab shall induce any prospective passenger to
employ him by misinforming or misleading any such prospective
passenger, either as to time or place of the arrival or departure of any
train or motor bus or as to the location of any building or place or as to
the distance between any two (2) points.
h. Any motor vehicle accident involving a taxicab and causing injury to a
person or persons or damage to property in excess of one hundred
($100.00) dollars shall be reported immediately by the driver to the
Police Department, and the taxicab shall not be moved until released by
the police, except in an emergency where there is immediate danger to
life or limb.
i. No owner or driver of any licensed taxicab shall permit the use of such
taxicab for any illegal or immoral purpose.
j. All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the Township, operating
under the provisions of this section, shall render an overall service to
the public desiring to use taxicabs.
§ 11-30.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.23
AO:425
k. Holders of taxicab owner's licenses shall maintain a central place of
business which shall be kept open for the purpose of receiving calls and
dispatching cabs for at least the minimum hours stipulated on the
taxicab license.
l. All taxicab licensees or their representatives shall answer all calls
received for taxicab service inside the Township limits as soon as they
can do so. If such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time,
they shall then notify the prospective passenger as to how long it will be
before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor.
m. Any licensee under this section or his representative who shall refuse to
accept a call for taxicab service anywhere within the Township limits at
any time when such licensee has a taxicab available or who shall fail or
refuse to give overall service shall be deemed a violator of this section.
n. Taxicab licensees shall not refuse service to any individual based upon
the individual's race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry or sex.
o. No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab
unless the person or persons first employing a taxicab shall consent to
the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers.
p. The number of passengers permitted to be carried in any taxicab shall
be in accordance with the particular vehicle manufacturer's passenger
capacity specifications, and, the transportation of all passengers shall
be in accordance with all applicable New Jersey State Statutes and
regulations.
q. The driver of any taxicab shall, upon request of any passenger, render
to such passenger a receipt for the fare charged. The receipt shall state
the name of the driver, the taxicab license number, the amount of the
fare, the points of origin and destination and the date and time of the
transaction.
r. No taxicab shall be left unattended by the driver while the vehicle is
standing at a designated taxicab stand. More particularly, the driver
must remain in or within ten (10) feet of the vehicle while it is standing
at a designated taxicab stand.
s. Record Keeping.
1. Recordkeeping by Owners.
(a) The holder of each and every taxicab owner's license shall
record in a book kept solely for such purpose the time of
departure from and the time of return to the garage of each
vehicle licensed under this section, the name and an address of
the driver thereof, the license number of the driver and the
license number of the vehicle.
(b) The record book shall be kept open for inspection at all times
by a duly authorized representative of the Police Department.
§ 11-30.23 EDISON CODE § 11-30.23
AO:426
§ 11-30.24. Refusal to Pay Fare Prohibited. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
It is unlawful for a passenger or bailee of any vehicle referred to herein to
refuse or fail to pay his or her fare.
§ 11-30.25. Confusing Vehicle Color Schemes or Names Prohibited
— Taxicabs. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
No vehicle covered by the terms of this section shall be licensed whose
color scheme, or name, monogram or insignia to be used thereon, shall
be in conflict with or, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, imitate any
color scheme, monogram, name or insignia, used by any other person, firm
or corporation operating a taxicab or taxicabs, in such manner as to be
misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. Each vehicle covered
by the terms of this section shall display on the outside of that vehicle the
name of the license holder, its municipality and telephone number on the
driver's side door. Every licensed taxicab shall have painted on both sides
thereof the words "taxicab," "taxi" or "cab" in letters at least six (6) inches
high, or the name of the operating owner if it contains the words "taxi" or
"cab" or "taxicab." Every licensed taxicab shall have painted on each side
thereof, in letters at least one (1) inch high, the name of the owner thereof
followed or preceded by the word "owner."
2. Recordkeeping by Drivers.
(a) The holder of each and every taxicab driver's license shall keep
a daily record upon which all trips shall be recorded. The daily
record shall show the time and place of origin and destination
of each trip and the amount of fare received for each trip. All
such records shall be given to the holder of the taxicab license
and shall be retained for two (2) years by such holder. The
holder of the taxicab license shall be responsible for the
maintenance of daily records of all taxicabs operated by him.
Such daily record shall be kept in the taxicab vehicle during
daily operations.
(b) The record book shall be kept open for inspection at all times
by a duly authorized representative of the Police Department.
t. No taxicab vehicle, whether licensed or unlicensed, when not in service,
shall be parked on any street or on any property except that of a
licensed taxicab owner's approved place of business per subsection
11-30.16b1(e). However, short breaks during the shift of a taxicab
driver or the repair of a taxicab vehicle at a garage or service station
shall not be considered being parked under this section.
u. All taxicab drivers and owners shall comply with Title 48 Public
Utilities, Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the
Statutes of New Jersey, and Title 39 Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Regulation of the Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or
regulation.
§ 11-30.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-30.26
AO:427
§ 11-30.26. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1836-2013]
§ 11-31. LIMOUSINE SERVICES.
§ 11-31.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1673-2008§ I]
As used in this section:
LIMOUSINE — Means and includes any automobile or motor car used
in the business of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged
passenger transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled,
charter basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating
capacity in no event of more than fourteen (14) passengers, not including
the driver, provided, that such a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in
excess of four (4) passengers, not including the driver beyond the maximum
passenger seating capacity of the vehicle, not including the driver, beyond
the maximum passenger.
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — Means and includes the business of
carrying passengers for hire by limousines.
a. Any person violating the provisions of this section or permits, aids or
abets the violation of the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of:
1. Three hundred ($300.00) dollars plus costs for a first offense.
2. Six hundred ($600.00) dollars plus costs for a second offense.
3. Third and subsequent offenses shall require a Court appearance
and shall be subject to a fine of at least one thousand two hundred
($1,200.00) dollars plus costs.
b. For the purposes of subsection 11-30.26, a person who has been
convicted of a previous violation need not be charged as a second, third
or subsequent offender in the complaint made against him in order to
render him liable to the penalties imposed by this section on a second,
third or subsequent offender, but if the second offense occurs more than
two (2) years after the previous offense, the Court shall treat the second
conviction as a first offense for sentencing purposes, and if a third
offense occurs more than two (2) years after the second offense, the
Court shall treat the third conviction as a second offense for sentencing
purposes, and if an offense subsequent to the third offense occurs more
than two (2) years after the third offense, the Court shall treat the
offense subsequent to the third offense as a third offense for sentencing
purposes and so on for additional subsequent offenses.
c. In addition to the penalty provided above, any taxicab driver's license,
taxicab owner's license, or taxicab vehicle license may be suspended or
revoked as provided in this section.
d. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Division of Police
and/or a Traffic Enforcement Officer.
§ 11-30.26 EDISON CODE § 11-31.1
AO:428
PERSONS — Means and includes a firm, copartnership, association and
corporation, and the singular or plural and the masculine, feminine or
neuter thereof, unless the contrary is clearly expressed.
§ 11-31.2. Limousine; Insurance. [Ord. No. O.1673-2008§ I]
§ 11-31.3. Limousine Power of Attorney. [Ord. No. O.1673-2008§ I]
The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver to the Motor Vehicle
Commission concurrently with filing of a policy referred to in N.J.S.A.
48:16-14, a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint
the Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission his true and lawful attorney
for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed. A copy of the power of
attorney shall be placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 11-31.4. License Application. [Ord. No. O.1673-2008§ I]
§ 11-31.5. Zoning Officer Certification - Limousine. [Ord. No.
O.1673-2008§ I]
a. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-22, no person shall operate a
limousine wholly or partly along any street in Edison Township until the
owner of the limousine shall have filed with the Clerk of the Township in
which the owner has his principal place of business, an insurance policy
of a company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of this state in the sum of one million five hundred ($1,500,000.00)
dollars against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon every
limousine owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as the result of an accident occurring by reason
of the ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public
street. Such operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount of one
million five hundred ($1,500,000.00) dollars.
b. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine, or any fault in respect thereto,
and shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or
injury as aforesaid.
a. In addition to the submission of an insurance policy provided in
subsection 11-31.2 and power of attorney provided in subsection
11-31.3, the applicant must submit to the Township Clerk a completed
application and application fee in the amount of fifty ($50.00) dollars
upon a form provided by the Bureau of Licenses and Permits. In
addition, the applicant is required to submit proof of background check
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3(a) with said application.
§ 11-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-31.5
AO:429
§ 11-31.6. Issuance of License to Operate Limousine; Fees. [Ord.
No. O.1673-2008§ I; Ord. No. O.1892-2014]
§ 11-31.7. Change of Address - Loss of Records - Limousines. [Ord.
No. O.1673-2008§ I]
Any change of address of any owner or driver licensed under the provision
of this section must be reported in writing, to the Township Clerk within
seventy-two (72) hours of such change. The loss of limousine license must
be reported to the Township Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of such
loss. In the event any licensed driver terminates his or her employment
a. General Jurisdiction of Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall have
jurisdiction and responsibility to investigate and certify that the
limousines business is not operating in a residential zone and that the
limousine business has sufficient off-street parking for any and all
limousines to be used in the business.
b. The Zoning Officer's certification must be submitted to the Township
Clerk prior to the issuance of a limousine license.
a. The clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his principal place
of business, upon the filing of the required insurance policy, required
documentation, and the payment of a fee in the amount of ten ($10.00)
dollars per vehicle (plus payment of the fifty ($50.00) dollars per/
company application fee as required by subsection 11-31.4, above),
shall issue in duplicate, a license to operate showing that the owner of
the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of this
section.
b. The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of expiration of the policy, a description of limousine insured
thereunder and the registration number of the same.
c. The duplicate license shall be filed with the Motor Vehicle Commission
before any such car is registered as a limousine.
d. The original license shall be retained within the limousine and be
available for inspection by any Police Officer in the State. In lieu of
insurance information required on the license pursuant to this section,
the owner of a limousine may affix to the original license retained
within the limousine, a notarized letter from an insurance company
containing the same insurance information required in the recital,
which shall constitute proof of insurance coverage, and which shall also
be available for inspection by any Police Officer in the State. A copy of
the notarized letter shall constitute proof to the Director of the Motor
Vehicle Commission that the applicant has complied with the insurance
provision of this section.
* The term "license" used throughout subsection 11-31.6 is synonymous
with the term "Certificate of Insurance."
§ 11-31.5 EDISON CODE § 11-31.7
AO:430
as a driver or ends employment with one Edison based company and joins
another Edison based company, he or she shall return the original license
and any other paper or document in his or her possession furnished to
him or her by the Township Clerk within seventy-two (72) hours of such
termination.
§ 11-31.8. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1673-2008§ I]
Any person not having been duly licensed as a limousine driver, or any
person whose license as such driver has been revoked or suspended and
who, during the time such revocation or suspension is in effect, drives for
hire any vehicle upon the streets of this Township, or who shall violate any
other provision of this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 11-32. REGULATIONS OF SERVICE/GAS STATIONS.
§ 11-32.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. O.1741-2010§ I]
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the residents within the Township of Edison as well as the safety of
employees working at 24-hour service/gas stations and convenience stores
within the Township. This is accomplished by requiring the use of video
surveillance equipment.
§ 11-32.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1741-2010§ I]
For purposes of this section:
CONVENIENCE STORE — Shall mean an establishment that sells a limited
variety of food, pharmaceutical, personal, novelty and related sundry items
to the public.
SERVICE/GAS STATION — Shall mean an establishment that sells gasoline,
diesel and automotive fuels to the public.
§ 11-32.3. Required Use of Video Camera Surveillance System. [Ord.
No. O.1741-2010]
All service/gas stations operating and convenience stores between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be required to install and maintain a
video camera security surveillance system that is approved by the Township
of Edison Police Department. All service/gas stations and convenience
stores must post a conspicuous sign stating the property is under camera
surveillance.
a. The video camera surveillance system must comport with the following
minimum requirements:
1. All recording devices that must be capable of retrieving an image of
sufficient quality to assist in offender identification.
§ 11-31.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-32.3
AO:431
2. Cameras must be placed to record the cash register/product
payment area and all entry and exit doors to the service/gas station
or convenience store that are connected to or provide access to the
cash register/product payment areas that are not normally locked
and connected to a working alarm system.
3. Cameras installed to observe the entrances and exits must be
placed and lenses fixed so that the entrances or exists are
completely visible in the field of view.
4. Cameras must be installed so that the whole person is not less than
seventy (70%) percent of the field of view.
5. Cameras and other video recording equipment must be in good
working order and any breakdowns of the equipment must be
repaired expeditiously.
6. Cameras and other video security devices shall as sequencers and
multiplexers must be compatible within the recording device.
7. Camera activity must be recorded continuously.
8. All recording must have time and date stamp.
9. The recording media must be maintained in a secure environment,
not accessible by the public or unauthorized store employees.
10. The technical specifications provided in this section are minimum
standards and do not preclude a service/gas station or convenience
store from installation equipment that exceeds these standards.
b. In the event a service/gas station or convenience store already has in
place a VHS recorder for recording and storing images for its video
camera surveillance system, then in addition to the requirements of the
foregoing section, the recorder must comport with the following
minimum requirements:
1. The recorder must be a commercial grade VHS deck.
2. The time recorded on each video cassette shall not exceed seventytwo
(72) hours.
3. The recorder must have a minimum of two hundred forty (240)
lines of resolution and four (4) heads.
4. The service/gas station or convenience store must use a
commercial grade VHS tape.
5. An individual tape must not be used more than twenty (20) times.
6. The recording device tapes or other recording medial must be
maintained in a secure environment, not accessible by the public or
unauthorized store employees.
§ 11-32.3 EDISON CODE § 11-32.3
AO:432
§ 11-32.4. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1741-2010§ I]
§ 11-33. TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES, DRIVERS
AND VEHICLES.
§ 11-33.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
APPLICANT — Means a person who applies to a Transportation Network
Company to be a Transportation Network Driver.
DEPARTMENT or POLICE DEPARTMENT — Means the Township of Edison
Police Department.
PASSENGER — Means a person who arranges transportation with a
Transportation Network Driver through a Transportation Network
Company's digital network or software online application program and who
pays a fare based upon the transportation provided.
PRIVATE PASSENGER AUTOMOBILE — Means an automobile required to
be insured pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:6A-1 et seq. and/or
insurance as may be required by State law.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY or COMPANY — Means an
individual, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity that
uses a digital network or software online application program to connect
a passenger to a driver for the purpose of providing transportation to the
passenger for profit by the Transportation Network Company.
7. The technical specifications provided in this section are minimum
standards and do not preclude a service/gas station or convenience
store from installing equipment that exceeds these standards.
c. All recordings no matter how recorded and/or stored (i.e., digital or
tape) shall be maintained for thirty (30) days. All video cameras
surveillance systems, recordings and the like shall be available for
inspection by the Edison Township Police Department and other law
enforcement agencies upon request.
a. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
b. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a minimum fine of
two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for the first offense. The second
offense shall result in a fine of not less than one thousand ($1,000.00)
dollars and shall require a Court appearance. Third and subsequent
offenses shall result in a fine of the maximum amount permitted by law,
and in addition to a fine, in the discretion of the Court, imprisonment for
a term not to exceed ninety (90) days and shall require a Court
appearance.
c. Violation of any part of this section may result in the revocation of the
business owner's license pursuant to the rules and regulations of
Chapter XI General Licensing and Business Regulations of this Code.
§ 11-32.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-33.1
AO:433
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK DRIVER or DRIVER — Means a person who
operates a private passenger automobile to provide transportation to a
passenger who requests transportation through a Transportation Network
Company's digital network or software online application program which
results in a fare being owed by the passenger.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK LICENSE or LICENSE — Means the license
required to be obtained from the Township of Edison by a Transportation
Network Driver, prior to providing transportation to a passenger in the
Township of Edison.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK PERMIT or PERMIT — Means the permit
issued by the Township of Edison to a Transportation Network Company
that is required in order for the Company to be able to operate and provide
transportation to passengers in the Township of Edison.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK VEHICLE — Means a private passenger
automobile used by a Transportation Network Driver to provide
transportation to a passenger and that has at least four (4) doors and is
designed to carry not more than eight (8) passengers, including the driver.
§ 11-33.2. Transportation Network Company Regulations-Permits
and Licenses. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
The Chief of Police or a designee shall:
a. Issue to a Transportation Network Company, a Transportation Network
Permit to allow for the lawful operation of a Transportation Network
Company in the Township of Edison after receipt, review and approval
of the following information:
1. Proof of insurance as required pursuant to subsections 11-33.4 and
11-33.5 herein;
2. Proof that the Transportation Network Company is licensed to
conduct business in the State of New Jersey; and
3. Any other information the Department may require, as may be
necessary and reasonable, governing the issuance of any Permit
provided for in this section.
The Chief of Police may revoke the Permit if the Transportation
Network Company fails to comply with the provisions of this
section.
b. Issue a Transportation Network License for Transportation Network
Drivers after receipt, review and approval of proof from the
Transportation Network Company that the Company has:
1. Verified that the Transportation Network Driver has a valid driver's
license, vehicle registration, and automobile insurance as required
pursuant to subsections 11-33.4 and 11-33.5 and/or insurance as
may be required by State law.
§ 11-33.1 EDISON CODE § 11-33.2
AO:434
§ 11-33.3. Transportation Network Company Responsibilities,
Business License, Driver Background Check, Vehicle and
Equipment Safety. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
A Transportation Network Company shall not operate in the Township of
Edison unless the Company:
2. Conducted, through New Jersey State Police or other appropriate
State agency, a driver license record check which did not reveal
any disqualifying violations, as required pursuant to subsection
11-33.3 paragraphs d, e and f.
3. Conducted, through New Jersey State Police or other appropriate
agency, a criminal history background check which did not reveal
any disqualifying convictions, as required pursuant to subsection
11-33.3 paragraphs d, e and f; and
4. Conducted, either directly or by a third party, a safety inspection of
the driver's transportation network vehicle which met safety
inspection standards, as required pursuant to subsection 11-33.3
paragraphs g and h.
c. Issue a Transportation Network License bearing the name, signature
and photograph of the Driver.
a. Applies for, receives, and maintains a Transportation Network Permit
issued by the Chief of Police or a designee of the Township of Edison;
b. 1. Verifies that an Applicant has a valid driver's license, vehicle
registration, and private passenger automobile insurance; and
2. Annually verifies that a Transportation Network Driver has a valid
driver's license, vehicle registration, and private passenger
automobile insurance;
c. 1. Conducts, through New Jersey State Police or other appropriate
State agency, a driver's license record check on an Applicant; and
2. Once every three (3) years, conducts, through New Jersey State
Police or other appropriate State agency, a driver's license record
check on a Transportation Network Driver;
d. Prohibits an Applicant or Transportation Network Driver from
providing transportation to a passenger if the individual's driver's
license record check reveals any of the following violations:
1. Reckless driving pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-96;
2. Driving while intoxicated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-50;
3. Driving with a suspended or revoked license pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:5-30;
§ 11-33.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-33.3
AO:435
4. A violation committed in any other state, territory, commonwealth,
or other jurisdiction of the United States that is comparable to one
of the violations enumerated in paragraphs 1, 2, or 3 above.
5. Any other violation as determined by the Department;
e. 1. Conducts, through New Jersey State Police or other appropriate
State agency, a criminal history record background check on an
Applicant; and
2. Once every three (3) years, through New Jersey State Police or
other appropriate State agency, conducts a criminal history record
background check on a Transportation Network Driver;
f. Prohibits an Applicant or Transportation Network Driver from
providing transportation to a passenger if the criminal history record
background check reveals any of the following convictions:
1. Aggravated assault, arson, burglary, extortion, homicide,
kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or
endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4,
whether or not armed with or having in the applicant's or driver's
possession any weapon enumerated in Subsection r of N.J.S.A.
20:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3,
N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4, or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly
persons or petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use,
possession, or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined
in N.J.S.A. 20:35-2;
2. A conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction for a crime
committed in any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, which in that other jurisdiction is
comparable to one of the crimes enumerated in paragraph f1
above.
3. Any other conviction as determined by the Department;
g. 1. Conducts, either directly or by a third party, a safety inspection of a
vehicle an Applicant will use as a Transportation Network Vehicle;
and
2. Once every other year, conducts either directly or by a third party, a
safety inspection of a vehicle used by a Transportation Network
Driver;
h. Prohibits an Applicant or Transportation Network Driver from
providing transportation to a passenger until an Applicant's vehicle or a
Driver's Transportation Network Vehicle passes a safety inspection,
required pursuant to paragraph g of this subsection, by meeting
inspection standards established by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission of the State of New Jersey, which inspection shall include,
but need not be limited to, the following equipment:
§ 11-33.3 EDISON CODE § 11-33.3
AO:436
1. Foot brakes;
2. Emergency brakes;
3. Steering mechanism;
4. Windshield;
5. Rear window and other glass;
6. Windshield wipers;
7. Headlights;
8. Tail lights;
9. Turn indicator lights;
10. Stop lights;
11. Front seat adjustment mechanism;
12. Doors;
13. Horn;
14. Speedometer;
15. Bumpers;
16. Muffler and exhaust system;
17. Condition of the tires, including tread depth;
18. Interior and exterior rear view mirrors; and
19. Safety belts and air bags for driver and passengers;
i. 1. Implements a zero tolerance drug and alcohol policy that prohibits
being under the influence and the consumption of illegal drugs or
alcohol by a Transportation Network Driver while logged into the
digital network or software online application program or while
providing transportation to a passenger; and
2. Requires an Applicant to be tested, at the Applicant's expense, for a
dangerous controlled substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2;
j. Maintains a record demonstrating that the Transportation Network
Company has met the requirements of this section and makes the
record available to the Department upon request;
k. Cooperates with, and facilitates the exchange of information between,
the insurance company providing the Transportation Network
Company the insurance required pursuant to this section and all other
insurers involved in a claims coverage investigation of an occurrence
§ 11-33.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-33.3
AO:437
§ 11-33.4. Transportation Network Driver Restrictions. [Ord. No.
O.1937-2016]
A Transportation Network Driver shall not provide transportation to a
passenger in the Township of Edison unless:
§ 11-33.5. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
while a Transportation Network Driver is providing transportation to a
passenger;
l. Retains records, for at least six (6) years, of each Transportation
Network Driver's use of a Transportation Network Vehicle in the
Township, which records shall include:
1. The date, time, and duration of time during which the
Transportation Network Driver logged on to the Transportation
Network Company's digital network or software online application
program to indicate the Transportation Network Driver's
availability;
2. The locations and mileage data associated with the transportation
provided to each passenger, if available; and
3. Any claims for injury or property damage arising in connection with
transportation provided to a passenger, including claims payments
made, if applicable;
m. Provides, upon request, the records retained pursuant to paragraph I of
this subsection to the Transportation Network Driver's private
passenger automobile insurance for purposes of a claim investigation;
and
n. Provides the Department with any other information the Department
may require pursuant to rule or regulation.
a. That person has been issued a Transportation Network License to
operate a Transportation Network Vehicle as provided pursuant to
subsection 11-33.2b; and
b. That person maintains in the Transportation Network Vehicle proof of
the person's private passenger automobile insurance issued pursuant to
P.L. 1972, c. 70 (C. 39:6A-1 et seq.) and/or insurance as may be required
by State law and proof of the Transportation Network Company's
insurance policy required pursuant to subsection 11-33.5c.
a. A Transportation Network Company shall be required to obtain and
maintain an insurance policy from an insurance company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New
Jersey which:
1. From the moment a Transportation Network Driver logs on to the
Transportation Network Company's digital network or software
§ 11-33.3 EDISON CODE § 11-33.5
AO:438
§ 11-33.6. Expiration Date of Transportation Network License; Fee;
Display of License. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
online application program, until the moment the Transportation
Network Driver accepts a request to transport a passenger, and
from the moment all passengers have exited the Transportation
Network Vehicle, until the Transportation Network Driver either
accepts another request to transport another passenger on the
digital network or software online application program or logs
off the digital network or software online application program,
whichever is later: provides coverage in an amount of not less
than $250,000.00 per incident involving a Transportation Network
Vehicle for liability, property damage, and uninsured and
underinsured motorist coverage, and medical payments coverage
in an amount not less than $10,000.00 per person per incident
involving a Transportation Network Vehicle; and
2. From the moment a Transportation Network Driver accepts a
request to transport a passenger on the Transportation Network
Company's digital network or software online application program
until the moment all passengers have exited the Transportation
Network Vehicle: provides coverage in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000.00 per incident involving a Transportation Network
Vehicle for liability, property damage, and uninsured and
underinsured motorist coverage; and medical payments coverage
in an amount not less than $10,000.00 per person per incident
involving a Transportation Network Vehicle.
b. The coverage required pursuant to paragraph a of this subsection shall
cover the Transportation Network Vehicle and passengers, where
applicable.
c. The Transportation Network Company insurance policy maintained by
a Transportation Network Company as required by this subsection,
shall be in force and effect any time a Transportation Network Driver is
logged in to the Transportation Network Company's digital network or
software application and when a passenger is in a Transportation
Network Vehicle. A policy of private passenger automobile insurance
shall not be deemed to be in force at any time a Transportation Network
Driver is logged in to the Transportation Network Company's digital
network or software application or when a passenger is in a
Transportation Network Vehicle.
a. A Transportation Network License shall be valid for one year from the
date of issuance.
b. No License shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant therefor,
has paid an annual License fee for a Transportation Network License of
$100.00. The License fee shall be payable upon the submission of the
application form to be provided by the Township Clerk. This License
allows the Transportation Network Driver to pick-up passengers within
§ 11-33.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-33.6
AO:439
§ 11-33.7. Transportation Network Company Permit Fees;
Expiration of Permit Date. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
§ 11-33.8. Appeal of Denial, Revocation or Suspension of Permit or
License. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
the Township of Edison and shall be issued and renewed in accordance
with subsection 11-33.2.
c. While a Transportation Network Driver is operating a Transportation
Network Vehicle in the Township of Edison, his/her Transportation
Network License shall be displayed in an open and obvious place in the
vehicle and must be immediately available for review upon request by a
passenger or law enforcement official.
d. While a Transportation Network Driver is operating a Transportation
Network Vehicle in the Township of Edison, the Driver shall also display
on the windshield of the Vehicle, a sticker or other form of identifying
marker to be issued by the Township at the time the Transportation
Network License is issued to the Driver, which states that the Driver is
authorized to operate in the Township.
a. Each Transportation Network Company Permit shall be valid for one
year from the date of issuance.
b. No Permit shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant therefor has
paid an annual permit fee of $500.00, for the privilege to engage in the
Transportation Network Company business in the Township. Prior to
renewal of a Permit, the Transportation Network Company shall be
required to confirm and update the information required in subsection
11-33.2.
c. The Permit fee shall be payable upon the submission of the application
form to be provided by the Township Clerk, and the documentation and
information required in subsection 11-33.2. The fee shall be returned
less the sum of $200.00 in the event a Permit is not granted.
a. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity aggrieved by the
denial, revocation or suspension of a Transportation Network Permit or
Transportation Network License under this section may appeal such
action to the Township Council.
b. Any appeal hereunder shall be filed in writing and served on the
Township Clerk within ten (10) days of the License or Permit denial,
revocation or suspension.
c. At the time such appeal is filed, the appellant shall pay to the Township
Clerk a nonrefundable fee of one hundred seventy-five ($175.00) dollars
and a written statement of the basis for the appeal.
§ 11-33.6 EDISON CODE § 11-33.8
AO:440
§ 11-33.9. Conflicts of Law. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
Notwithstanding any law, rule, or regulation to the contrary:
§ 11-33.10. Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1937-2016]
A Transportation Network Company which violates the provisions of this
section or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be subject
to a civil penalty of $500.00 for the first offense, per Driver, and up to
$1,000.00 for each subsequent offense, per Driver, to be collected in a
civil action by a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law
of 1999," P.L. 1999, c. 274 (C. 2A:58-10 et seq.). If the violation is of
a continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall constitute
an additional, separate, and distinct offense. The Superior Court and the
Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of the
"Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L. 1999, c. 274 (C. 2A:58-10 et seq.)
pursuant to this section.
§ 11-34. FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING.
§ 11-34.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1973-2017]
FILMING — Means the taking of still or motion pictures, either on film,
videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on television or in theaters or for institutional
use. Filming includes all rehearsals, preparations and assembly and
dismantling of all equipment and structures, including but not limited to
scaffolding, lights, backdrops, tools and food, and the loading and unloading
of vehicles containing the equipment, structures and food.
PUBLIC LANDS — Means any and every public street, highway, sidewalk or
square, public park or playground or other public place within the Township
which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Township.
§ 11-34.2. Permits. [Ord. No. O.1973-2017]
d. Any such appeal will be scheduled for hearing within thirty (30) days
after the filing of the appeal, provided however, that the appeal may be
adjourned or continued by the Township Council for good reason.
a. A Transportation Network Company shall not be considered a taxicab
association, taxicab, autocab or a for-hire vehicle owner.
a. No person shall film or permit filming within the Township without
obtaining a permit therefor, which permit set forth the location of such
filming and the date or dates when filming shall take place. No permits
shall be issued unless applied for prior to five (5) days before the
requested shooting date. However, the administrator may waive the
five-day period if in his/her judgment the applicant has obtained all
related approvals and adjacent property owners or tenants do not need
to be notified.
§ 11-33.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-34.2
AO:441
§ 11-34.3. Applications for Permits. [Ord. No. O.1973-2017]
Applications shall be obtained from and submitted to the Township Clerk in
person or by mail and must contain at least the following information:
b. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Township Clerk during
normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Township Clerk and shall be accompanied by a permit
fee in the amount established by the Township. Incidental use of a
public sidewalk or street which does not result in a closing of the street
or sidewalk to public use shall not be considered filming on public land.
c. One permit shall be required for each location.
d. One (1) permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor filming on one (1)
day and indoor filming on one (1) day, provided that such date on which
filming is to take place shall be specified in the permit, and further
provided that the maximum number of days on which filming may be
authorized in any calendar year for premises located in a residential
zone shall not exceed ten (10) without a waiver pursuant to subsection
11-34.4i of this chapter.
e. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Township
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates, subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
f. No permit shall be issued for filming within the Township on or in any
private property unless written consent of the property owner and/or
tenant accompanies the application. Any businesses, merchants or
residents on the block in which filming will occur shall be given written
notice of the filming within three (3) days prior to the requested
shooting date. Said notice shall inform the businesses, merchants or
residents that the application is on file with the Clerk's Office, and the
businesses, merchants or residents shall be informed that objections
may be filed with the Township Clerk. The objections will become part
of the applicant's application and will be considered by Township
officials in reviewing the same. Proof of service of the notification of
adjacent property owners shall be submitted to the Township Clerk at
least two (2) days prior to the requested shooting date.
a. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
b. The location of the property where filming, etc., is to take place.
c. Whether the applicant is the owner or tenant in possession of the
property.
d. The name and address of the owner of the property if the applicant is
not the owner.
§ 11-34.2 EDISON CODE § 11-34.3
AO:442
§ 11-34.4. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. O.1973-2017]
e. The consent of the owner if other than the applicant.
f. The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity the
applicant wishes to allow to film, etc.
g. The date filming is to take place and the hours of filming.
h. The dates within the previous twelve (12) months that any filming, as
described in subsection 11-34.2 above, was conducted at this location.
i. Approval from the Police Chief, with any conditions he may set forth if
the filming is to take place on public lands.
j. Any other approval the Township Clerk deems necessary, with any
conditions which may be set forth.
k. A signed statement that the applicant affirms, under penalty of perjury,
that all statements contained in the application are true.
a. No permit shall be issued for filming at a particular location in a
residential zone within the Township which would permit filming at said
location on more than ten (10) days during any one (1) calendar year
unless a waiver pursuant to subsection 11-34.4i of this section is
granted.
b. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the
Township unless the applicant for such permit:
1. Provides proof of insurance coverage as follows: for bodily injury
for any person in the amount of five hundred thousand
($500,000.00) dollars and for any aggregate occurrence in the
amount of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars.
2. Agrees, in writing, to indemnify and save harmless the Township
from any and all liability or damages resulting from the use of such
public lands.
3. Agrees, in writing, to reimburse the Township for any lost
revenues, such as parking meter revenue, repairs to public
property and other revenue that the Township was prevented from
earning because of the filming.
4. Posts a cash bond of five hundred ($500.00) dollars or a
maintenance bond of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars in favor of
the Township for protecting and ensuring that the site of the
filming is left in a satisfactory condition (free of debris, rubbish and
equipment), and that all Township laws and regulations are
followed. Within seven (7) days of the completion of the filming, the
Township may return the bond if there is no damage to public or
private property or public expense caused by the filming.
§ 11-34.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-34.4
AO:443
c. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Township
Police Chief with respect thereto.
d. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and shall limit, to the extent
possible, any interference with normal public activity on such public
lands.
e. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
f. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown, whichever is earlier, in
residential zones.
g. The Township Clerk may refuse to issue a permit on the basis of
objective facts and after a review of the application and a report
thereon by the Township Police Chief and by other Township agencies
involved with the proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/
or time set forth in the application would violate any law or ordinance
or would unreasonably interfere with the public's use of public lands,
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or
welfare.
h. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to this section
may appeal to the Township Administrator. A written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Township
Administrator. An appeal from the decision of the Township Clerk shall
be filed within ten (10) days of the Township Clerk's decision. The
Township Administrator shall set the matter down for a hearing within
thirty (30) days of the day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The
decision of the Township Administrator shall be in the form of a written
decision.
i. The Township Administrator may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter and may authorize filming
other than during the hours herein described or may extend the
duration of a permit beyond ten (10) days or may permit filming at a
particular location on more than ten (10) days during any one (1)
§ 11-34.4 EDISON CODE § 11-34.4
AO:444
§ 11-34.5. Fees. [Ord. No. O.1973-2017]
Fees shall be as follows:
§ 11-34.6. Exemptions. [Ord. No. O.1973-2017]
The provisions of this Section 11-34 et seq. shall not apply to the filming of
news stories within the Township.
§ 11-35. CRANE OPERATION.
§ 11-35.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
The purpose of this section:
calendar year or may waive any other limitation or requirement of
this chapter whenever he determines that strict compliance with such
limitations will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant and
that such a permit may be issued without endangering the public's
health, safety and welfare.
j. The applicant shall notify the Fire Chief twenty-four (24) hours before
filming takes place and shall permit the Fire Chief or his designee to
inspect the site and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall
comply with all fire safety instructions issued by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
k. The holder of a permit issued for filming on public lands shall hire, at
said person's sole cost and expense, a Township police officer who will
be present at all times at the site during the filming.
l. Automobiles, trucks and all other vehicles owned, leased or used by the
holder of a permit for either residential or public land filming shall not
be parked on more than one (1) side of the street.
a. A permit fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars for a normal application.
b. A permit fee of one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars for an expedited
application (less than five (5) days prior to the shooting date).
c. A permit fee of seven hundred fifty ($750.00) dollars for filming on
public land.
d. A permit fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for nonprofit applicants for
filming for educational purposes (including public lands).
e. A daily filming fee of five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each day of
filming pursuant to any issued permit (which fee shall be waived for
nonprofit applicants filming for educational purposes).
a. Impose a consistent policy concerning the operation of cranes within
the Township which helps to preserve safety and prevent damage to
§ 11-34.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-35.1
AO:445
§ 11-35.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
As used in this section:
BOARD — Means the Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Means certification from the National Commission for
the Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSIONER — Means the Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — As used in this section, the term crane shall be defined in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 through 45:26-17 (Licensure of Crane
Operators Act), hereafter referred to as the Crane Operator Licensure Act
and the 1926 OSHA Crane and Derricks in Construction also known as
OSHA Subpart CC.
CRANE OPERATOR — Means an individual engaged in the operation of a
crane.
CRANE RELATED EXPERIENCE — Means operating, inspecting, training
and maintenance experience acceptable to the Board.
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — Means an examination demonstrating the
applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of crane.
Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
categories: the lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC) lattice boom truck cranes
(LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, Swing Cab) & (TSS, Fixed Cab), Tower
cranes and Overhead cranes.
§ 11-35.3. General Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
personal property and real estate of residential properties located in
the Township; and
b. Create a standard by which crane operators are governed in the
Township, such that professional crane operators adhere to the highest
standard of safety.
a. Five (5) days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the Township, a permit shall
be obtained. In emergent situations, the building inspector may waive
this requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator meets the
balance of the requirements of this section.
b. The permit will be maintained with the Township as well as with the
crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be produced on
the work site when requested.
§ 11-35.1 EDISON CODE § 11-35.3
AO:446
§ 11-35.4. Crane Operator Licensing. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
c. The following documents must be provided to the Township in order to
be granted a permit:
1. Copy of crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO);
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP); or
(c) Crane Institute of America Certification.
2. New Jersey Crane License.
3. Current Medical Examiner's Card.
4. A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection for the
crane being operated (crane owner).
5. Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily Injury:
(1) For any one (1) person in the amount of five hundred
thousand ($500,000.00) dollars;
(2) For any occurrence in the amount of one million
($1,000.000.00) dollars;
(b) Property Damage:
(1) For any one (1) accident in the amount of five hundred
thousand ($500,000.00) dollars;
(2) For any aggregate of occurrences in the amount of two
million ($2,000,000.00) dollars.
6. Proof of a current commercial driver's license if required to operate
the crane.
7. Proof that the crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program if the crane requires a commercial driver's license to
operate.
8. Proof of Completion of Signal Person Qualification or Certification
course as set forth in 29 CFR 1926.1419 and 1926.1428.
d. Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance with
the requirements of this section, the building department shall issue or
deny the requested permit within five (5) business days. If the
application is denied the reasons for the denial are furnished to the
applicant in writing.
§ 11-35.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-35.4
AO:447
§ 11-35.5. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
The permit fee for each crane shall be one hundred ($100.00) dollars. Each
permit is valid for sixty (60) days and may be extended and/or renewed
provided that compliance with the requirements of this section continues to
be met. Fee for an extended or renewal permit is fifty ($50.00) dollars.
§ 11-35.6. Notification of Accident or Safety Issue - Required. [Ord.
No. O.1984-2017]
The crane operator, contractor, and/or crane owner shall immediately notify
the Township of every accident causing personal injury or damage to
property involving a construction crane covered by this section and shall
afford the Township access to every facility for investigating such accident.
When an accident involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of
any part of the apparatus, it shall be unlawful to use such device in the
Township until after an examination by a licensed third party is made and
written proof is provided that the crane involved in any accident causing
a. Licensure of crane operators, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-7. No person
shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself or herself for
employment as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act,
present or represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as
such under the provisions of this act.
b. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for which
the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice boom crawler
crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT), telescopic boom cranes
(TLL, Swing Cab) & (TSS, Fixed Cab), tower cranes and overhead
cranes.
c. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the Township, an
applicant shall fulfill each of the following requirements:
1. Be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program
meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies.
3. Have at least one thousand (1,000) hours of crane-related
experience.
4. Maintain a current Medical Examiner's certification card.
d. The crane operator should reside in the Township. If not, they should
reside in the same County as the Township is located. The crane
operator shall reside in New Jersey.
§ 11-35.4 EDISON CODE § 11-35.6
AO:448
personal injury or damage to property is fit to resume service. It shall be the
duty of the Township to make a prompt examination into the cause of the
accident and to enter a full and complete report thereof in the records of the
Township. Such records shall be open for public inspection during regular
business hours.
§ 11-35.7. Safety Equipment - Required. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
§ 11-35.8. Administration; Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
§ 11-35.9. Unsafe Cranes. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
a. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
b. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to proper working order.
c. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Board,
Commissioner, or Township must be adhered to at all times.
d. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one (1) month.
Such inspection shall include, but not be limited to, all blocks, shackles,
sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master
boom, controls and braking mechanisms.
e. A written, dated, and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
Township. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written
designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such
attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of said
crane.
f. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
g. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
a. The Municipal Council may promulgate rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this section.
b. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Township's
Engineering Department.
§ 11-35.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-35.9
AO:449
§ 11-35.10. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1984-2017]
a. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which demonstrates
inadequate maintenance shall be deemed to be in an unsafe condition
by the Township Engineer. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or
removed or made safe, as the Township Engineer deems necessary and
as provided for in this section.
b. The Township Engineer shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
crane. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
c. If an unsafe condition is found, the Township Engineer or Township
Engineer's agent shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of
the crane, a written notice that describes the condition being unsafe
and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate
the unsafe condition. Such notice shall require the person thus notified
to declare immediately to the Township Engineer or Township agent
exceptions or rejection of the terms of the written notice.
d. Such written notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy is
delivered to the owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail
addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return
receipt requested. If a certified or registered letter is returned showing
that the written order has not been delivered, a copy shall be posed in a
conspicuous place in or on the structure affected by such notice.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent
or upon the person responsible for the crane shall constitute service of
notice upon the owner.
e. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the Township Engineer or
Township agent may be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that
repairs, alterations or additions are made during restoration of such
equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions shall comply with all
applicable codes.
f. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
notice to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with subsection 11-35.10.
a. Any person who operates a crane without meeting the requirements of
this ordinance or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall
be subject to a fine of not less than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars
and no more than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars for each violation.
Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
b. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall be subject to a fine of not less than two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars nor more than twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars
§ 11-35.9 EDISON CODE § 11-35.10
AO:450
§ 11-36. CLOTHING DONATION BINS.
§ 11-36.1. Regulations. [Ord. No. O.1982-2017; Ord. No.
O.2014-2018]
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no person shall place,
use or employ a textile donation bin, for solicitation purposes, unless all
requirements of this Chapter are met.
Textile recycling bins currently located on Township property including
Edison parkland, libraries, community centers, schools and public works
properties are exempt from this section provided the owner of the bin
has received permission from the Township Zoning Department. No textile
recycling bin will be allowed on Township land without prior authorization
from the Township Zoning Department, which shall have sole discretion in
approving issuance of permits and locations of such bins. Any person or
charity not given previous approved authorization or that does not adhere
to the other provisions of this zoning permit in this section will be subject
to the regulations in this section. The Township will provide a color-coded
zoning permit specific for those with prior approvals. Textile recycling bins
located on state or federal owned property are exempt from this section but
are still required to provide tonnage reports yearly.
for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
a. The textile donation bin must be owned by a non-profit, I.R.C. 501 (c)
(3) charitable organization registered with the Attorney General of the
State of New Jersey pursuant to P.L. 1994, c. 16; and
1. The textile donation bin is defined as any receptacle or container
made of metal, steel, or other material designed or intended for the
collection and temporary storage of donated clothing or other
materials.
2. Notwithstanding the approved textile donation bins currently
located on Township property, the Zoning Department shall limit
the amount of permits issued for such bins to 75, with no individual
organization eligible to receive more than 35 of the available
permits.
3. A textile donation bin must be similar in size or smaller than a
refrigerator box, or any container smaller than 45 x 45 by 80
inches.
4. All textile donation bins must be properly secured and maintained,
with no items affixed or attached to the bin except for the
identification materials required by paragraphs b, 5(a) through (e)
below.
5. No textile donation bin shall be located within one (1) square mile
of any other such bin.
§ 11-35.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-36.1
AO:451
b. The registered charitable organization or the person has obtained a
zoning permit valid for a period of one (1) year, from the Zoning
Department in accordance with the following:
1. In applying for such a zoning permit, the registered charitable
organization or person shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the charitable organization or person
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin would be used, sold or dispersed, and the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent;
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
applicant and of any entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
(d) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the bins,
which can be no less often than once per week, and the name
and telephone number of the person to be notified if the bin is
overflowing prior to the scheduled date of pickup;
(e) Written consent from the property owner, or the owner's
authorized representative, to place the bin on his/her property.
(f) The owners of textile clothing bins in the Township of Edison,
NJ must provide annual tonnage reports, with information
sufficient to support these reports, to the Township of Edison.
Collectors must provide annual tonnage reports as required by
the New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and
Recycling Act. (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16), which mandates the
governing body of each municipality to submit an annual
Recycling Tonnage Report summarizing the amount of material
recycled during the previous year.
(g) All charities must provide liability insurance, insurance for all
vehicles and a valid driver's license for any driver servicing the
textile recycling bins. Valid policies must be presented for any
drivers for the charity providing pickup services. Additionally,
background checks for any charities, their employees, or
drivers must be done within one year of the permit being
issued.
(h) All non-profit charitable organizations must provide at no cost
tax-deductible receipts for any person or family that has
donated to the charity and requests it. The receipt should
include all necessary tax identification numbers and the name
and address of the charity in accordance with Internal Revenue
Code (IRC) regulations.
§ 11-36.1 EDISON CODE § 11-36.1
AO:452
(i) No garbage or waste of any kind is allowed to be left outside of
textile recycling bins. The charitable organization or owner,
once notified, must address overflowing bins and rectify
problem. Charity must address dumping any waste within 10
feet of their bins within 72 hours of notification by the
Township, after which they will be subject to dumping or
littering fines. Before a complaint can be filed, there must be a
good faith attempt to reach the charity or their agent and give
them 72 hours to correct the problem.
2. The Zoning Department shall not grant an application for a zoning
permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it
determines that the placement of the bin is either in the front yard
setback or could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall
include, but are not limited to, the placement of a donation clothing
bin in handicapped parking spaces, in any area that interferes with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or on top of or within 20 feet to
large amounts of fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
3. The fee for such application for the zoning permit shall be twentyfive
($25.00) dollars. Charitable organizations as defined by I.R.C.
501(c) (3) non-profit organization can receive a waiver of the fee
provided they provide proof of their federal tax exempt status.
Twenty-five (25%) percent of each fee collected for permits on
private property shall be dedicated to the Township's Capital
Expenditure Account.
4. An expiring zoning permit for a donation clothing bin may be
renewed by a charitable organization or person upon payment of
the twenty-five ($25.00) dollar renewal fee, twenty-five (25%)
percent of which will be dedicated in accordance with paragraph b
3 above, or approval of fee waiver, and by application that shall
include the following information:
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible,
and, if applicant intends to move it, the new location where the
bin would be situated after the renewal is granted;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates it may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal;
(c) The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
applicant and any entity which shared or profited from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, and of any
entities which may do so during the period covered by the
renewal;
§ 11-36.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-36.1
AO:453
(d) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the bins,
which can be no less often than once per week, and the name
and telephone number of the person to be notified if the bin is
overflowing prior to the date of pickup; and
(e) Written consent from the property owner or the owner's
authorized representative, to place the bin on his/her property.
5. The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously
affixed to the exterior of the donation clothing bin by means of
white paint, or a single vinyl sticker or protective water-resistant
sleeve:
(a) The name and address of the registered charitable
organization or person that owns the bin, and of any other
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(b) The telephone number of the organization's bona fide office
and, if applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin. The telephone number
of an answering machine or service unrelated to the charitable
organization does not satisfy this requirement; and
(c) The charitable organization's registration number, permit
number and its date of expiration.
(d) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the
bin may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily
understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
shared, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person
who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities which may
share or profit from such donations; and
(e) A statement, indicating the manner in which the charitable
organization or person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
c. The Division of Planning and Zoning shall receive and investigate,
within forty-five (45) days, any complaints from the public about the
bin.
1. Whenever it appears to the Township that an organization or a
person has engaged in or is engaging in any act or practice in
violation of this section, the organization or person who placed the
bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not
rectified or an appeal taken within fifteen (15) days, then the bin,
§ 11-36.1 EDISON CODE § 11-36.1
AO:454
Chapter 12
HEALTH REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
Editor's Note: See Chapter 2, Administration, for the Department of
Health and Human Resources and health boards and committees.
See also Chapter 11, General Licensing and Business Regulations.
§ 12-1. DEFINITIONS. [1999 Code § 8.44.010]
As used in this chapter:
DIVISION OF HEALTH or HEALTH DEPARTMENT — Means the Division of
Health of the Township.
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — Shall mean the Health Officer or other official
authorized by the Board.
HEALTH ADVISORY BOARD or BOARD — Shall mean the Health Advisory
Board of the Township.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the Health Officer of the Township,
appointed by the Board.
PERFORMANCE BOND — Shall mean that the installer shall well and
faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to the
installation of individual septic disposal systems indicated in this chapter;
that the installer will be responsible for any damages or injuries that
may occur to persons, animals or property by reason of any neglect or
carelessness or improper workmanship on the part of the said installer or
his agent, servants or employees in connection with the work. This bond
shall be for a term of not less than one (1) year.
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold
at public auction. In addition to any other means used to notify
the person who placed the bin, a warning shall be affixed to the
exterior of the bin itself.
2. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within fifteen (15) days of the posting
of the warning, the Township may seize the bin, remove it or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell
it at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the Township.
3. In addition to any other penalties or remedies under this section,
any person who violates any provision which results in the seizure
of the donation clothing bin shall be subject to a penalty of up to
one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each violation.
d. Clothing bins shall be permitted on all Board of Education properties.
Said clothing bins must comply with all other provisions delineated in
Section 11-36 of the Township Code.
§ 11-36.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1
AO:455
PERMIT or LICENSE — Shall mean a written authorization to carry on
specified activities as regulated by this chapter and includes a certification
of approval.
PERSON — Shall mean any person or persons, firm, corporation or
association.
SANITIZE — Shall mean the cleansing of equipment and utensils, with the
reduction of the bacterial count to safe levels and the removal of harmful
residues.
TOWNSHIP, THE TOWNSHIP, THIS TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — Shall
mean the Township of Edison, New Jersey.
§ 12-2. RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
[1999 Code § 8.44.020]
The Health Advisory Board, Division of Health, and its members, agents or
employees shall have the right of entry, at any reasonable hour, into and
upon any public or private building or premises for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter or determining whether such provisions or
the rules and regulations of the Board are being complied with and obeyed.
No person shall oppose such entry, or hinder or interfere with the Health
Advisory Board, Division of Health, or any of its members, agents or
employees in the performance of their duty. The refusal of entry to any
authorized representative of the Board by any person licensed or holding
a permit under this chapter shall be sufficient reason for immediate
suspension of such license or permit and its revocation after an opportunity
for a hearing before the Board.
§ 12-3. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. [1999 Code § 8.44.080]
a. Any person who shall:
1. Do or commit any act prohibited by the terms of this chapter; or
2. Do or commit any act for which a license or permit is required,
without having secured and being in possession of a valid license or
permit at the time of the doing or commission thereof; or
3. Omit to do or perform any act required by him to be so done or
performed by this chapter; or
4. Maintain any place, establishment, vehicle, conveyance, equipment
or article in violation of any of the provisions thereof; or
5. Violate any of the provisions of any of this chapter or regulations
thereof; or
6. Fail to maintain any condition, equipment or facility required
therein to be maintained; or
7. Fail to install any article of a particular type, kind, quality or
specification, where such installation is required; or
§ 12-1 EDISON CODE § 12-3
AO:456
§ 12-4. VITAL STATISTICS.12
§ 12-4.1. Application for Marriage License. [1999 Code § 8.140.010]
In accordance with the rules of the State Department of Health of New
Jersey, both contracting parties to a marriage shall appear before the
Registrar or Deputy Registrar of Vital Statistics to apply for a license at
least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time ceremony is to be performed.
Information must be furnished on applications supplied for that purpose
before license will be issued.
§ 12-4.2. Filing of Certificates of Marriage. [1999 Code § 8.140.020]
Every person having authority to solemnize marriages shall transmit to the
Registrar of Vital Statistics a certificate in writing of every such marriage
within five (5) days after the same shall be solemnized. Said certificate shall
be made out on blank forms furnished by the Registrar for that purpose and
shall include all facts required.
§ 12-4.3. Registration of Births. [1999 Code § 8.140.030]
Any physician or midwife present at the birth of any child born in the
Township, and in case there be no physician or midwife present, then
8. In any manner, by deed, act, act of commission or act of omission,
violate any one (1) or more of the provisions of this chapter;
shall, upon conviction thereof, or upon conviction of any violation
of the provisions hereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
I, Section 1-5.
b. Each day that a violation is allowed to exist shall constitute separate
violation or offense.
c. In the event that any violation of this chapter shall also be a violation of
a New Jersey State law for which a greater penalty is provided than that
contained in this chapter, the Judge of the Municipal Court before
whom the complaint is brought, based upon such violation, shall, in his
or her discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that penalty so provided for in the New
Jersey State law which has been so violated.
d. If any penalty herein provided shall exceed or be greater than that
provided by any law of the State of New Jersey for the violation of which
such penalty is imposed herein, the maximum penalty for such violation
shall be the maximum permitted by such law of the State of New Jersey
as may be applicable thereto.
e. Every act herein designated as being unlawful is prohibited, and every
act herein expressly prohibited is designated as being unlawful.
12.Editor's Note: See Chapter 2, Administration, Article VI, for vital statistics fees.
§ 12-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.3
AO:457
the parent or witness present at the birth, shall report in writing to the
Registrar of Vital Statistics of the Township within five (5) days after the
date of the birth, all particulars concerning the birth called for on the blank
forms furnished by the Registrar for that purpose.
§ 12-4.4. Certificates of Death. [1999 Code § 8.140.040]
When any person shall die within the Township, the physician who may
have attended such person during his or her illness shall furnish to the
undertaker or any member of the family applying therefor a certificate in
writing of such death. The certificate shall be made out and shall comprise
all the facts stated in the blank forms furnished by the Registrar of Vital
Statistics for that purpose.
§ 12-4.5. Burial Permits. [1999 Code § 8.140.050]
No person shall bury or deposit in any grave, tomb or vault, cremate, or
remove from the limits of the Township, the body of any person dying in
the Township or of any child stillborn in this Township, without a permit
therefor from the Registrar of Vital Statistics of the Township.
§ 12-4.6. Disinterments. [1999 Code § 8.140.060]
No dead human body shall be disinterred or removed from any grave, tomb
or vault without a permit from the Division of Health.
§ 12-4.7. Prohibition of Public Funerals in Certain Cases. [1999
Code § 8.140.070]
The Division of Health may specify any communicable disease or diseases
for which no public funeral shall be held, and prohibit such public funeral,
and in case of threat or prevalence of an epidemic, may prohibit such public
funeral of persons dying from the particular disease or diseases specified.
§ 12-5. HEALTH SCREENING TEST SERVICE FEES.
§ 12-5.1. Screening Tests Service Fee Schedule. [1999 Code
§ 8.52.010]
The Director of the Department of Health is authorized to charge the
following fees:
a. Fees for screening tests not routinely available and intermittently
offered by the Health Department in conjunction with other programs
such as health fairs.
§ 12-4.3 EDISON CODE § 12-5.1
AO:458
Service Description Fee
1. Mammography administered to residents eligible
per New Jersey Department of Health Guidelines
and/or regulations
$85.00
2. Lyme Disease: antibody screening $30.00
3. Hepatitis B: antibody screening $25.00
4. Blood Chemistry Profile (SMAC) $20.00
5. PSA (Prostatic Specific Antigen) $30.00
6. T-4 (Thyroid) $5.00
b. Clinic Service Fees.
Service Description Fee
1. Clinic Registration Fee (nonresident) (excludes
Medicare Part B services)
$20.00
2. Pneumovax (with physician approval) $30.00
3. Influenza (to any Edison resident eligible according
to Federal CDC or State Health guidelines, except
Medicare recipients)
$20.00
4. MMR (re-vaccination only) $50.00
5. TD - Adult $20.00
6. DT — Pediatric $20.00
7. School Age Immunization Registration (each) $2.00
8. Childhood Blood Level Screening (if not enrolled in
CHC or if not indicated by risk assessment)
$10.00
9. Mantoux (routine employment) (no charge for
contact investigation)
$10.00
10. Lyme (tick handling) $25.00
11. Hep B (per dose) $40.00
12. Polio IPV $25.00
13. Hep A (per dose) $50.00
14. Varicella $75.00
15. Meningitis $100.00
16. Hep B (per dose) — School Age Special Prog $10.00
17. STD/HIV Services (18 and under) $0.00
18. STD/HIV Services (over 18) $5.00
19. Well Child Care (CHC); or Women's Cancer
Screening; or School Physicals
Sliding scale:
§ 12-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.1
AO:459
§ 12-6. HEALTH LICENSE FEES.
§ 12-6.1. Purpose of Fees. [1999 Code § 8.48.010]
The fees imposed in this section for such permit are imposed for revenue,
regulation and control.
§ 12-6.2. License and Permit Fees Enumerated.13 [1999 Code
§ 8.48.020; Ord. No. O.1646-2008§ III]
All applicants for permits and for renewal thereof as encompassed herein
shall be made in accordance with this chapter and shall be accompanied
by the payment of the fees prescribed by the following table. Permits shall
expire and shall be renewed in accordance with the expiration date as
prescribed by the following table:
Description of Activity Under Permit Fee
Expiration
Date
a. Bathing places: permit to operate a pond or lake $500.00 June 30
b. Boarding of children: permit to conduct a daycare
service
$150.00 June 30
c. Dormitories: permit to operate a trucking
dormitory
$300.00 June 30
d. Eating places (see restaurant fees)
e. Food establishments (other than restaurants):
1. Class A (over
10,000 square feet)
$900.00 June 30
2. Class B (5,001 to 10,000 square feet) $600.00 June 30
3. Class C (3,501 to 5,000 square feet) $350.00 June 30
4. Class D (2,501 to 3,500 square feet) $245.00 June 30
Service Description Fee
(a) Up to 200% poverty $0.00
(b) Up to $70,000.00/year (per visit) $5.00
(c) Over $70,000.00/year (per visit) $25.00
20. Cholesterol Screening $7.00
21. School Physicals (non sports related) $15.00
22. Copies of Immunization Records (Replacements) $5.00
23. TDAP - Adult $40.00
13.Editor's Note: Pursuant to subsection 2-128.3a1 of the Township of Edison Charter and
Code, any resident of the Township who shall have obtained the age of sixty-five (65) years
old is hereby exempt from the municipal fees in this section.
§ 12-5.1 EDISON CODE § 12-6.2
AO:460
Description of Activity Under Permit Fee
Expiration
Date
5. Class E (0 to 2,500 square feet) $175.00 June 30
f. Ice: permit to sell or deliver ice, each vehicle or
depot
$25.00 June 30
g. Laundry, self-service: permit to operate each
washer or dryer in a self-service laundry
$15.00 June 30
h. Microwave ovens: commercial $50.00 June 30
i. Milk: permit to sell milk or milk products, each
vehicle or premises
$15.00 June 30
j. Motel (motor lodge, motor court tourist lodge,
hotel): permit to conduct each dwelling or
rooming unit
$40.00 June 30
k. Restaurants:
1. Class A (seating capacity of 100 or over) $600.00 December
31
2. Class B (seating capacity of 50 to 99) $490.00 December
31
3. Class C (seating capacity 1-49) $375.00 December
31
4. Class D (primarily a bar serving food) $245.00 December
31
l. Food establishments (wholesale):
1. Permit to conduct a wholesale food
establishment (manufacturing)
$400.00 June 30
2. Permit to conduct a wholesale food
establishment (nonmanufacturing)
$400.00 June 30
m. Food vehicles or vendors (restaurants):
1. Permit to operate a food vehicle (peddler) $125.00 June 30
2. Temporary retail food establishments.
a) For one location for more than three (3)
consecutive days.
$200.00
b) For one location for not more than three (3)
consecutive days and one event.
$ 75.00
3. Permit to operate a food delivery vehicle $50.00 June 30
4. Permit to operate an ice cream vehicle $150.00 June 30
n. Food-vending machines; permit to operate a
food-vending machine, per machine
$30.00 September
30
o. Frozen desserts:
§ 12-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.2
AO:461
Description of Activity Under Permit Fee
Expiration
Date
1. Class A (wholesale plant) $500.00 June 30
2. Class B (retail plant) $275.00 June 30
p. Septic tank:
1. Permit to conduct business of cleaning septic
tanks
$100.00 June 30
2. Permit to conduct business of installing
septic tank disposal systems
$250.00 June 30
3. Permit to install an individual septic tank
disposal system, including percolation tests
$300.00 Two
years
from
date of
issue
q. Slenderizing salon: permit to operate a
slenderizing salon
$200.00 June 30
r. Swimming pools:
1. Permit to operate, nonresidential:
(a) Seasonal (four months or less per year) $550.00
(b) Yearly (four months or more per year) $750.00 April 30
2. All new pools, other than nonresidential,
initial inspection
$45.00 Initial
inspection
s. Wells: Permit to install individual and semipublic
wells
$50.00 June 30
t. Plan Review Fee (Food Establishments, septics
and bathing places)
$100.00
u. Late Fee (all licenses and permits) 20% late
fee if
more
than
thirty
(30) days
past
expiration
date.
§ 12-6.3. Conflicting Provisions. [1999 Code § 8.48.030]
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other ordinances except those
specifically repealed by the provisions of this chapter. Where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or personal property
§ 12-6.2 EDISON CODE § 12-6.3
AO:462
than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of other ordinances,
the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 12-7. NUISANCES.
§ 12-7.1. Certain Nuisances Enumerated. [1999 Code § 8.112.010;
Ord. No. O.1512-2006]
The following matters, things, conditions or acts, and each of them, are
declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the inhabitants of
this Township:
a. Pollution, or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution, of any waters in this Township in such manner as to
cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of this Township,
either in their health, comfort or property;
b. The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air, or from any fire into the open air, of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases as to
cause injury, detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of this
Township, or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety;
c. The growth, existence or presence of ragweed on any plot of land, lot,
highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place;
d. The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within twenty (20) feet
of any property line;
e. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist;
f. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and to
which flies may have access or in which fly larvae or pupae breed or
exist;
g. Depositing, accumulating or maintaining any matter or thing which
serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may have access,
or which serve as or constitutes a breeding place or harborage for
insects or rodents, in or on any land, premises, building or other place.
Composts are permitted, except in cases where they may prove either a
health hazard or a nuisance;
h. Any container or utensil in which garbage, offal, scraps, waste food and
any other putrescible material is held in or upon any premises, and
which is not watertight, tightly covered and so kept at all times to
exclude flies, rodents and vermin;
i. Any common drinking cup or utensil in any park, playground, theater,
school, club, boarding home, public washroom or lavatory, or in any
place where a number of people congregate or are employed;
§ 12-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:463
§ 12-7.2. Polluted Wells. [1999 Code § 8.112.020]
Whenever the Division of Health shall have satisfactory evidence that any
well, the water of which is used for domestic purposes, has become polluted
and rendered unsafe for potable use, notice to discontinue the use of the
polluted water shall be sent to the owner or party in charge of the well, and
at the discretion of this Division the owner or party in charge of the well
may be ordered, in writing, to close, fill up or withdraw from the ground the
well. If the order is not complied with within the time therein specified, this
section shall be deemed violated and this Division may proceed to cause the
well to be closed, filled up or withdrawn from the ground.
§ 12-7.3. Poisonous Gases for Fumigating. [1999 Code § 8.112.030]
No person shall use or permit the use of hydrocyanic acid gas or any
product of cyanogen or any other substance poisonous to animal life or
human beings for fumigating or disinfecting any structure or premises in
the Township without first having obtained a permit to do so from the
Division of Health, which permit shall be exercised only in the presence of
an authorized representative of the Division of Health at the time and place
the gas or other product is released.
§ 12-7.4. Nuisances Prohibited. [1999 Code § 8.112.040]
It is unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or allow any
nuisance as declared and described in this section.
§ 12-7.5. Abatement of Nuisances; Notice. [1999 Code § 8.112.080]
j. Any common towel for use by more than one (1) person without
intermediate laundering, except roller towels which can be
mechanically adjusted for individual use, in any park, playground,
theater, school, club, boarding home, public washroom or lavatory, or in
any place where a number of people congregate or are employed;
k. The placing of house sewage, waste fluids or fouled liquids on the
surface of the ground in such a manner as to become a source from
which offensive odors shall emanate, or in such a manner as to pollute
the ground, air or water, or in such a manner as to endanger the purity
of any water of any well, stream, pond or lake, or the discharge of any
such sewage or fluids into any street or highway;
l. The discharge or deposit of any foul or offensive liquids or solids into or
upon any lots or lands without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Division of Health, or the keeping or forming of sunken places or
excavations upon any lot or land and the accumulation thereon of foul
water or offensive animal or vegetable matter.
a. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this section, is found on any plot
of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice
by certified mail shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate
§ 12-7.1 EDISON CODE § 12-7.5
AO:464
§ 12-7.6. Costs of Abatement. [1999 Code § 8.112.090]
The Division of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs
incurred by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as declared
by this section, from any person who shall have caused or allowed such
nuisance to exist, or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who,
after notice and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and
abate the same within the time specified in such notice.
§ 12-8. through § 12-9. (RESERVED)
§ 12-10. BOARDING HOMES FOR CHILDREN.
§ 12-10.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.68.010]
As used in this section:
BOARDING HOMES FOR INFANTS AND CHILDREN — Means any house
or other place where one or more children under sixteen (16) years of age
are received, cared for or kept, unattended by his or her parents or legal
guardians, for the purpose of providing such child or children with food,
lodging or care. This definition shall not apply to:
the same within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less
than five (5) days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the
notice shall be left with one (1) or more of the tenants or occupants of
the premises or place.
b. If the owner resides out of the State or cannot be so notified speedily,
such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or
occupant thereof, or posted on the premises, and such action shall be
considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
c. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this section, is found on any public
property or on any highway or any other public premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein.
If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the Division of Health may remove or abate such nuisance in
the manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition
existing on a private premises or place.
d. If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided by this
subsection, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Division of
Health shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be
removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as the Division
of Health shall deem proper.
a. Any person caring for a child related by blood or marriage;
b. The Bureau of Children's Services;
§ 12-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-10.1
AO:465
§ 12-10.2. License Required.14 [1999 Code § 8.68.020]
No person shall conduct or maintain any boardinghouse for infants or
children without having a license approved by the Division of Health.
§ 12-10.3. Regulations. [1999 Code § 8.68.030]
§ 12-10.4. Character References Required. [1999 Code § 8.68.040]
Any person or persons engaged in conducting, maintaining or employed in
a boarding home for infants and children shall submit adequate character
references to the Division of Health.
§ 12-10.5. Inspections of Buildings and Premises. [1999 Code
§ 8.68.050]
The building and premises in which is conducted the business of operating
a boarding home may be inspected from time to time by the Health Officer
c. Any children's home, orphan asylum or children's aid society
incorporated under the laws of the State.
a. No greater number of infants or children shall be kept at any time than
shall be authorized by the Division of Health.
b. The premises shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition at all times
and ample provision shall be made for light and fresh air.
c. Such infants or children at all times shall be kept clean and properly
clothed, shall be fed upon wholesome food and shall be given proper
medical attention and preventive treatment as prescribed.
d. No such infants or children shall be kept in any house in which any of
the other occupants are affected with tuberculosis or any venereal
disease in a communicable stage.
e. Individual beds shall be provided for each child.
f. All such infants or children shall, at all times, be properly cared for and
such boardinghouse shall be conducted in a manner which meets with
the approval of the Division of Health.
g. All boarding homes for infants and children must be approved by the
Fire Official and the Construction Official.
h. No license for a home shall be granted where adult roomers or boarders
are living.
i. Boarding homes and their grounds shall be maintained and equipped in
such a manner that their use shall not be hazardous to children, and
constant vigilance shall be exercised to prevent accidents.
14.Editor's Note: License fees may be found in Section 12-6 of this chapter.
§ 12-10.1 EDISON CODE § 12-10.5
AO:466
or his or her authorized representative or by the Fire Official or other
authorized representative of the Fire Department. At the time of such
inspections, all rooms in the building and all parts of the premises must be
available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner or operator
is required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such
inspections.
§ 12-10.6. Vaccinations Required. [1999 Code § 8.68.060]
All children must be vaccinated as specified in subsection 12-11.15.
§ 12-10.7. Liability Insurance Required. [1999 Code § 8.68.070]
Proof of adequate liability insurance covering injury to children must be
presented to the Division of Health prior to final approval.
§ 12-11. COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
§ 12-11.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.72.010]
As used in this section:
CARRIER — Means any person who harbors or carries the causative agent
of any disease, but who at such time manifests no clinical symptoms.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — Means any disease in which the causative
agent may be transmitted from person to person or from animal to person
by direct or indirect means.
ISOLATION — Means the placing apart of persons or animals affected
with or exposed to a communicable disease, for the purpose of preventing
contact.
QUARANTINE — Means the limitation of freedom of movement of such
susceptible persons or animals as have been exposed to a communicable
disease, for a time equal to the longest usual incubation period of the
disease to which they have been exposed.
§ 12-11.2. Reportable Conditions. [1999 Code § 8.72.020]
The following diseases and conditions are declared to be reportable and
it shall be the duty of every physician, within twelve (12) hours after the
disease has been diagnosed, to report the name, address, age, disease or
condition and the precise location of the person so affected to the Health
Advisory Board:
a. Communicable Diseases.
1. Amebiasis;
2. Anthrax;
3. Brucellosis;
§ 12-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:467
4. Cholera;
5. Dengue;
6. Diarrhea of newborn;
7. Diphtheria;
8. Encephalitis, infectious;
9. Glanders;
10. Hepatitis, infectious, including serum hepatitis;
11. Influenza;
12. Leprosy;
13. Leptospirosis;
14. Malaria;
15. Measles (rubeola);
16. Meningococcal meningitis;
17. Ophthalmia neonatorum;
18. Plague;
19. Pneumonia, all forms;
20. Poliomyelitis;
21. Psittacosis;
22. Q fever;
23. Rabies (hydrophobia);
24. Rocky Mountain spotted fever;
25. Salmonellosis;
26. Shigellosis;
27. Smallpox;
28. Streptococcal sore throat, including scarlet fever;
29. Tetanus;
30. Trachoma;
31. Trichinosis;
32. Tuberculosis, all forms;
§ 12-11.2 EDISON CODE § 12-11.2
AO:468
§ 12-11.3. Reports by Physicians. [1999 Code § 8.72.030]
Physicians having knowledge of any outbreak of a disease not listed in
subsection 12-11.2, or of unusual manifestations of disease, shall report
33. Tularemia;
34. Typhoid fever;
35. Venereal diseases.
(a) Chaneroid,
(b) Gonorrhea,
(c) Lymphogranuloma venereum,
(d) Granuloma inguinale,
(e) Syphilis;
36. Whooping cough (pertussis);
37. Yellow fever.
b. Communicable Disease Carriers.
1. Cholera;
2. Diphtheria;
3. Dysentery, amoebic, bacillary;
4. Paratyphoid fever;
5. Typhoid;
c. Food Poisonings.
1. Botulism;
2. Food poisonings due to the consumption of unwholesome, spoiled,
contaminated or poisonous articles of food.
d. Occupational Diseases: Any Disease or Poisoning Due to Occupation.
e. Miscellaneous.
1. Animal bites;
2. Drug poisoning;
3. Mental deficiency;
4. Epilepsy;
5. Cerebral palsy.
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.3
AO:469
the facts to the Health Officer in whose jurisdiction the condition exists,
who shall make an investigation and submit a report thereof to the State
Department of Health.
§ 12-11.4. Reports by House Owners. [1999 Code § 8.72.040]
Every house owner or occupant who shall know of, or have reason to
suspect the existence of, any person affected with any disease or condition
mentioned in subsection 12-11.2 who is in or upon any premises owned
or occupied by him or her and who is not being attended by a physician,
shall report immediately to the Division of Health the existence of such
person and all necessary facts, within the knowledge of the person making
such report, as to the name, address, age and sex of the person having or
suspected of having such disease or condition.
§ 12-11.5. Reports by School Officials. [1999 Code § 8.72.050]
The principal or person in charge of every school shall immediately exclude
from school or isolate any child or person in such school who appears to be
affected with any communicable disease mentioned in subsection 12-11.2,
and shall immediately report such fact to the Division of Health, together
with the name and address of such child or person and the supposed nature
of the disease.
§ 12-11.6. Placarding Premises. [1999 Code § 8.72.060]
Whenever a communicable disease as listed in subsection 12-11.2 exists in
any house or upon any premises, the Division of Health may cause a placard
stating the name of the disease to be posted in a conspicuous place upon
such house or premises, and no person shall conceal, mutilate, destroy or
remove such placard except by authority of the Division of Health.
§ 12-11.7. Quarantines. [1999 Code § 8.72.070]
Any person affected with, suspected to be affected with, or exposed to any
communicable disease mentioned in subsection 12-11.2 may, until officially
released by the Division of Health, be quarantined, isolated or restricted
according to the regulations of the Health Advisory Board, or shall follow
such precautions to prevent the spread or transfer of such disease as this
Board or the Division of Health may direct.
§ 12-11.8. Observing Quarantine. [1999 Code § 8.72.080]
No person shall enter or leave the house or premises where any person
is quarantined or isolated by reason of being affected with or having been
exposed to any communicable disease mentioned in subsection 12-11.2
except in accordance with the regulations of the Health Advisory Board and
by permission granted by the Division of Health.
§ 12-11.3 EDISON CODE § 12-11.9
AO:470
§ 12-11.9. Prevention of Spread of Disease. [1999 Code § 8.72.090]
No person shall commit any act which may cause, contribute to or promote
the spread of any disease from any person affected with such disease,
or commit any negligent act connected with or in respect to the care or
custody of the person affected.
§ 12-11.10. Hospitalization of Infected Persons. [1999 Code
§ 8.72.100]
The Division of Health shall have the power to remove to a hospital or
institution any person affected with a communicable disease listed in
subsection 12-11.2, whenever in the opinion of the Division of Health such
removal is necessary to prevent further spread of such disease, or whenever
the isolation of such person is not effective or is contrary to the rules and
regulations of the Health Advisory Board.
§ 12-11.11. Infection and Cleaning of Quarantined Premises. [1999
Code § 8.72.110]
Whenever the quarantine of a public or private building or premises is
terminated by the Division of Health, such disinfection and cleaning as may
be required by the Division of Health shall be performed immediately by the
occupant of the public or private building or premises.
§ 12-11.12. Medical Examinations of Suspected Persons. [1999
Code § 8.72.120]
In order to establish the true nature of any disease which may be
communicable, any person suspected of being affected or who may have
been exposed may be required to submit to a medical examination or test.
§ 12-11.13. Carriers of Communicable Diseases. [1999 Code
§ 8.72.130]
All persons who carry the causative agent of diseases in subsection 12-11.2
and who are commonly known as "carriers" shall be considered as being
affected with such diseases.
§ 12-11.14. Exclusion from Schools of Persons Not Vaccinated or
Immunized. [1999 Code § 8.72.140]
The person in charge of any school within the jurisdiction of the Health
Advisory Board may be required and ordered to exclude any children or
teachers not vaccinated or immunized against any communicable disease
that the Board may designate.
§ 12-11.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.15
AO:471
§ 12-11.15. Immunization of Children in Institutions. [1999 Code
§ 8.72.150]
Every person, corporation, organization or society maintaining a home,
orphanage, nursery or other establishment for the care and/or maintenance,
in whole or in part, of infants or children who are not members of the
family, shall require that each such child be vaccinated against smallpox,
immunized against diphtheria and any other communicable disease that
the Board may designate, and be examined for syphilis or gonorrhea if
requested by the Health Advisory Board. No infant or child not protected
and examined as provided by this chapter shall be received by such home,
orphanage, nursery or other establishment.
§ 12-11.16. Control of Epidemics. [1999 Code § 8.72.160]
The Health Advisory Board, in case of an epidemic or unusual prevalence of
any communicable disease, may take measures and order to be done acts
necessary for the preservation of public health until the emergency shall
have ceased to exist.
§ 12-11.17. Reports by Veterinarians of Certain Diseases. [1999
Code § 8.72.170]
Every veterinarian who shall attend any animal in the Township affected
or suspected to be affected with anthrax, glanders, farcy, psittacosis, footand-
mouth disease, rabies, tuberculosis or any other communicable disease
shall file with the Division of Health within twelve (12) hours thereafter
a written report stating the name of the disease, the kind of animal, the
precise location of such animal, the name and address of the owner or
person in charge thereof, and any other necessary information regarding
the animal so affected. In case no veterinarian shall attend such animal,
then it shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge to file such report
with the Division of Health.
§ 12-11.18. Isolation of Animals Infected with Certain Diseases;
Destruction. [1999 Code § 8.72.180]
The owner or person in charge of any animal affected with or suspected to
be affected with any disease mentioned in subsection 12-11.2, or with any
other communicable disease, shall isolate or restrict such animal and follow
such precautions in such manner and for such length of time as the Division
of Health may direct. The Division of Health shall have the power to order
the destruction of any animal so affected, and it shall be the duty of the
owner or person in charge thereof to comply immediately with the terms of
such order. The Division of Health or the Board shall not be liable for the
value of any animal so destroyed.
§ 12-11.15 EDISON CODE § 12-11.19
AO:472
§ 12-11.19. Animals Bitten by Rabid Animals. [1999 Code
§ 8.72.190]
Whenever any animal shall be bitten by another animal affected with rabies,
the owner or person in charge of the animal so bitten shall, according as the
Division of Health may order, either have such animal destroyed or have it
isolated for a period of six (6) months.
§ 12-11.20. Rabies Inoculations. [1999 Code § 8.72.200]
§ 12-12. MEAT PACKAGING.
§ 12-12.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.28.010]
As used in this section:
FOOD DEALER — Means and includes every person, firm or corporation,
his, her, its or their agents, servants or employees, engaged in the business
of selling, offering or exposing for sale, food at retail for human
consumption either on or off the premises where sold.
MEAT — Means and includes poultry and fish as well as the other varieties
of meats.
§ 12-12.2. Clear Packaging Required; Exceptions. [1999 Code
§ 8.28.020]
It is unlawful for any food dealer in the Township as defined in subsection
12-12.1, to sell or offer or expose for sale, at retail, any sealed,
prepackaged, unprocessed or untreated fresh-cut meat or frozen meat
unless the packaging thereof is colorless and transparent on all sides,
exclusive of labeling, which labeling shall not occupy more than ten (10%)
percent of one (1) side of the package, or which fresh-cut meat or frozen
a. Whenever a dog or other animal not vaccinated against rabies within
one (1) year shall have bitten any person not a member of the dog
owner's family or household, the owner or person in charge thereof
shall either surrender the animal for quarantine in accordance with
instructions of the Division of Health, to be quarantined for such
observation period not exceeding ten (10) days, as may be deemed safe
by the Board, or shall arrange with the Division of Health for the
quarantine of such animal for a like period by a veterinarian at the
expense of the owner or person in charge of the animal. If the person
bitten is a member of the animal owner's family or household, the
animal may be quarantined at home for a similar period. Dogs with
nursing puppies may also be quarantined at home.
b. Whenever any vaccinated dog or other animal has bitten any person
and the vaccination was not performed at least three (3) months prior
to the bite, as shown by a certificate of a licensed veterinarian, such
animal shall be quarantined in the manner as provided for in paragraph
a. above.
§ 12-11.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-12.2
AO:473
meat is layered or shingled, making the entire contents of the package not
wholly visible. This section shall not apply to meat commonly designated or
known as "chopped meat" or "ground meat."
§ 12-12.3. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.28.030]
Any person, firm or corporation, his, her, its or their agents, servants or
employees, found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this section,
shall, for each such violation, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I,
Section 1-5.
§ 12-13. FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 12-13.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.80.010; Ord. No.
O.1646-2008§ IV]
As used in this section:
EMPLOYEE — means any person who handles food during preparation or
serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who
is employed in a room in which food is prepared or served.
FOOD AND DRINK — Means all substances, except drugs, used or intended
to be used for human consumption, whether simple, mixed or compounded.
FROZEN DESSERTS — Means ice cream, milk sherbet, ice or ice sherbet or
frozen confection.
OPERATOR — Means any person who conducts a food-handling
establishment, maintains a food vending machine or vends food within the
Township.
PEDDLER — Means a person engaged in selling uncooked food products
from a vehicle.
TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Means any establishment
which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or similar
transitory gathering, including church suppers, picnics or similar
organizational meeting, as well as agricultural markets conducted on a
regular basis.
UTENSIL — Means and includes any kitchenware, tableware, glassware,
cutlery, containers or other equipment with which food comes in contact.
§ 12-13.2. License Required.15 [1999 Code § 8.80.020]
a. No person shall operate a food handling establishment, restaurant or
itinerant restaurant, maintain a food vending machine or peddle or
vend food from a vehicle, within the Township, without first making
written application for a license to the Division of Licenses and Permits
15.Editor's Note: License fees may be found in Section 12-6 of this chapter.
§ 12-12.2 EDISON CODE § 12-13.2
AO:474
§ 12-13.3. Seating Capacity of Restaurant. [1999 Code § 8.80.030]
The seating capacity of each restaurant shall mean the total of each chair,
stool or other individual unit. Where benches are used or standing space is
offered at a bar or counter, each twenty (20) inches of linear length of such
bench, counter or bar shall constitute a unit of serving capacity.
§ 12-13.4. Course in Food Handling Required. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.040]
§ 12-13.5. Exceptions. [1999 Code § 8.80.050]
The provisions of subsection 12-13.4 shall not apply to handlers of any
food which is ordinarily cooked or peeled before consumption or which is
enclosed in cans or other packages.
§ 12-13.6. Inspection of Food Handling Establishments. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.060]
The Division of Health shall inspect as often as it is deemed necessary every
food handling establishment. The operator of a food handling establishment
shall permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall make available
all records of food purchased upon request of the Division of Health.
§ 12-13.7. Sale of Unwholesome Food. [1999 Code § 8.80.070]
No food or drink for human consumption shall be sold or offered for sale
which has been exposed to any communicable disease or which is unfit,
unwholesome, impure, decayed, diseased, misbranded or adulterated
according to the meaning of Title 24 of the Revised Statutes of the State
and securing the approval of the Division of Health for the conduct of
such activity under the conditions specified.
b. This regulation shall not apply to taverns where no food is served.
c. Food vending vehicles shall not be permitted to operate between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. without a special permit issued by the
Division of Health.
a. Every food handler and every person who is charged with supervision of
the operations of a restaurant or other eating place shall successfully
complete, within one (1) year of the commencement of his employment,
a course in food handling acceptable to the Division of Health.
b. The Health Officer may, at his or her discretion, when found necessary,
require such persons to attend supplementary courses.
c. No restaurant or other eating place shall employ a food handler or a
supervisor in charge of its operation unless he complies with paragraph
a. above.
§ 12-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.7
AO:475
of New Jersey, or of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, or which
contains or has been exposed to any foreign or injurious contamination.
§ 12-13.8. Employee Cleanliness and Health. [1999 Code § 8.80.080]
§ 12-13.9. Use of Saliva on Food or Wrappers. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.090]
No person for any purpose shall, at any time, moisten with saliva, directly
or indirectly, any food or any wrapper in which food is placed, or any label
affixed to any such food or wrapper.
§ 12-13.10. Cleanliness of Premises. [1999 Code § 8.80.100]
The premises of all food handling establishments shall be kept clean and
free of litter or rubbish.
§ 12-13.11. Sleeping Rooms or Rooms for Animals Prohibited.
[1999 Code § 8.80.110]
No sleeping room or room where live animals or fowl are kept shall be
directly connected to any room in which food is served, stored or prepared
for human consumption.
§ 12-13.12. Lockers or Dressing Rooms. [1999 Code § 8.80.120]
Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees'
clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be
kept in containers provided for this purpose.
§ 12-13.13. Washrooms. [1999 Code § 8.80.130]
Every food handling establishment shall be provided with at least one (1)
washroom. In any food handling establishment hereafter constructed where
both males and females are employed or served, such facilities shall be
provided for separate use of each sex and the washrooms shall not open
directly into any room in which food or utensils are handled or stored. Each
washroom shall be provided with an adequate number of flush toilets and
handbasins and urinals, as required. Privies or earth closets are prohibited.
a. All employees shall wear clean, washable outer garments and shall
keep their hands and arms clean at all times while engaged in handling
food, drink, utensils or equipment; they shall not expectorate or use
tobacco in any form in any room in which food is prepared or stored.
b. Employees with open lesions or cuts on hands shall not handle food.
Employees having long hair shall wear hair nets while serving food.
Employees with acute respiratory and acute intestinal illnesses or other
diseases in a communicable stage shall not be permitted to work on the
premises during the period of such illness.
§ 12-13.7 EDISON CODE § 12-13.13
AO:476
The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Hand-washing signs shall
be posted in each washroom used by employees.
§ 12-13.14. Hand-Washing Facilities. [1999 Code § 8.80.140]
Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided,
including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary towels
or air-drying facilities. The use of common towels is prohibited. Employees
shall not resume work after using the toilet room or subjecting the hands to
other contaminating contact without first washing the hands and arms.
§ 12-13.15. Coating of Floor and Wall Surfaces. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.150]
The floors, walls, ceilings, shelving, partitions, windows, doors and other
surfaces shall be made of or coated with a smooth, tight, washable surface
material which shall be kept clean and in good repair in those rooms in
which food is stored, prepared or served or in which utensils are washed or
in which toilet facilities are provided.
§ 12-13.16. Lighting, Drainage, Ventilation and Plumbing. [1999
Code § 8.80.160]
Every room of a food handling establishment shall be properly lighted,
drained, ventilated, have required plumbing facilities and be kept free of
insects, vermin and other animals.
§ 12-13.17. Screening. [1999 Code § 8.80.170]
From April 1 to November 1, all outer openings shall be effectively screened
and all screened doors shall be self-closing. This requirement shall not apply
when and where air-conditioning equipment is functioning.
§ 12-13.18. Sinks and Water Supply. [1999 Code § 8.80.180]
Suitable sinks with running hot and cold water shall be easily accessible to
or in all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed. The water
supply system shall be adequate as to quantity and quality and meet the
standards prescribed by the State Department of Health of New Jersey and/
or the Division of Health.
§ 12-13.19. Plumbing and Waste Disposal Equipment. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.190]
All plumbing and waste disposal equipment shall be so designed, installed,
maintained and utilized in such a manner as to prevent contamination of the
water supply, food or equipment.
§ 12-13.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.20
AO:477
§ 12-13.20. Refrigerators and Iceboxes. [1999 Code § 8.80.200]
All refrigerators and iceboxes used for the storage of food shall be kept
clean and in good repair. The compartments used for the storage of ice shall
be lined with some proper, impervious substance so as to be watertight.
Foods and containers of food shall be stored in the refrigerator so as
to permit free circulation of cold air and in such manner as to prevent
contamination.
§ 12-13.21. Storage of Perishable Food. [1999 Code § 8.80.210]
All perishable food shall be kept at or below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°
F.) or above one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F.) except when
being prepared or served; such temperatures shall be maintained while in
vehicles used for transporting same.
§ 12-13.22. Construction and Location of Equipment. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.220]
All equipment used in the preparation, handling and storage of food shall be
so constructed, located and installed as to be easily cleaned, shall be kept
clean and sanitary at all times and shall be kept in good repair.
§ 12-13.23. Protection of Food from Insects, Rodents, Dust and
Contamination. [1999 Code § 8.80.230]
Food shall be protected during all processes and at all times, including
delivery, from insects, rodents, dust, dirt and all foreign or injurious
contamination. These requirements shall be interpreted to prohibit the selfhandling
of food by those being served, except at buffets, smorgasbords,
salad bars or other foods offered where the consumer may make a choice
to partake and shall provide for the protection of all foods from droplet
contamination and shall mandate the use of sterile disposable gloves when
deemed necessary by the Division of Health.
§ 12-13.24. Sale of Food on Sidewalks. [1999 Code § 8.80.240]
No fruit, vegetables or other food shall be placed or exposed for sale
upon any sidewalk or outside of any building unless placed upon structures
having a height of at least twenty-four (24) inches above the sidewalk or
ground.
§ 12-13.25. Cleansing of Utensils. [1999 Code § 8.80.250]
All individually used multiuse utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and
effectively sanitized after each use. All utensils shall be free from coliform
bacilli and shall have a total bacterial count of not more than one hundred
(100) per utensil as determined by examination in a laboratory approved by
the Division of Health.
§ 12-13.20 EDISON CODE § 12-13.26
AO:478
§ 12-13.26. Storage of Utensils. [1999 Code § 8.80.260]
All utensils shall be properly stored until used and handled in such manner
as to prevent contamination.
§ 12-13.27. Worn or Corroded Utensils. [1999 Code § 8.80.270]
The use of any utensil used in the preparation, service or sale of food which
is badly worn or rusted, corroded or in such condition that it cannot be
rendered clean and sanitary by washing is prohibited.
§ 12-13.28. Utensils Containing Toxic Metals; Toxic Polishes. [1999
Code § 8.80.280]
§ 12-13.29. Single-Service Utensils. [1999 Code § 8.80.290]
Single-service utensils shall be purchased only in original protective
containers and shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place in order to
protect the inner and contact surfaces from contamination prior to use.
Single-service containers shall be used only once.
§ 12-13.30. Cloths Used by Food Handlers. [1999 Code § 8.80.300]
All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees and persons shall be
clean.
§ 12-13.31. Display of Foodstuffs. [1999 Code § 8.80.310]
All foodstuffs shall be arranged and displayed in an orderly and systematical
manner so as to improve appearance and to facilitate cleaning and
inspection.
§ 12-13.32. Protection of Food from Animals. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.320]
No food intended for human consumption shall be deposited or allowed to
remain less than twenty-four (24) inches above any street or floor unless
contained in covered receptacles so as to be protected from animals.
§ 12-13.33. Imported Foods. [1999 Code § 8.80.330]
No person shall bring into the Township for sale or delivery any food for
human consumption which has not been manufactured, prepared, handled,
stored, sold or served under conditions of cleanliness, sanitation and
protected from contamination.
a. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium, lead or other toxic
material shall not be used.
b. No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleaning
or polishing of utensils.
§ 12-13.26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.34
AO:479
§ 12-13.34. Garbage and Waste Containers. [1999 Code § 8.80.340]
Suitable watertight, clean containers made of an impervious material shall
be provided for receiving and holding all garbage and other waste material.
A tight-fitting cover shall be provided for each can. The can shall be kept
covered and shall not be allowed to become a nuisance. All garbage and
other waste matter shall be removed from the premises and disposed of as
often as may be necessary, in a manner approved by the Division of Health.
§ 12-13.35. Foodstuff Unfit for Human Consumption. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.350]
Foodstuff which has become unfit for human consumption shall be kept
separate from other refuse, be properly denatured, marked "condemned"
and removed.
§ 12-13.36. Samples of Food for Analysis. [1999 Code § 8.80.360]
Any food handling establishment, restaurant, delivery vehicle or other place
where food for human consumption is manufactured, prepared, handled,
sold, stored, served or transported shall, upon offer of value, deliver to the
Division of Health or its authorized representative such samples of food for
analysis as may be necessary or requested.
§ 12-13.37. Embargo of Unfit Food. [1999 Code § 8.80.370]
§ 12-13.38. Evidence of Intended Use. [1999 Code § 8.80.380]
The presence in any part of a food handling establishment of any food,
raw material, prohibited coloring matter or preservative shall constitute
evidence of its intended use.
§ 12-13.39. Meat, Poultry and Seafood Sources; Examination. [1999
Code § 8.80.390]
a. Whenever any substance intended as food for human consumption is
found being offered or exposed for sale, or held in possession with
intent to sell, which is, in the opinion of the Division of Health, unfit for
human use or liable to cause or transmit disease, the Division of Health
may embargo or order the same removed and disposed of. It shall be
the duty of the operator of such establishment to remove and dispose of
it at his own expense according to the directions of the Division of
Health. In case the operator shall fail to remove and dispose of such
substance so ordered, such substance may be caused to be removed by
the Division of Health at the expense of said operator.
b. Any embargoed substance shall be moved or disposed of under the
supervision of the Division of Health.
a. All poultry, meats, oysters, clams and mussels shall be purchased from
sources approved by the State Department of Health.
§ 12-13.34 EDISON CODE § 12-13.39
AO:480
§ 12-13.40. Meat and Meat Products. [1999 Code § 8.80.400]
§ 12-13.41. Unplucked Poultry; Plucking Rooms. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.410]
b. All beef, pork, veal, mutton or lamb shall have been examined, passed
and stamped or labeled as fit for human consumption by a meat
inspector appointed by the United States Government or other
approved agency.
a. The owner, proprietor or person in charge of any retail food store,
restaurant or other establishment within the Township where meat is
prepared for sale, distribution or consumption, cooked or uncooked,
either shall use a separate meat grinder or multiple-piece unit,
excluding the motor, solely for the grinding of pork and pork products.
Equipment shall be so identified with a tag affixed thereon.
b. No person operating a market or other establishment within the
Township wherein ground fresh meat is packaged and/or sold shall
package and/or sell such ground fresh meat unless such package is
plainly labeled as to the kinds of meat contained therein, including any
additions of nonmeat substances added thereto.
c. All hamburger, chopped or ground veal, mutton, lamb or pork or
combinations thereof shall not contain more than thirty (30%) percent
of fat as determined either by a chemical analysis or a fat analyzer.
d. Sausage or similar pork products shall not contain more than fifty-five
(55%) percent fat as determined by chemical analysis.
e. Where a raw pork product is processed or offered for sale or sold to the
consumer in a retail establishment, sign shall be provided and
conspicuously posted in the establishment; and where a raw pork
product is displayed for sale in such establishment, its display case, tray
or pan shall also be provided with a sign having the following statement
clearly and legibly printed or stated on a contrasting background
thereon and of such size and so placed as to be, in the opinion of the
Department, clearly visible to the purchaser: "The raw pork product
displayed herein must be thoroughly heated or cooked so that all
portions thereof reach a temperature of not less than one hundred
sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit (165° F) to prevent trichinosis."
f. Wherein trays or pans are used for storage or display of fresh meat or
fresh meat by-products, individual trays shall be utilized for each item
to prevent cross-contamination.
a. No unplucked poultry shall be kept, sold or offered for sale in any food
handling establishment where other foods are sold, unless such
unplucked poultry shall be kept in a refrigerated case and apart from
other food.
§ 12-13.39 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.41
AO:481
§ 12-13.42. Cooking of Pork. [1999 Code § 8.80.420]
Pork products when served must have been heated to a temperature of one
hundred sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit (165° F) or be approved for direct
consumption without further heat treatment by virtue of prior approved
treatment.
§ 12-13.43. Milk Sources; Pasteurization. [1999 Code § 8.80.430]
All milk or milk products sold or served shall be from approved sources and
must be pasteurized.
§ 12-13.44. Custard- or Cream-Filled Products. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.440]
b. No poultry shall be dry-plucked in any food handling establishment
unless a separate room is provided, to be used exclusively as a plucking
room. The floors, walls and ceilings of the plucking room shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair and shall be painted
whenever required by the Division of Health. The floors, walls and
fixtures in the plucking room shall be washed at the close of each day's
work with a disinfecting solution and flushed with clean water. Suitable
impervious receptacles with tight-fitting covers for the holding of
feathers shall be provided, and the feathers shall be removed daily from
the premises and the receptacles thereupon disinfected.
a. All commercially prepared custard- or cream-filled bakery products
shall be made under clean conditions.
1. Only pasteurized milk or cream shall be used.
2. The mix shall be heated to a minimum of one hundred forty-two
degrees Fahrenheit (142° F) for a period of not less than thirty (30)
minutes.
3. Upon completion of cooking the mix, it shall be immediately
transferred into previously sterilized containers, properly covered,
and chilled without delay to fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50° F) or
below and maintained at such temperature until used.
4. The filling apparatus shall be of a suitable impervious material and
shall be cleaned and properly sterilized before each use. No cloth
filling bags shall be used.
5. The hands of employees shall not touch custards or cream fillings
during their preparation.
6. All windows and showcases used to display custard- and creamfilled
pastries shall be chilled to fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50° F) or
below.
§ 12-13.41 EDISON CODE § 12-13.44
AO:482
§ 12-13.45. Bacteria Count of Ice Cream and Frozen Confections.
[1999 Code § 8.80.450]
All ice cream, ice-cream products or frozen confections (including any
coating) shall contain not more than ten coliforms per gram and not more
than thirty thousand (30,000) bacteria per cubic centimeter as determined
by examination in a laboratory approved by the Division of Health.
§ 12-13.46. Labeling of Horsemeat. [1999 Code § 8.80.460]
No horseflesh shall be sold unless originated from an animal slaughtered
under a United States Government license, and unless every carcass, piece
and parcel thereof so exposed for sale, or sold, shall have conspicuously
attached thereto a label or tag stamped, in letters not less than one (1) inch
in height, with the words "Horse Flesh."
§ 12-13.47. Copy of Regulations to Be Available. [1999 Code
§ 8.80.470]
A copy of this section shall be kept by every permittee at each plant or
facility operated by him or her and shall be made available to all personnel.
§ 12-14. (RESERVED)
§ 12-15. ICE.
§ 12-15.1. License Required for Manufacture for Resale or Sale.
[1999 Code § 8.96.010]
Editor's Note: License fees may be found in Section 12-6 of this chapter.
No person shall manufacture for resale, sell or deliver any ice without first
making written application for a license and securing the approval of the
Division of Health for the activity. The application shall contain a true and
accurate statement as to the source of supply or of the water from which
the ice was made.
§ 12-15.2. Change of Source of Supply. [1999 Code § 8.96.020]
No person licensed to sell ice shall change the source of such supply of ice
or water without giving immediate notice to that effect to the Division of
Health.
b. Custard- and cream-filled pastries shall not be sold or delivered from
vehicles unless stored in a compartment maintained at fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (50° F) or below, unless on a special trip and delivery is
completed within two (2) hours.
§ 12-13.44 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.3
AO:483
§ 12-15.3. Impure or Unfit Ice. [1999 Code § 8.96.030]
No person shall sell or deliver ice which is unfit for use for domestic
purposes or which has been cut or made from any impure or polluted water
or which is obtained from a source which is not approved by the Division of
Health.
§ 12-15.4. Vehicles Used in Delivery and Sale. [1999 Code
§ 8.96.040]
Vehicles used in the delivery and sale of ice are to be used for no other
purpose, except by special permission of the Division of Health.
§ 12-15.5. Samples for Analysis. [1999 Code § 8.96.050]
Any person engaged in the sale, delivery or manufacture for resale of ice
shall, upon tender or offer of value, deliver to the Division of Health or
its authorized representative such samples of ice or water from which it is
made, for analysis, as may be necessary or requested.
§ 12-16. MILK.
§ 12-16.1. Milk Defined. [1999 Code § 8.108.010]
MILK — Is defined to be the lacteal secretion obtained by the complete
milking of one (1) or more healthy cows, properly fed and kept, excluding
that obtained within fifteen (15) days before and five (5) days after calving,
or such longer period as may be necessary to render the milk practically
colostrum free, which contains not less than eleven and one-half (11 1/2%)
percent of watery fluids nor less than three (3%) percent of milk fats. Milk
shall mean and include milk, certified milk and also that which has been
pasteurized, homogenized, irradiated, modified, skimmed, concentrated or
otherwise processed or treated, but shall not include or mean condensed,
evaporated or dried milk in hermetically sealed containers.
§ 12-16.2. Standards and Sanitary Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 8.108.020]
No person shall sell or deliver milk, milk products or fluid milk products in
the Township unless such milk or milk products comply with the standards
and quality required by, and were produced, handled, processed and
transported in accordance with, the provisions of Title 24 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey as amended, the Sanitary Code enacted by the
Department of Health of the State of New Jersey, and the provisions of this
section.
§ 12-16.3. Cooling and Storage. [1999 Code § 8.108.030]
Milk and fluid milk products shall be cooled to a temperature of fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50° F) or below, and maintained at that temperature
§ 12-15.3 EDISON CODE § 12-16.3
AO:484
during storage, distribution, shipment, transportation and until delivered to
the consumer.
§ 12-16.4. License Required for Sale or Distribution of Milk.16 [1999
Code § 8.108.040]
§ 12-16.5. Permit for Change of Supply. [1999 Code § 8.108.050]
No person having been granted a license hereunder shall procure for sale or
delivery in the Municipality any milk or cream from a source other than the
source specified on the application for a license hereunder, without having
obtained authorization from the Division of Health.
§ 12-16.6. Vehicles Used for Distribution. [1999 Code § 8.108.060]
Vehicles used for the distribution of milk shall be constructed and operated
so as to protect their contents from the sun, freezing and from
contamination.
§ 12-16.7. Samples for Analysis. [1999 Code § 8.108.070]
Any person engaged in the sale, delivery or manufacture for resale of milk
or milk products shall, upon tender or offer of value, deliver to the Division
of Health or its authorized representative such samples for analysis as may
be necessary or requested.
§ 12-17. FOOD VENDING MACHINES.
§ 12-17.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.84.010]
a. No person, either as principal or through agent or employee, shall
engage in the business of sale or distribution of milk in the Township
without a license issued by the Division of Health; provided that no
license shall be required for the proprietor of a public eating
establishment to sell for consumption on the premises milk or cream
obtained from a person licensed hereunder.
b. Each vehicle or premises from which milk or cream is sold or delivered
shall require a separate license.
a. As used in this section:
CONTROLLED LOCATION VENDING MACHINE (LIMITED SERVICE
VENDING MACHINE) — Means a vending machine which:
1. Dispenses only nonpotentially hazardous food;
Is of such design that it can be filled and maintained in a sanitary
manner by untrained persons at the location;
2.
16.Editor's Note: License fees may be found in Section 12-6 of this chapter.
§ 12-16.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-17.1
AO:485
§ 12-17.2. License Required for Each Machine.17 [1999 Code
§ 8.84.020]
No person shall operate a food vending machine without first making
written application for a license to the Division of Licenses and Permits
and securing the approval of the Division of Health for the conduct of such
machine at a stated location. A separate license shall be secured for each
machine.
§ 12-17.3. Repair Information Required on Machines. [1999 Code
§ 8.84.030]
The name, address and telephone number of the service repairman shall be
conspicuously posted on each machine.
§ 12-17.4. Source and Condition of Foods. [1999 Code § 8.84.040]
Food and ingredients intended for sale through vending machines shall
be obtained from sources complying with the regulations of the Township
and with other applicable State and Federal laws and regulations. Such
products shall be clean and wholesome, free from spoilage and shall be
processed, handled and stored in such a manner as to be protected against
contamination and adulteration. All products, contact surfaces of containers
and equipment shall be protected from contamination.
§ 12-17.5. Locations of Machines. [1999 Code § 8.84.050]
Such machine shall be so located as to minimize the possibility of
contamination of the product, shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept
clean. Each machine shall receive an adequate degree of lighting by natural
or artificial means.
VENDING MACHINE — Means any self-service device which upon
insertion of a coin, paper currency, token, card or key dispenses unit
servings of food, either in bulk or in packages, without the necessity
of replenishing the device between each vending operation. It shall
also include self-service dispensers equipped for coin, paper currency,
token, card or key operation and optional manual operation. Unless
otherwise stated, "vending machine" includes controlled location
vending machines.
Is intended for and used at locations in which protection is assured
against environmental contamination.
3.
b. All terminology in the above definitions shall be interpreted as provided
by the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.3.
17.Editor's Note: License fees for food vending machines may be found in Section 12-6,
License Fees.
§ 12-17.1 EDISON CODE § 12-17.6
AO:486
§ 12-17.6. Exterior Construction of Machines. [1999 Code
§ 8.84.060]
The exterior of such vending machines shall be as constructed as to
facilitate cleaning and to prevent the entrance of vermin.
§ 12-17.7. Interior Surfaces and Parts. [1999 Code § 8.84.070]
All interior surfaces and component parts of such vending machines shall
be so designed and constructed as to permit easy cleaning and shall be
kept clean. All product contact-surfaces of the machines shall be smooth,
nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and shall be capable of withstanding repeated
cleaning and bactericidal treatment by normal procedure. Such surfaces
shall be protected against contamination.
§ 12-17.8. Source of Water. [1999 Code § 8.84.080]
Water used in vending machines shall be from an approved source and shall
be of a safe and sanitary quality.
§ 12-17.9. Disposal of Wastes. [1999 Code § 8.84.090]
All wastes from such machines shall be properly disposed of and, pending
disposition, shall be so kept as to prevent creating a nuisance.
§ 12-17.10. Protection of Food in Transit. [1999 Code § 8.84.100]
Food and ingredients and product contact-surfaces of containers,
equipment and supplies shall be protected from contamination while in
transit to such vending machines. Readily perishable foods while in transit
shall be maintained at or below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50° F) or at or
above one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F).
§ 12-17.11. Machines Not to Dispense on Failure of Heating or
Cooling Devices. [1999 Code § 8.84.110]
All unattended food vending machines shall be so equipped that they will
not dispense in case of failure of heating or cooling devices.
§ 12-18. SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES.
§ 12-18.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.132.010]
As used in this section:
OPERATE — Means maintain or undertake to maintain any such self-service
laundry equipment, either as owner, agent or manager.
RENTAL SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — Means any retail establishment
where a series of washing, drying or ironing machines are installed for the
use of the general public. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the home of a person performing laundry work for a regular family trade.
§ 12-17.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-18.1
AO:487
RESIDENTIAL SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY EQUIPMENT — Means any
automatic or semiautomatic washing, drying, ironing or other laundry
machine, or group or battery of such machines regardless of type or make,
installed in any multiple dwelling, project, housing development or unit
for the use of the tenants of such multiple dwelling, project, housing
development or unit, and for the use of which a special charge, payment or
other consideration is required, either by insertion of a coin, payment to an
attendant or otherwise.
§ 12-18.2. License Required.18 [1999 Code § 8.132.020]
No person shall operate rental or residential laundry equipment in the
Township without a license approved by the Division of Health.
§ 12-18.3. Responsibility of Licensee. [1999 Code § 8.132.030]
The licensee shall at all times be held strictly responsible for the
installation, maintenance and operation of the self-service laundry
equipment at all locations serviced.
§ 12-18.4. Plumbing Fixtures. [1999 Code § 8.132.040]
§ 12-18.5. Lighting. [1999 Code § 8.132.050]
Each machine or group of machines shall be so installed in a building as
to receive a proper and adequate degree of lighting by natural or artificial
means.
§ 12-18.6. Installation and Maintenance. [1999 Code § 8.132.060]
Machines shall not be installed and located in such a manner that they shall
be exposed to unsanitary conditions. Floors under and adjacent to washing
machines shall be constructed of nonabsorbent, watertight material and
shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and kept free of accumulation of
waste water at all times. The inner and outer surfaces of tubs and cylinders
shall be kept visibly clean, sanitary and free from accumulation of residues
and other debris. Within twenty-four (24) hours after the licensee or his
or her representative has been notified that any washing machine or other
installation controlled or operated by him or her is broken or defective, he
or she shall cause such machine or machines to be inspected by capable
repairmen and to be properly repaired, replaced or disconnected from
service.
a. All plumbing fixtures and appliances shall be properly installed and
connected in accordance with the requirements of the plumbing
regulations of the State Uniform Construction Code.
b. Plumbing fixtures and appliances shall be maintained in good repair
and in clean and sanitary condition.
18.Editor's Note: License fees may be found in Section 12-6, License Fees.
§ 12-18.1 EDISON CODE § 12-18.7
AO:488
§ 12-18.7. Sanitary Maintenance. [1999 Code § 8.132.070]
All reasonable and usual precautions shall be taken to maintain installations
in a safe and sanitary condition.
§ 12-18.8. Water Temperature. [1999 Code § 8.132.080]
All washing units shall be capable of laundering by a high-temperature
process. The high-temperature process shall mean and include the washing
of fabrics in water of a temperature of one hundred forty degrees
Fahrenheit (140° F) or more for a minimum cleansing and an adequate
series of rinses to render negligible any danger of bacterial contamination.
Washing units capable of laundering at lower temperatures should be
conspicuously marked. Where practicable, water temperature shall be
measured at the delivery point to the machine unit.
§ 12-19. INDIVIDUAL AND SEMI-PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
SYSTEMS.
§ 12-19.1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [1999 Code § 8.100.010]
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semipublic water supplies, requiring certain permits,
providing for the inspection of such supplies, the fixing of fees and
prescribing penalties for violations is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1
to 69.6. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 12-19.2. Code Designated. [1999 Code § 8.100.020]
The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Water Supply Code of New Jersey (1959)."
§ 12-19.3. Copies of Code on File. [1999 Code § 8.100.030]
Three (3) copies, of the Water Supply Code of New Jersey (1959) have been
placed on file in the Office of the Secretary, Clerk or other similar officer
of this Health Advisory Board upon the introduction of this section and will
remain on file in said office for the use and examination by the public.
§ 12-19.4. Permit Required. [1999 Code § 8.100.040]
a. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of the water supply
shall have been approved by the Health Advisory Board.
b. The Board may approve a permit if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey stating that the design of the
water supply as proposed is in compliance with the code.
§ 12-18.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-19.5
AO:489
§ 12-19.5. Certificate Required for Use. [1999 Code § 8.100.050]
§ 12-19.6. Hearing. [1999 Code § 8.100.060]
In case any permit or certification required by this section is denied by the
Board, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within fifteen (15)
days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing
the Board shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination and take
action accordingly within fifteen (15) days after the date of such hearing.
§ 12-19.7. Stoppage of Work. [1999 Code § 8.100.070]
The Board may order all further work in and about any water supply which
is being erected or installed in violation of the code, to be stopped forthwith,
except such work as shall be necessary to remedy such violation, and
thereafter the work continued without any violation of any of the provisions
of the code, and after issuance of any such order and the service of a
copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in and about the
erection or installation of any such water supply or any part thereof, no
further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 12-19.8. Fees. [1999 Code § 8.100.080]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
a. New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new
dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied which
must rely on such a supply for water, until the Board shall have
approved a certificate indicating that the water supply has been located
and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued and
the requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificate
shall not be required for alteration to an existing water supply.
b. The Board may approve such a certificate if an engineer licensed to
practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement in
writing, signed by him or her, to the Board, that the water supply has
been located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the
permit and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
a. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct a water supply, a fee of ten ($10.00) dollars.
b. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
water supply, a fee of ten ($10.00) dollars.
c. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter a water
supply, a fee of five ($5.00) dollars.
d. For each reinspection of a water supply or part thereof caused by the
failure of the permittee to locate and construct or alter the same in
accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the terms of the
§ 12-19.5 EDISON CODE § 12-19.8
AO:490
§ 12-19.9. Applications for Permits. [1999 Code § 8.100.090]
All applications for permits required by this section shall be made in writing
to the Division of Licenses and Permits and such permits shall not be issued
until approved by the Board.
§ 12-20. INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
§ 12-20.1. Septic Tanks Permitted in Certain Cases. [1999 Code
§ 8.104.010]
There shall be permitted, until such time as a public sanitary sewer is
constructed along the street bounding that property, a septic tank of a style,
size and kind that shall be approved by the Division of Health.
§ 12-20.2. Standards for Individual Sewage Disposal Systems. [1999
Code § 8.104.020]
All individual sewage disposal systems must be installed in compliance with
N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 7:9-1.1 et seq. and as the same may
be amended from time to time.
§ 12-20.3. Contractor's License Required; Bond Required. [1999
Code § 8.104.030]
No person shall engage in the business of construction or reconstruction of
individual sewerage facilities unless approved and licensed by the Division
of Health. Prior to issuance of license, a performance bond in the sum of five
thousand ($5,000.00) dollars must be posted with the Division of Health.
§ 12-20.4. Permit Required; Issuance. [1999 Code § 8.104.040]
aforesaid code, an inspection fee of five ($5.00) dollars shall be
charged.
a. No septic tank, house sewer, effluent sewer, distribution box, seepage
pit, disposal field or any connections shall hereafter be constructed or
reconstructed in the Township without a permit for that purpose being
first approved by the Division of Health upon such terms and conditions
as the Division of Health may direct.
b. The permit issued must be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
property for which it was issued.
c. No septic tank disposal system is to be covered or used until inspected
and approved by the Division of Health.
d. No permit for the construction or reconstruction of any septic tank or
any of its component parts shall be granted until the permeability of the
soil is first determined by a percolation test meeting all the
requirements set forth by this section.
§ 12-19.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-20.5
AO:491
§ 12-20.5. Construction Prohibited in Certain Cases. [1999 Code
§ 8.104.050]
No septic tank shall hereafter be constructed or reconstructed on any street
in which a public sewer is laid.
§ 12-20.6. Connection to Public Sewer Required. [1999 Code
§ 8.104.060]
Where in any street or section of street there is now constructed a public
sewer, or where hereafter in any street or section of street there may be
constructed a public sewer for the purpose of carrying off sewage, the
owner or owners of property abutting on, adjacent to or along the line of
any such sewer so constructed shall, within thirty (30) days after being
notified by the Division of Health, connect the houses and buildings on such
property with such public sewer in a proper manner.
§ 12-20.7. Approval of Seepage Pits and Dry Wells; Use. [1999 Code
§ 8.104.070]
§ 12-20.8. Surface Waters Excluded from Sanitary Sewers or Septic
Tanks. [1999 Code § 8.104.080]
No drainage line from any roof, porch, shed, areaway, etc., or any other
medium of drainage disposal resulting from rain, snow, sleet or hail, shall be
permitted to be connected either permanently or temporarily to any public
sanitary sewer or septic tank within the boundaries of Edison Township.
§ 12-20.9. Construction of Cesspools or Privy Vaults Prohibited.
[1999 Code § 8.104.090]
No cesspool or privy vault used in connection with any building shall
hereafter be constructed or reconstructed within the confines of the
Township.
§ 12-20.10. Temporary Privy Vaults for Construction Sites. [1999
Code § 8.104.100]
Every contractor or person in charge of any construction or repair work in
the Township shall provide toilet accommodations for the persons employed
in such construction whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the Division
of Health. If a connection with a sewer is not practicable, then application
shall be made for a permit to install and maintain a temporary privy vault in
accordance with the rules adopted by the Division of Health. All temporary
a. Seepage pits and dry wells must be constructed in a manner approved
by the Division of Health.
b. Dry wells may be used only for receiving drainage from roofs,
areaways, etc., but shall not be used for the disposal of any sanitary
sewage, septic tank effluent or laundry wastes.
§ 12-20.5 EDISON CODE § 12-20.10
AO:492
privy vaults must be built and maintained in such a manner that flies, etc.,
cannot gain access to the contents.
§ 12-20.11. Cleaning of Cesspools and Septic Tanks. [1999 Code
§ 8.104.110]
Any owner or occupant of any premises within this Township shall cleanse
every cesspool or septic tank upon such premises and remove the contents
therefrom upon notice in writing to that effect from the Division of Health.
§ 12-20.12. License Required for Cleaning Cesspools and Septic
Tanks. [1999 Code § 8.104.120]
No person shall engage in the business of cleaning, emptying or removing
the contents of any septic tank or cesspool within the Township unless
approved and granted a license by the Division of Health.
§ 12-20.13. Procedure for Cleaning Septic Tanks; Disposal of
Contents. [1999 Code § 8.104.130]
Any scavenger who shall commence to clean or empty any septic tank shall,
without interruption or delay, proceed with the work until it is completed
and the material removed from the premises; such material shall first be
disposed of in such manner and place as approved by the Health Officer.
§ 12-20.14. Conveyances for Transporting Contents of Septic Tanks.
[1999 Code § 8.104.140]
Every person engaged in the business of removing the contents of any
septic tank, where such contents are to be carried through any public
street or highway of the Township, shall use in such business a suitable
conveyance for carrying such contents, provided with watertight tanks with
close-fitting lids or covers, or some other suitable conveyances to be first
approved for such use by the Division of Health.
§ 12-21. (RESERVED)
§ 12-22. NONRESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS.
§ 12-22.1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [1999 Code § 8.116.010]
A code regulating and controlling the location and construction, alteration
and operation of swimming pools, the issuance of licenses to locate and
construct, alter or operate swimming pools and declaring and defining
certain swimming pools as nuisances and fixing penalties for violations is
adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 through 3-69.6. A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
§ 12-20.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-22.2
AO:493
§ 12-22.2. Copies on File. [1999 Code § 8.116.020]
The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970)," as
amended from time to time. Three copies of the Swimming Pool Code of
New Jersey (1970) have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Township upon the introduction of this section and will remain on file in said
office for the use and examination by the public.
§ 12-22.3. Types of Pools Permitted; Location. [1999 Code
§ 8.116.030]
a. No commercial swimming pool shall be permitted in the Township.
b. Exception. No swimming pool shall be permitted in the Township unless
operated by a chartered organization or corporation upon a nonprofit
private membership club plan with a membership at all times consisting
of a minimum of seventy-five (75%) percent bona fide residents of the
Township.
c. Since swimming pools may be inimical to the health, public safety and
general welfare if located without the due consideration of conditions
and surroundings, no permit therefor, shall be issued except upon
application first made to the Board of Adjustment, which is directed to
hear the same in the same manner and under the same procedure as
the Board of Adjustment is empowered by law and ordinance to hear
cases and make exceptions to the provisions of the zoning ordinance,
and empowered to recommend in writing to the Municipal Council of
the Township that a permit for such use be granted if, in its judgment, it
will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
community and is reasonably necessary for the convenience of the
community.
1. The Municipal Council may by resolution approve such
recommendation by the Board of Adjustment. In determining
whether to approve or disapprove such recommendation by the
Board of Adjustment, the Municipal Council shall apply the same
standards and criteria as those to be applied by the Board of
Adjustment.
2. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize the
issuance of a permit for the construction of a swimming pool in
those districts of the Township in which they are otherwise
prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the Township.
d. Notwithstanding authorization having been obtained as heretofore
provided, no person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a
swimming pool until licenses therefor shall have been issued by the
Health Advisory Board and permit for the construction thereof obtained
from the Construction Official.
§ 12-22.2 EDISON CODE § 12-22.3
AO:494
§ 12-22.4. Fees and Charges for Construction or Alteration. [1999
Code § 8.116.040]
The following fees and charges, in addition to those normally charged for
building construction, are herewith established:
§ 12-22.5. License Required; Expiration and Renewal of Licenses.19
[1999 Code § 8.116.050]
Licenses issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually
on December 31 of each year, and application for the renewal thereof shall
be submitted, together with the required fee, prior to April 30 of each year.
The license fees shall not be prorated.
§ 12-22.6. Denial or Suspension of License. [1999 Code § 8.116.060]
Licenses required by this section may be denied or suspended by the Health
Advisory Board for failure to comply with this section. The Board shall
afford the person whose license to locate and construct, alter or operate has
been denied or suspended an opportunity to be heard in public hearing and,
following this, to be informed of the Board's decision.
e. Suitable and appropriate trees, shrubbery, planting or fencing shall be
provided and maintained so that neither the pool itself nor the bathers
using it are visible at any time to a person standing on the ground on
any adjoining street or on any contiguous property, except that this
provision does not apply to diving boards or platforms or to bathers
while they are on such diving boards or platforms.
f. Sound-absorbing and deflecting structures and planting, shrubbery and
trees shall be provided in such manner and such number as to
effectively reduce the sounds from the pool as heard on continuous
property or streets, to the end that there shall be no unreasonably loud
noise which is abnormal to the surrounding neighborhood.
g. All areas surrounding the pool shall be made and kept neat and
attractive so as to be in conformity with surrounding property, and no
rubbish, debris or litter shall be permitted to remain or accumulate in
or about the pool.
h. The pool shall be completely surrounded by such fencing as will
effectively exclude children or trespassers, except that gates shall be
provided which shall be kept locked when the pool is not in use.
a. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a swimming pool,
one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
b. For the issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool, fifty ($50.00)
dollars.
19.Editor's Note: Fees for licenses to operate a nonresidential swimming pool may be found
in Section 12-6, Health License Fees.
§ 12-22.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-23
AO:495
§ 12-23. RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS.
§ 12-23.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.120.010]
As used in this section:
PERMANENT RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL — Means and includes any
artificially constructed swimming pool or tank which is affixed to the real
estate and which is established or maintained upon any premises by an
individual for his or her own or his or her family's use or the use of guests
of his household.
PORTABLE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL — Means and includes any
artificially constructed swimming pool or tank which is not stationary or
permanently affixed to the real estate and which has over one hundred
twenty (120) square feet of area, twelve (12) feet in diameter or eighteen
(18) inches of water depth, and which is established or maintained upon any
premises by an individual for his or her own or his or her family's use or the
use of guests of his or her household.
§ 12-23.2. License Required.20 [1999 Code § 8.120.020]
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, install, establish, alter or
maintain in the Township a residential swimming pool unless licensed to do
so by the Division of Licenses after approval by the Health Officer of Edison
Township. Upon being satisfied that the proposed pool conforms to the
requirements of this section, the Health Officer shall approve a license, for
a term expiring on the last day of April next succeeding the day of issuance.
Application for renewal shall be made in writing not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the expiration of the same, and the Health Officer, upon being
satisfied that such pool conforms to the requirements of this section, shall
approve same upon payment of the license fee.
§ 12-23.3. Construction Materials. [1999 Code § 8.120.030]
All material used in the construction of the pool shall be waterproofed and
easily cleaned. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
§ 12-23.4. Drainage. [1999 Code § 8.120.040]
All such pools shall be provided with a drainpipe of galvanized iron or
approved equal material, of a diameter not over two (2) inches, which shall
extend from the pool to a brook or to the storm sewer where the capacity is
adequate as determined by the Township Engineer. No such pool drain shall
be connected to the sanitary sewer system. If neither a brook nor storm
sewer is readily available, emptying of the pool may be accomplished by
pumping the water at a slow rate into a suitable dry well or through a hose
connected to sprinklers which will spray the water upon the premises upon
which pool is located.
20.Editor's Note: License fees may be found in Section 12-6, Health License Fees.
§ 12-23 EDISON CODE § 12-23.5
AO:496
§ 12-23.5. Location. [1999 Code § 8.120.050]
No such pool shall be constructed or installed nearer than six (6) feet from
any property line or nearer to the street line on which the property fronts
than the main front wall of the dwelling erected thereon. No such pool shall
be constructed or installed on any lot except in connection with a dwelling
constructed on the lot.
§ 12-23.6. Fencing. [1999 Code § 8.120.060]
Every such pool referred to in this section shall be fully enclosed by a
suitable fence with a gate capable of being locked when the pool is not in
use. Such fence shall have a minimum height of four (4) feet; if a woven
fence, a mesh so that openings will not exceed four (4) by four (4) inches, or
if other, a maximum distance between pickets of four (4) inches.
§ 12-23.7. Water Quality; Sanitation. [1999 Code § 8.120.070]
§ 12-23.8. Water Supply. [1999 Code § 8.120.080]
a. Residential swimming pools using the fill-and-draw system shall be
completely emptied, cleaned and refilled with fresh water at such
intervals so as to maintain sanitary conditions as determined by
chemical and physical tests. In such of those who employ the flowthrough
system, there shall be a continuous flow of fresh water into the
swimming pool and a corresponding overflow. In such of those as
employ the recirculation system, the water shall be drawn from the
swimming pool and passed through mechanical filters or other
clarifying equipment and then returned to the pool, tank or plunge at
such intervals to maintain sanitary conditions as determined by
chemical and physical tests.
b. The Division of Health may from time to time adopt minimum sanitary,
chemical and bacterial standard methods and tests for determining
compliance with minimum standards for such swimming pool.
c. The water of swimming pools using any one (1) or a combination of the
systems mentioned in paragraph a. above shall at all times be
maintained in a sanitary condition for bathing purposes.
d. Locker rooms, shower rooms, runways and other places used in
conjunction with swimming pools shall be kept in a sanitary condition at
all times.
a. Physical connections between potable public or private water system
and swimming pool circulation systems shall not be permitted.
b. Potable water for filling swimming pools, tanks or plunges or for
makeup purposes shall be introduced in such a manner as to prevent
siphonage, either into a float-controlled surge tank having an air gap of
at least six (6) inches above the overflow rim of the tank or directly into
§ 12-23.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-23.8
AO:497
§ 12-23.9. Closing for Nonconformance. [1999 Code § 8.120.090]
Whenever any pool fails to comply with the requirements of this section,
the Division of Health shall serve notice upon the owner or operator, by
certified mail, stating the particulars in which the pool fails to conform.
Upon issuance of such notice, the pool shall be closed until a subsequent
inspection(s) indicates compliance.
§ 12-23.10. Regulation of Pool Having Dimensions Less Than Those
Specified Herein. [1999 Code § 8.120.100]
§ 12-24. PONDS AND LAKES FOR SWIMMING.
§ 12-24.1. License Required. [1999 Code § 8.124.010]
It is unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation to
operate any outdoor pond or lake in the Township for swimming or bathing
purposes without having first obtained a license therefor in the manner
hereinafter provided.
§ 12-24.2. Application for License; Fee. [1999 Code § 8.124.020]
Application for such a license shall be made to the Township Clerk, who
may, in compliance with the hereinafter set forth rules and regulations,
issue a license in writing upon payment of the annual license fee of two
hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars. Application shall be made upon a form
prepared by the Clerk, which shall require the following information:
the pool by means of a discharge pipe turned downward with an air gap
at least six (6) inches above the pool overflow level.
a. Emptying of pools may be accomplished by pumping water at a slow
rate into a suitable dry well or through a hose connected to sprinklers
which will spray water upon the premises upon which pool is located.
b. No pool shall be emptied so as to cause a nuisance or discomfort to
adjoining property owners.
c. When pools are not to be used for periods of twenty-four (24) hours or
more, they must either be emptied or properly protected so as not to
endanger human health and life.
a. Specific location of lake or pond;
b. Area and extent of lake or pond;
c. Sketch of property showing distances to nearest roads;
d. Maximum depth of the lake or pond;
e. Information as to number of bathing houses or dressing rooms;
§ 12-23.8 EDISON CODE § 12-24.2
AO:498
§ 12-24.3. Days and Hours for Swimming. [1999 Code § 8.124.030]
Swimming or bathing shall be permitted in said ponds or lakes between
the dates of May 30 and the day following Labor Day of each year. Bathing
hours shall be between 10:00 a.m. and sunset.
§ 12-24.4. Grading of Lake Bottoms. [1999 Code § 8.124.040]
The bottom of any lake or pond so used for swimming or bathing purposes
shall be graded so as to eliminate any sudden drop-offs or holes. The bottom
slope where the depth is less than five and one-half (5 1/2) feet shall not
be greater than one (1) to fifteen (15). There shall be no sudden change
of slope where the pool or lake is less than five and one-half (5 1/2) feet.
The bottom slope at depths greater than five and one-half (5 1/2) feet shall
not be greater than one (1) to three (3). All areas to be used for bathing or
swimming shall be marked by roping off the said sections to be used and
marking the same at one (1) foot depth intervals, such markers to indicate
the depth and to be plainly visible to all bathers at all times.
§ 12-24.5. Locker and Shower Rooms. [1999 Code § 8.124.050]
Sufficient locker rooms, shower rooms, runways and other sanitary facilities
shall be provided and shall be kept in proper and sanitary condition at
all times. At least one (1) telephone must be available during the hours
provided for bathing.
§ 12-24.6. Analysis of Water. [1999 Code § 8.124.060]
All chemical and bacteriological analyses of the water shall be made in
accordance with the procedure set forth in the current edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," published jointly by
the American Public Health Association and the American Water Works
Association. The standard test for the coliform group shall consist of the
presumptive and confirmed tests, the latter being required when
presumptive evidence of coliform organisms is indicated. The standard test
for total bacteria shall consist of the standard agar plate count at thirtyseven
degrees (37° C) centigrade.
§ 12-24.7. Reports of Analysis; Samples. [1999 Code § 8.124.070]
The operator of the pond or lake shall have water samples analyzed by
a laboratory approved by the Health Advisory Board unless otherwise
directed by the Board or its authorized agent. Reports of all analyses shall
be forwarded to the Board or its authorized agent within forty-eight (48)
hours after completion. Samples shall be collected at least once weekly
at the four (4) extreme ends of the pond or lake during periods of heavy
bathing load. These samples shall be collected and handled and the
f. Certificate of Health Officer as to acceptability of water for swimming
or bathing purposes.
§ 12-24.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-24.7
AO:499
bacterial quality standards shall be the same as provided in the "Swimming
Pool Code of New Jersey (1955)."
§ 12-24.8. Rescue and Emergency Equipment. [1999 Code
§ 8.124.080]
The same rescue and emergency equipment shall be provided as is required
by the "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955)."
§ 12-24.9. Supervision. [1999 Code § 8.124.090]
The pond or lake, when open for use, shall at all times be under the
supervision of a competent director, who shall be responsible for all phases
of the swimming or bathing operation, including the applicable provisions
of this section.
§ 12-24.10. Lifeguards. [1999 Code § 8.124.100]
The requirements as to lifeguards shall be the same as in the "Swimming
Pool Code of New Jersey (1955)."
§ 12-24.11. Inspection; Closing. [1999 Code § 8.124.110]
The Health Officer of the Board is designated as swimming pool inspector.
Whenever any pond or lake, by reason of lack of proper supervision or
failure to comply with the requirements of this section, is a hazard to public
health or safety, the swimming pool inspector is authorized and directed to
order the closing of the pond or lake until such time as no further hazard to
the public health or safety exists.
§ 12-24.12. Adoption of Portions of Code by Reference. [1999 Code
§ 8.124.120]
The portions of the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955) referred to
herein, a copy of which code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without inclusion of the text thereof herein, except as is included by specific
reference thereto, are adopted. Three copies of the Swimming Pool Code of
New Jersey (1955) have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Township upon the introduction of this section and will remain on file in said
office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 12-25. (RESERVED)
§ 12-26. SANITATION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 12-26.1. Sanitation Requirements. [1999 Code § 8.128.010]
a. The owner, tenant, manager and all other persons maintaining,
operating or in charge or control of any public place shall, at all times,
keep and maintain every such public place and all parts thereof in a
§ 12-24.7 EDISON CODE § 12-26.1
AO:500
§ 12-26.2. Sanitary Requirements. [1999 Code § 8.128.020]
Every public place shall contain the following:
§ 12-26.3. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 8.128.030]
In all public places there is prohibited:
§ 12-26.4. Prohibited Cleansing Agents. [1999 Code § 8.128.040]
The use of cleansing agents containing hydrocyanic acid or other poisonous
ingredients is specifically prohibited.
§ 12-26.5. Drinking Fountains. [1999 Code § 8.128.050]
Drinking fountains must be of the angle-stream bubbler-type or other
accepted by the Plumbing Inspector. All fountains shall throw a stream not
less than three (3) inches from the bubbler. It will be the responsibility of
the property owner where a drinking fountain is located to keep same clean
and free of debris.
clean and sanitary condition and open to inspection by the Division of
Health.
b. When used in this section, "public place" means any restaurant,
lunchroom, cabin, barroom, hotel or other place where food or drink is
offered for sale to the public and any camp, trailer camp, tourist home
or public recreation place or place of business where toilet facilities or
water for drinking or culinary purposes may be available for use of the
public.
a. A washroom containing adequate toilet facilities;
b. A sufficient quantity of toilet tissue;
c. Clean, individual towels, mechanically adjustable roller towels, or airdrying
facilities;
d. A sanitary waste receptacle for towels customarily discarded after
usage;
e. Separate toilets for male and female patrons;
f. An adequate supply of hand-cleansing soap or detergent shall be
available at each hand-washing facility.
a. The use of any common drinking cup;
b. The use of towels in common.
§ 12-26.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-26.6
AO:501
§ 12-26.6. Sanitary Requirements for Public Vehicles. [1999 Code
§ 8.128.060]
Every vehicle used for hire or for a public conveyance shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 12-27. NOISE CONTROL.21
§ 12-27.1. Findings; Scope. [1999 Code § 8.112.050A]
§ 12-27.2. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 8.112.050B]
The Noise Control Code adopted by this section shall be enforced by the
Department of Health and Human Services Director and his or her duly
appointed designees.
§ 12-27.3. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.112.050C]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL AREA — Means a group of commercial facilities and the
abutting public rights-of-way and public spaces.
COMMERCIAL FACILITY — Means any premises, property, or facility
involving traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit,
including but not limited to:
a. Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and, whereas a substantial body
of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and, whereas the people have a right to, and
should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound. It is
therefore the policy of Edison Township to prevent excessive sound that
may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of the citizens or degrade
the quality of life.
b. This section shall apply to the control of sound originating from
stationary sources within the limits of the Township.
a. Banking and other financial institutions;
b. Dining establishments;
c. Establishments for providing retail services;
d. Establishments for providing wholesale services;
e. Establishments for recreation and entertainment;
f. Office buildings;
21.Editor's Note: Section 12-27, Noise Control, was codified as Section 10-1 of the 2008
Revised General Ordinances. It was relocated to Chapter 12 in Supplement No. 1.
§ 12-26.6 EDISON CODE § 12-27.3
AO:502
CONSTRUCTION — Means any site preparation, assembly, erection repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition of buildings or
structures.
DECIBEL (dB) — Means the practical unit of measurement for sound
pressure level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to
twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound
pressure of the measured sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound
(twenty (20) micropascals); abbreviated dB.
DEMOLITION — Means any dismantling, intentional destruction, or
removal of buildings or structures.
EMERGENCY WORK — Means any work or action necessary to deliver
essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way or abating life threatening
conditions.
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — Means any activity and its related premises,
property, facilities, or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture, or
production of durable or nondurable goods.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Means any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land
by an engine or motor.
MUFFLER — Means a sound dissipative device or system for abating the
sound of escaping gasses of an internal combustion engine.
MULTIDWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Means any building wherein there
are two (2) or more dwelling units.
NOISE — Means any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend
to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the State or
in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee
relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a
place of employment.
NOISE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR — Means the Noise Control Officer
designated as the official liaison with all municipal departments,
empowered to grant permits for variances.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — Means an officially designated employee of
the Municipality, of a group of municipalities, or of the County, trained in the
measurement of sound and empowered to issue a summons for violations of
this section.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Means any sound that: a. endangers the safety
or health of any person; or b. disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, or c. endangers personal or real property.
g. Transportation;
h. Warehouses
§ 12-27.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-27.3
AO:503
PERSON — Means any individual corporation, company, association,
society, firm, partnership, joint stock company, the State or any political
subdivision, agency or instrumentality of the State.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley that is leased, owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Means any real property or structures thereon that are
owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Means either: a. the imaginary line including its
vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another;
or b. the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one (1)
in a multidwelling-unit building.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — Means a group of residential properties and the
abutting public rights-of-way and public spaces.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Means property used for human habitation,
including but not limited to:
SOUND LEVEL — Means the sound pressure level measured in decibels
with a sound level meter set for A weighting; sound level is expressed in
dBA.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Means an instrument used to measure sound
level and conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified by ANSI
specification S1.4-1971.
WEEKDAY — Means any day, Monday through Friday, that is not a legal
holiday.
§ 12-27.4. Noise Control Officers/Administrators. [1999 Code
§ 8.112.050D; Ord. No. O.2013-2018]
a. Private property used for human habitation;
Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for
human habitation;
b.
c. Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation;
d. Community service property used for human habitation.
a. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Department of
Health and Human Services Director and his or her duly appointed
designees.
b. The Noise Control Administrator shall have the power to:
1. Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments
and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies to the
extent practicable;
§ 12-27.3 EDISON CODE § 12-27.4
AO:504
§ 12-27.5. Duties and Responsibilities of Other Departments. [1999
Code § 8.112.050E]
§ 12-27.6. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels. [1999 Code
§ 8.112.050E]
2. Review the actions of other municipal departments and advise such
departments of the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
3. Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
section;
c. The Noise Control Administrator shall consult with the airport
proprietor to recommend changes in airport operations to minimize any
noise which the airport owner may have the authority to control in its
capacity as proprietor. The Noise Control Administrator shall report on
his or her efforts to the Governing Body.
d. A person shall be qualified to be a Noise Control Officer if the person
has satisfactorily completed any of the following:
1. Community Noise - A Short Course" offered by the Department of
Environmental Science of Cook College, Rutgers, the State
University; or
2. A program of tutoring and on-the-job training offered by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Office of Noise
Control to its employees; or
3. Education or experience or a combination thereof certified by the
above Department as equivalent to the provisions of paragraph a or
b.
e. Noise measurements made by Noise Control Officers shall be taken
according to procedures specified by N.J.A.C. 7:29B, except as provided
in subsection 12-27.6a.
a. All departments and agencies of Edison Township shall carry out their
programs according to law and shall cooperate with the Noise Control
Administrator in the implementation and enforcement of this section.
b. All departments charged with new projects or changes to existing
projects that may result in the production of noise shall consult with the
Noise Control Administrator prior to the approval of such projects to
insure that such activities comply with the provisions of this section.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on a particular category of property or any public space
or right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds
the particular sound level limits set forth in Table 1 when measured at
§ 12-27.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-27.6
AO:505
or within the real property line of the receiving property except as
provided in paragraph b. below.
When measuring noise within a dwelling unit of a multidwelling-unit
building, all exterior doors and windows shall be closed and the
measurements shall be taken in the center of the room.
Table 1.
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Property Category, in dBA
Sound Source
Property
Category
Receiving Property Category
Another Dwelling
Within a
Multidwelling-Unit
Building Residential CommercialIndustrial
7:00 a.m.
-10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m.
-10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m.-7:00
a.m.
All Times All Times
Any location
within a multidwelling-
unit
building
45 40 55 50 65 75
Residential 55 50 65 75
Commercial or
public spaces or
rights-of-way
65 50 65 75
Industrial 65 50 65 75
b. The following are exempt from the sound level limits of Table 1:
1. Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers, and agricultural
equipment shall be permitted when operated with a muffler
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekends and legal holidays, provided that
they produce less than eighty-five (85) dBA at or within any real
property line of a residential property;
2. Sound from church bells and church chimes when a part of a
religious observance or service;
3. Noise from construction activity provided all motorized equipment
used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, except
as provided in subsection 12-27.7b6 of this section;
4. Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers, and snow plows when
operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal;
§ 12-27.6 EDISON CODE § 12-27.6
AO:506
§ 12-27.7. Prohibited Acts; Certain Noises Prohibited During
Certain Hours. [1999 Code §§ 8.112.050F, 9.08.010B]
5. Noise from stationary emergency signaling devices that conforms
with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29;
6. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor
vehicle provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation
within fifteen (15) minutes after it has been activated.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made verbally or
mechanically any noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking
and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public
right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this subsection.
b. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the following acts:
1. Sound reproduction systems: operating, playing, or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, or similar
device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance for any person other than the operator
of the device;
2. Loudspeakers and public address systems: using or operating of
any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in the following day, such that
the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
residential real property line;
3. Animals and birds: owning, possessing or harboring any pet animal
or pet bird that frequently or for continued duration, makes sounds
that create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
line (for the purpose of this section, a noise disturbance from a
barking dog shall be defined as that created by a dog barking
continually for ten (10) minutes or intermittently for thirty (30)
minutes unless provoked);
4. Loading and unloading: loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
liquids, garbage cans, refuse or similar objects, or the pneumatic or
pumped loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid, gaseous,
powder or pellet form, or the compacting of refuse by persons
engaged in the business of scavenging or garbage collection,
whether private or municipal, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. the following day when the latter is a weekday and
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day
when the latter is a legal holiday or a weekend day except by
permit, when the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance
across a residential real property line;
5. Standing motor vehicles: operating or permitting the operation of
any motor vehicle whose manufacturers gross weight is in excess of
§ 12-27.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-27.7
AO:507
§ 12-27.8. Exceptions. [1999 Code § 8.112.050G]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
§ 12-27.9. Conditions for Variance. [1999 Code § 8.112.050H; Ord.
No. O.2013-2018]
ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached
to such a vehicle, for a period of longer than five (5) minutes in any
hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic
congestion or emergency work, on a public right-of-way or public
space within one hundred fifty (150) feet (forty-six (46) meters) of
a residential area between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of
the following day;
6. Construction and demolition: operating or permitting the operation
of any tools or equipment used in construction drilling,
earthmoving, excavating, or demolition work between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays or at any
time on weekends or legal holidays, provided such equipment is
equipped with a functioning muffler except for (a) emergency work;
(b) by variance issued pursuant to subsection 12-27.9; or (c) when
the sound level does not exceed any applicable limit specified in
Table 1 of this section.
7. Repairs, construction work or maintenance, including use of lawn
mowers or other types of equipment, which involves annoyance to
person or persons, shall not be performed except on Monday
through Friday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and
on Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m.
a. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency except as provided in subsections 12-27.6b5
and 12-27.6b6; or
b. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; or
c. The emission of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal
Occupational Safety and Health Act;
d. Noise from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
a. Any person who owns or operates any stationary noise source may
apply to the Business Administrator for a variance from one (1) or more
of the provisions of this section. Applications for a permit of variance
shall supply information including, but not limited to:
1. The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made;
§ 12-27.7 EDISON CODE § 12-27.9
AO:508
2. The reason for which the permit of variance is requested, including
the hardship that will result to the applicant, his or her client, or
the public if the permit of variance is not granted;
3. The nature and intensity of noise that will occur during the period
of the variance;
4. The section or sections for which the permit of variance shall apply;
5. A description of interim noise control measures to be taken by the
applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom;
6. A specific schedule of the noise control measures which shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this section within a
reasonable time;
b. Failure to supply the information required by the Business
Administrator shall be cause for rejection of the application.
c. A copy of the permit of variance must be kept on file by the Municipal
Clerk for public inspection.
d. The Business Administrator may charge the applicant a fee of twentyfive
($25.00) dollars to cover expenses resulting from the processing of
the permit of variance application.
e. The Business Administrator may, at his or her discretion, limit the
duration of the permit of variance, which shall be no longer than one (1)
year. Any person holding a permit of variance and requesting an
extension of time shall apply for a new permit of variance under the
provisions of this section.
f. No variance shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate
proof that: 1. noise levels occurring during the period of the variance
will not constitute a danger to public health; and 2. compliance with
this section would impose an arbitrary or unreasonable hardship upon
the applicant without equal or greater benefits to the public.
g. In making the determination on granting a variance, the Business
Administrator shall consider:
1. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the
health and welfare or the reasonable use of property which is
caused or threatened to be caused;
2. The social and economic value of the activity for which the variance
is sought;
3. The ability of the applicant to apply best practical noise control
measures.
h. The permit of variance may be revoked by the Business Administrator if
the terms of the permit of variance are violated.
§ 12-27.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-27.9
AO:509
§ 12-27.10. Violations and Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.112.050I]
i. A variance may be revoked by the Business Administrator if there is:
1. Violation of one (1) or more conditions of the variance;
2. Material misrepresentation of fact in the variance application; or
3. Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the
Business Administrator in granting the variance.
a. Issuance of Summons. Violation of any provision of this section shall be
cause for a summons to be issued by the Noise Control Officer
according to procedures set forth in this Code, relevant New Jersey
Administrative Codes including but not limited to N.J.A.C. 7:29B., and
New Jersey Rules of Court.
b. Abatement Orders.
1. Except as provided in paragraph b. below, in lieu of issuing a
summons as provided in paragraph b. below, the Noise Control
Officer may issue an order requiring abatement of any source of
sound alleged to be in violation of this section within a reasonable
time period and according to guidelines which the Noise Control
Officer may prescribe.
2. An abatement order shall not be issued: (a) if any person willfully or
knowingly violates any provision of this section; or (b) if the Noise
Control Officer has reason to believe that there will not be
compliance with the abatement order.
c. Penalties.
1. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a penalty for each offense of not more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars, except as provided in paragraph 2 below.
2. Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this
section shall be subject to a penalty for each offense a sum of not
less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars and not more than five
hundred ($500.00) dollars.
3. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
d. No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or
from other law.
§ 12-27.9 EDISON CODE § 12-28
AO:510
§ 12-28. LITTERING.
Editor's Note: Section 12-28, Littering, was originally codified as Section
10-2 of the 2008 Revised General Ordinances. It was relocated to Chapter
XII in Supplement No. 1.
§ 12-28.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.24.010]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATTER — Means any sample or device,
dodger, bill or handbill, circular, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
written or printed or reproduced matter which:
GARBAGE — Means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Means any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material or any combination
thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted
cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden
waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material, but does not include political
literature or the waste of the preliminary processes of mining or other
extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
PARK — Means a park, reservation, recreation center or any other area in
the Township owned and used by the Township and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
PERSON — Means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Means any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.
Advertises any merchandise, product, commodity, service or other thing
for sale;
a.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
b.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
c.
§ 12-28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-28.1
AO:511
PUBLIC PLACE — Means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
parking areas open to the public, alleys and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds and public buildings.
REFUSE — Means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, dismantled vehicles, other abandoned personal property and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as circulars, leaflets,
pamphlets, wrappers, handbills, newspapers and all and any other printed
material, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood,
glass, building materials and other like materials, but specifically excepting
political literature.
TOWNSHIP — Means the Township of Edison.
§ 12-28.2. Littering Prohibited. [1999 Code § 8.24.020]
It is unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place litter
of any nature upon any public or private property, other than in a litter
receptacle.
§ 12-28.3. Placement of Receptacles. [1999 Code § 8.24.030]
Litter receptacles and their servicing shall be required at the following
public places: sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially
zoned areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear onefourth
mile without a receptacle; buildings held out for use by the public,
including schools, government buildings and railroad and bus stations;
parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service
refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline service station islands;
shopping centers; parking lots; boat-launching; sporting events, parades,
carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors of these places or the
sponsors of these events shall be responsible for providing and servicing the
receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
§ 12-28.4. Littering in Bodies of Water. [1999 Code § 8.24.040]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream
or any other body of water within the Township.
§ 12-28.5. Littering from Vehicles. [1999 Code § 8.24.050]
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any public place or private property within the Township.
§ 12-28.6. Littering on Private Property. [1999 Code § 8.24.060]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within
the Township, whether owned by such person or not, except the owner
§ 12-28.1 EDISON CODE § 12-28.6
AO:512
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection. Such owner or person in control of private
property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided,
however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private
receptacles for collections.
§ 12-28.7. Littering in Parks. [1999 Code § 8.24.070]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Township
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of
elsewhere.
§ 12-28.8. Littering on Vacant Lots. [1999 Code § 8.24.080]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Township, whether or not owned by such person.
§ 12-28.9. Sweeping into Gutters and Streets.22 [1999 Code
§ 8.24.090]
No person shall sweep into or deposit into any gutter or street within the
Township any accumulation of litter as defined herein, including but not
limited to leaves, grass clippings or other land or garden waste, except that
a person may deposit leaves into the gutter or street immediately in front of
his or her property during periods announced by the Township for pickup or
collection thereof.
§ 12-28.10. Responsibility for Keeping Premises Litter-Free. [1999
Code § 8.24.100]
Persons owning or occupying a place of business or a place of residence
shall keep the sidewalks, entrance walks and parking areas in front of or
upon their premises free of litter.
§ 12-28.11. Prevention of Spillage from Trucks. [1999 Code
§ 8.24.110]
It is unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked on any
public roadway unless such a vehicle is constructed, covered or loaded to
prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any materials which
constitute litter have fallen or escaped which could cause an obstruction,
damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers or public property shall
immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of all such materials
and shall pay the costs therefor.
22.Editor's Note: See also Section 10-9, Property Offenses.
§ 12-28.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-28.12
AO:513
§ 12-28.12. Storage of Tires and Inoperable or Unregistered
Vehicles. [1999 Code § 8.24.120]
§ 12-28.13. Construction Sites. [1999 Code § 8.24.130]
It is unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before, during or
immediately following completion of any construction or demolition project.
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or
nonflyable debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and
to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a
frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 12-28.14. Sidewalks to Be Kept Free of Obstructions. [1999 Code
§ 8.24.140]
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter.
§ 12-28.15. Distribution of Commercial Advertising, Unsolicited
Newspapers and Advertising Tabloids. [1999 Code § 8.24.150]
a. The storage of tires in areas zoned residential shall be prohibited,
except that tires may be stored in a fully enclosed building or structure,
except on days designated for the collection of tires.
b. The keeping of inoperable or unregistered vehicles on streets, vacant
lots and residential lawns shall be prohibited.
a. No person shall throw, deposit, distribute or cause to be thrown,
deposited or distributed any commercial advertising, unsolicited
newspapers or advertising tabloids:
1. In or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant;
2. In or upon any vehicle;
3. In or upon the private premises which are inhabited, except by
handling or transmitting same directly to the owner, occupant or
other person than present except as hereinafter provided:
(a) A person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to
do so, may place or deposit any such commercial advertising,
unsolicitated newspaper or advertising tabloid in or upon
inhabited premises if the premises are not posted as provided
in this section and the commercial advertising, unsolicited
newspaper or advertising tabloid is placed or deposited as to
§ 12-28.12 EDISON CODE § 12-28.15
AO:514
§ 12-28.16. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 8.24.160]
The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the
Department of Health and Human Services of the Township, and said
Department is charged with the duty to enforce this section and, to that
end, to make and sign complaints for violations in the Municipal Court of
the Township.
§ 12-28.17. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.24.170]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
§ 12-29. FOOD ALLERGY INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE
POSTED.
§ 12-29.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.2015-2018]
In this section:
secure prevention from being blown or drifted about the
premises of sidewalks, streets or other public places.
Mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by Federal postal
rules or regulations. This provision of this subsection shall not
apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to
newspapers.
(b) Distributing Commercial Matter, Unsolicited Newspapers or
Advertising Tabloids Where Refused or Sign Posted. No person
shall throw, deposit, distribute or cause to be thrown,
deposited and distributed any commercial advertising,
unsolicited newspapers or advertising tabloid in or upon any
premises if requested by anyone in or upon such premises not
to do so or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words:
"No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No
Advertisement" or any similar notice indicating that the
occupants or the premises do not desire to have their right of
privacy disturbed or to have any such matter left upon the
premises.
b. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
subsection shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine as
follows:
1. First offense: two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars.
2. Second and subsequent offenses: five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
§ 12-28.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-29.1
AO:515
ALLERGEN — Is defined as any of the eight (8) foods required by the Food
and Drug Administration (the "FDA") to be listed by food manufacturers
as common ingredients that trigger food allergies, as well as monosodium
glutamate ("MSG") and commercial sulfites used as a food preservative
or additive. The eight (8) foods are: milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, fish,
shellfish, soy and wheat.
CONTRACT CATERER — Is defined as a caterer that delivers prepared food
to a customer, whether at a fixed location or at an off-site function.
NUT — Is defined as tree nuts, including, but not limited to, almonds, brazil
nuts, cashews, hazelnuts, filberts, macadamia nuts, pecans, pistachios, and
walnuts.
PEANUT — Is defined as the oval seed of a tropical South American plant in
the legume family, often roasted and salted and eaten as a snack or used to
make oil or animal feed.
RESTAURANT — Is defined as an establishment in which the principal
business is the sale of food or beverages for consumption on the premises,
and for the purposes of this section, includes any commercial
establishments that cook, prepare, or serve food or beverages intended for
immediate consumption either on or off the premises.
SHELLFISH — Is defined as an aquatic shelled mollusk, such as an oyster
or clam, or crustacean, such as a crab or shrimp.
§ 12-29.2. Identification of Foods Containing or Prepared with Nuts.
[Ord. No. O.2015-2018]
a. The local Health Officer, or her designee, shall furnish to all
Restaurants at the time of inspection a fact sheet, prepared by the state
Commissioner of Health, designed to explain food allergies and the
health-related consequences to persons with food allergies who are
exposed to food items that contain or are prepared with Allergens.
b. All Restaurants operating within the Township as of April 1, 2019 must
identify on a menu all food items that contain or are prepared with
specified Allergens, and must indicate on their public display menu sign
no later than April 1, 2019 that such menus are available.
c. All Contract Caterers operating at a fixed location within the Township
as of April 1, 2019 must identify on their menus and/or food display
signs all food items that contain or are prepared with Allergens.
Contract Caterers must specify the Allergen on the display sign or
menu, and all Contract Caterers delivering food to an off-site function
within the Township as of April 1, 2019 must provide menus indicating
all food items that contain or are prepared with Allergens at the
location of the function.
d. All establishments operating with a plenary retail consumption license,
as defined pursuant to Chapter VI herein, are required to post a display
§ 12-29.1 EDISON CODE § 12-29.2
AO:516
Chapter 13
(RESERVED)
Chapter 14
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 14-1. UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 14-1.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 15.04.010]
§ 14-1.2. Enforcing Agency. [1999 Code § 15.04.020]
sign no smaller than 8 1/2 x 11 inches for the purpose of indicating any
food or beverage item that contain or are prepared with Allergens.
e. Any Restaurant or Contract Caterer found in to be in violation of any
provision of this section shall be subject to penalty as set forth in
Section 12-3 of this Chapter XII.
a. As used in this section:
DEPARTMENT — Means the Department of Community Affairs.
ENFORCING AGENCY — Means the Edison construction enforcement
agency.
THE ACT — Means N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., State Uniform
Construction Code Act.
THE REGULATIONS — Means the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs N.J.A.C.
5:23-1 et seq., three (3) copies of which are on file with the Edison
Township Clerk.
b. All other words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in the Act and
the regulations.
a. There is established in Edison Township a State Uniform Construction
Code enforcing agency to be known as the Edison Construction Code
Enforcement Agency, consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode
Official and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as
the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a. above shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode
§ 12-29.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.2
AO:517
§ 14-1.3. Construction Permit Required; Exceptions. [1999 Code
§ 15.04.030]
§ 14-1.4. Applications. [1999 Code § 15.04.040]
official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one (1) office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
a. It is unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter, move or demolish a structure;
or to change the occupancy of a building or structure requiring greater
strength, exitway or sanitary provisions; or to change to a different use
group; or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made
or the installation of which is regulated by the regulations, without first
filing an application with the Construction Official in writing and
obtaining the required permit therefor.
b. The following are exceptions from paragraph a. above:
1. Ordinary repairs, as provided for in Article 7 of the regulations,
which do not involve any violation of the regulations;
2. Minor work as determined by the appropriate subcode official;
3. Emergency work, except that a permit shall be applied for as soon
thereafter as is practicable, but not later than seventy-two (72)
hours thereafter.
a. The application for a permit shall be submitted on forms provided by
the enforcing agency and shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications, as required by the regulations, and the required fee, as
provided for in this section. The application shall be a public record and
shall not be removed from the custody of the enforcing agency after a
construction permit has been issued.
b. If the application conforms with the Act, the Code, this section and the
requirements of other applicable laws and ordinances, the enforcing
agency shall approve the application and shall issue a construction
permit to the applicant. Every application for a construction permit
shall be granted, in whole or in part, or denied, within twenty (20)
business days. If the application is denied in whole or in part, the
enforcing agency shall set forth the reasons therefor in writing. If the
enforcing agency fails to grant, in whole or in part, or deny an
application for a construction permit within the period of time
prescribed herein, such failure shall be deemed a denial of the
application for the purposes of an appeal to the County Construction
Board of Appeals, unless such period of time has been extended with
the consent of the applicant. The enforcing agency may approve
changes in plans and specifications previously approved by it if the
§ 14-1.2 EDISON CODE § 14-1.4
AO:518
§ 14-1.5. Permits. [1999 Code § 15.04.050]
plans and specifications when so changed remain in conformity with the
law.
c. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to
have been abandoned six (6) months after the day of filing, unless such
application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been
issued, except that for reasonable cause, the Construction Official may
grant one (1) or more extensions of time for additional periods not
exceeding ninety (90) days each.
d. A construction permit issued in accordance with the foregoing
provisions, pursuant to which no construction has been undertaken
above the foundation walls within one (1) year from the time of issuance
or if authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6)
months after the time of commencement of the work, shall expire and
be invalid. The enforcing agency may suspend, revoke or cancel a
construction permit in case of neglect or failure to comply with the
provisions of the Act, the regulations or this section, or upon a finding
by it that a false statement or representation has been made in the
application for the construction permit.
a. The issuance of the construction permit shall be conditioned upon the
following:
1. The payment of appropriate fees;
2. That work will conform to the approved application, plans and
specifications for which the permit has been issued, including prior
approvals and any approved amendments thereto;
3. That the permit is a license to proceed with the work and shall not
be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the
provisions of the regulations;
4. That the owner, his or her agent, contractor or other employees will
assist the enforcing agency in its inspection work if requested;
5. That an as-built foundation resurvey of the lot is submitted to the
Construction Code Official for approval prior to the placing of sills
on the foundation. This survey shall have the seal and signature of
the registered architect or licensed engineer who prepared the
survey affixed thereto. The Construction Official shall waive the
requirement for an as-built foundation survey in the case of a
single-family homeowner who had prepared his or her own plans
for the construction, alteration or repair of a structure used or
intended to be used exclusively as his or her private residence and
to be constructed by himself or herself, provided that the owner
shall submit an affidavit attesting to the fact that the construction
has proceeded pursuant to the plans originally submitted and that
all minimum lot requirements have been met.
§ 14-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.5
AO:519
§ 14-1.6. Certificates of Occupancy. [1999 Code § 15.04.070; Ord.
No. O.1867-2014]
b. A true copy of the construction permit shall be kept on the site of
operations open to inspection during the entire time of prosecution of
the work and until the completion of the same.
c. At least twenty-four (24) hours' notice of start of work under a
construction permit shall be given to the Construction Official.
a. No building or structure hereafter constructed shall be used or
occupied, in whole or in part, until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued by the enforcing agency. No building or structure hereafter
altered, in whole or in part, shall be used or occupied until such a
certificate has been issued, except that any use or occupancy in an
already existing building or structure that was not discontinued during
its alteration may be continued in the preexisting structure for thirty
(30) days after the completion of the alteration without the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
b. After a change of use has been made in a building or structure, the
reestablishment of a prior use that is not legal in a new building of the
same type of construction is prohibited unless the building complies
with all applicable provisions of the regulations. A change from one
prohibited use for which a permit has been granted to another
prohibited use shall be deemed a violation of this section.
c. A written application for a certificate of occupancy shall be filed with
the enforcing agency by the owner or his or her agent. The application
shall be on forms provided by the enforcing agency and shall contain all
the information required thereby.
d. When a building or structure is entitled thereto, the Construction
Official shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy within ten (10)
business days after written application therefor. The certificate shall
certify the purpose for which the building or structure may be used in
its several parts. The certificate of occupancy shall specify the use
group, in accordance with the provisions of the building subcode; the
fire grading, as defined in the building subcode; the maximum live load
on all floors, as prescribed in the building subcode; the occupancy load
in the building and all parts thereof as defined in the building subcode;
and any special stipulations and conditions of the construction permit.
The Construction Official shall affix his or her signature thereto and
shall thereby certify that the building or structure has been approved
for occupancy by all applicable subcode officials in accordance with the
provisions of Part II of the regulations.
e. No temporary or final certificate of occupancy shall be granted until all
required utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, electric and
gas, are installed and in service.
§ 14-1.5 EDISON CODE § 14-1.6
AO:520
f. The enforcing agency may revoke a certificate of occupancy whenever a
condition of a certificate has been violated.
g. Time Limit. The provisions of this section do not preclude periodic
certification pursuant to other applicable laws and ordinances.
h. Certificates of occupancy shall be conditioned upon the following:
1. That the completed project meets the conditions of the
construction permit and the approved drawings, including all
amendments and all prior approvals;
2. That all required fees have been paid in full;
3. That all necessary inspections have been completed and that the
completed project meets the requirements of the regulations;
4. That all violations have been corrected and that any assessed
penalties have been paid;
5. That all protective devices and equipment required to be installed
by the regulations will continue to be operational as required by
the regulations.
i. A certificate of occupancy issued by the Construction Official shall be
required prior to the occupancy of any building, structure or dwelling
for which site plan or subdivision approval has been given. No final
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all improvements, as
shown on the applicant's site plan(s) or subdivision plan(s), and as
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board, are completed in
their entirety. In addition, no final certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until the required performance guaranties are posted.
j. Issuance of Certificates of Occupancy.
1. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
Construction Official only when all of the following conditions exist:
(a) The building, structure or dwelling for which occupancy is
desired has met all requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code, the Township Health regulations and the Township
Division of Engineering requirements and all required
inspections have been made and approved;
(b) The only remaining items not completed in accordance with
the approved drawings are landscaping, sidewalk, final street
surfacing and striping;
(c) A certified check shall be deposited with the Township Clerk in
an amount to cover the cost of unfinished items. The sum to be
deposited shall be determined by the Township Engineer or his
or her designee.
§ 14-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.6
AO:521
2. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for not more
than six (6) months. A final certificate of occupancy shall be issued
when all work has been satisfactorily completed. Application may
be made to the Township Engineer or his or her designee for the
retaining of all moneys deposited for completion of unfinished
items as condition precedent to the issuance of a temporary
certificate of occupancy.
k. Certificate of Continued Occupancy.
1. No building or structure shall be occupied or used in whole or part
unless and until a certificate of continued occupancy has been
issued by the enforcing agency, subject to the provisions of
paragraph k, 7 of subsection 14-1.6. The enforcing agency shall not
issue such certificate unless he determines, after inspection, that
there are no violations of any applicable laws, ordinances or orders
pending at the time of issuing the certificate. The certificate shall
be issued upon written application by the owner or his authorized
agent.
2. A certificate of continued occupancy shall be applied for and
obtained prior to the use or occupancy of the whole or any part of
any building undergoing a change in ownership or a change of
occupancy. Upon receiving an application for a certificate of
continued occupancy, the enforcing agency shall make an
inspection of the building or part thereof for which the certificate is
requested and shall forthwith issue the certificate of continued
occupancy if the use and occupancy thereof shall be in conformity
with the Code of the Township of Edison or other applicable
ordinances of the Township and if the building is safe and does not
constitute a nuisance or hazard likely to result in injuries to
persons or damages to property; in case the enforcing agency shall
decline to issue a certificate of continued occupancy, his reasons
for doing so shall be stated to the applicant, and a written
statement thereof shall be transmitted to the applicant on request.
3. A certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest who shall be held
responsible for any violations on the premises. A record of all
certificates shall be kept on file by the enforcing agency, and copies
shall be furnished to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the building affected.
4. A fee of one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars shall be charged and
paid to the Township for each original certificate of continued
occupancy.
5. Temporary Certificate of Continued Occupancy. If, in the opinion of
the enforcing agency, a time period is required to conform with the
requirements as set forth in the inspection of said structure or
dwelling, a temporary certificate of continued occupancy may be
§ 14-1.6 EDISON CODE § 14-1.6
AO:522
§ 14-1.7. Construction Standards. [1999 Code § 15.04.080]
The construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use,
location and occupancy of all buildings and structures and their service
equipment in Edison Township, Middlesex County, shall be performed in
compliance with the regulations as filed with the Municipal Clerk.
issued by the Construction Official for a period of no less than
thirty (30) days nor more than one hundred twenty (120) days. In
addition to the fee for a continuing occupancy certificate, the fee
for a temporary certificate shall be fifty ($50.00) dollars.
6. Any owner-occupant of a building, structure or premises, or any
architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person employed in
connection therewith, who violates this section or assists in the
commission of such violation shall be subject to the penalty set
forth in Chapter I, Section 1-5 and the Act.
7. A certificate of continued occupancy shall not be required for any
building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy has been
obtained pursuant to paragraphs a through i, subsection 14-1.6,
within the six (6) months prior to undergoing a change in
ownership or change in occupancy; provided, however, that the
continued validity of the certificate of occupancy within the six (6)
month period shall be contingent upon the maintenance of the level
of code compliance existing at the time of the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy and upon compliance with any orders
issued by the enforcing agency.
8. A certificate of continued occupancy shall not be required for any
building or structure undergoing a change in ownership or change
in occupancy where the new owner or occupant certifies that the
building or structure will be vacated and demolished. For purposes
of this section, a new owner or occupant must provide evidence to
the enforcing agency that such person or persons has or have a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the entire building or structure
and must submit an affidavit of the owner or occupants having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the entire building or structure
that such building or structure has been vacated as of the date of
submission and will be demolished within a six (6) month period
from the date of submission. The enforcing agency in receipt of
such submission shall be entitled to rely upon such submission and
shall not be required to issue a certificate of continued occupancy.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the building or structure the
subject of this paragraph k, 8 of subsection 14-1.6 shall not be
occupied or used in whole or in part for any reason unless or until a
certificate of continued occupancy has been issued by the enforcing
agency.
§ 14-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.8
AO:523
§ 14-1.8. Appeals. [1999 Code § 15.04.090]
Appeals from the decisions of the enforcing agency shall be to the
Middlesex County Board of Construction Appeals.
§ 14-1.9. (Reserved)
§ 14-1.10. Fees. [1999 Code § 15.04.100; Ord. No. O.1643-2008§ 1;
Ord. No. O.1846-2013; Ord. No. O.1850-2013; Ord. No.
O.1902-2015]
a. Terms. Unless defined herein, all terms shall have the meaning ascribed
in the State Uniform Construction Code, or as commonly understood in
the construction industry, unless the context indicates a different
meaning:
Commercial shall mean all other Use Groups which are not an R-5 Use
Group, including but not limited to: A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E, F-1,
F-2, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, S-1,
S-2 & U.
Residential shall mean Use Group R-5 only.
b. Collection of Fees. All fees required for plan review and for the issuance
of any permit or certificate shall be collected prior to the issuance of the
permit or certificate. Fees shall be computed in accordance with the
requirements and standards set forth in the State Uniform Construction
Code and in accordance with the following fee schedule.
c. Plan Review Fee. Twenty percent (20%) of the initial, aggregate
construction permit fee (described below) shall be deemed to be the
plan review fee, which portion shall not be refundable. The subsequent
review of revised plans shall incur additional plan review fee(s), as
provided for herein.
d. Construction Permit. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum
of the subcode fees listed herein:
1. Building Subcode Fees. The fees for the Building Subcode shall be
as follows:
New construction based on volume:
• All Use Groups (other than large, open volume buildings):
$.035/cubic foot
• Large, open volume buildings (such as barns, silos,
greenhouses, warehouses/ distribution centers, and other
agricultural, recreational and storage-use buildings): $.0225/
cubic foot
§ 14-1.8 EDISON CODE § 14-1.10
AO:524
DCA fee for new construction: Per the State Uniform
Construction Code
Alteration, Minor Work, Reconstruction, Renovation, Repair or
work that cubic volume cannot be calculated. Fee based on cost
of construction.
Use Group R-5: $25.00/$1,000.00
All Other Groups: $35.00/$1,000.00
DCA Fee Alterations: Per the State Uniform
Construction Code
Plan Review (revised plans): 20% of initial building fee
(non-refundable)
Updates: 20% of Building Technical
Subcode Permit
Antennas, dish, etc:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $250.00
Asbestos Abatement:
All Groups: $250.00
Certificate of Occupancy:
Use Group R-5: $100.00
All Other Groups: $200.00
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy
All Groups: $30.00
Certificate of Occupancy Temporary Structure:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $150.00
Certificate of Occupancy Temporary Trailer:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $150.00
Change of Contractor:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups $150.00
Chimney Liner: $75.00
Continuing Certificate of Occupancy:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $150.00
Change of Use: Review $600.00
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.10
AO:525
Demolition: Building/Structure
Use Group R-5: $500.00
All Other Groups: $3,000.00
Demolition: Deck, Pool, Shed
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $150.00
Fences over 6' or Pool Barriers: Alteration Fee
Use Group R-5: $20.00/$1,000.00 cost of
work
All Other Groups: $35.00/$1,000.00 cost of
work
Fireplace/stove:
Use Group R-5: $100.00
All Other Groups: $250.00
Minimum Fee:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $150.00
Pools, Above Ground:
Use Group R-5: $100.00
All Other Groups: $200.00
Pools, Inground:
Use Group R-5: $250.00
All Other Groups: $500.00
Signs: All Use Groups $3.50/sq. ft.
Temporary Structure:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $250.00
Temporary Trailer:
Use Group R-5: $75.00
All Other Groups: $250.00
Variation:
Use Group R-5: $250.00
All Other Groups: $500.00
2. Plumbing Subcode Fees. The fees for the Plumbing Subcode shall
be as follows:
§ 14-1.10 EDISON CODE § 14-1.10
AO:526
Equipment:
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
A/C Unit $75.00 $125.00
Air Test $75.00 $125.00
Back Flow Preventer $75.00 $125.00
Back Flow Preventer Test $75.00 $125.00
Back Water Value $75.00 $125.00
Boiler $75.00 $125.00
Cooling Tower $75.00 $125.00
Evaporator $75.00 $125.00
Fuel Piping $75.00 $125.00
Fuel Tank $75.00 $125.00
Gas Appliance $75.00 $125.00
Gas Equipment $75.00 $125.00
Gas Dryer $75.00 $125.00
Gas Piping $75.00 $125.00
Gas Range $75.00 $125.00
Generator $75.00 $125.00
Grease Trap $75.00 $125.00
Interceptor/Separator $75.00 $125.00
Lawn Sprinkler $75.00 $125.00
LP Tank $75.00 $125.00
Medical Gas Piping $75.00 $125.00
Pool Heater $75.00 $125.00
Pressure Test $75.00 $125.00
Radiant Heat $75.00 $125.00
Refrigeration Unit $75.00 $125.00
Removal/Capping of
Equipment
$75.00 $125.00
Rooftop Unit $75.00 $125.00
Sewer $75.00 $125.00
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.10
AO:527
Equipment:
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
Sewer Cap $75.00 $125.00
Sewer Ejector $75.00 $125.00
Solar System $75.00 $125.00
Sump Pump $75.00 $125.00
Washing Machine $75.00 $125.00
Water Heater $75.00 $125.00
Water Cap $75.00 $125.00
Water Service $75.00 $125.00
Water Softener $75.00 $125.00
Similar Equipment or
Devices
$75.00 $125.00
Fuel fired Appliance
Venting (Existing) R-3,
R-4 and R-5
$20.00 —
Fixtures:
Area Drain $20.00 $30.00
Bath Tub $20.00 $30.00
Condensate $20.00 $30.00
Drinking Fountain $20.00 $30.00
Dishwasher $20.00 $30.00
Floor Drain $20.00 $30.00
Garbage Disposal $20.00 $30.00
Hose Bib/Hydrant $20.00 $30.00
Humidifier $20.00 $30.00
Icemaker $20.00 $30.00
Indirect Waste
Connection
$20.00 $30.00
Lavatory $20.00 $30.00
Medical Gas Point $20.00 $30.00
Pot Filler $20.00 $30.00
§ 14-1.10 EDISON CODE § 14-1.10
AO:528
Equipment:
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
Removal/Capping of
fixtures
$20.00 $30.00
Roof Drain $20.00 $30.00
Shower $20.00 $30.00
Sink $20.00 $30.00
Stack $20.00 $30.00
Trap Primer $20.00 $30.00
Urinal/Bidet $20.00 $30.00
Water Closet $20.00 $30.00
Water Filter $20.00 $30.00
Similar fixture or Devices $20.00 $30.00
CCO Inspection $75.00 $150.00
Change of Contractor $75.00 $150.00
Change of Use Review $600.00 $600.00
Minimum Fee $75.00 $150.00
Plan Review (revised plans): 20% of plumbing permit fee (nonrefundable)
Variation $250.00 $500.00
3. Electrical Subcode Fees. The fees for the Electrical Subcode shall
be as follows:
Devices
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
1-10 Count $75.00 $100.00
11-50 $100.00 $150.00
51-75 $125.00 $175.00
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.10
AO:529
Devices
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
76-100 $150.00 $200.00
101-125 $175.00 $225.00
126-150 $200.00 $250.00
151-175 $225.00 $275.00
176-200 $250.00 $300.00
201-225 $275.00 $325.00
226-250 $300.00 $350.00
251-275 $325.00 $375.00
276-300 $350.00 $400.00
301-325 $375.00 $425.00
326-350 $400.00 $450.00
351-375 $425.00 $475.00
376-400 $450.00 $500.00
401-425 $475.00 $525.00
426-450 $500.00 $550.00
451-475 $525.00 $575.00
476-500 $550.00 $600.00
Add $25.00 per each group of 25 Devices over 501 Count.
Electrical Services:
Up to 100 AMPS $100.00 $125.00
101-200 AMP $125.00 $150.00
201-300 AMP $150.00 $200.00
301-400 AMP $200.00 $300.00
401-800 AMP $300.00 $400.00
Over 800 AMP Add $100.00 per each additional 100
AMPS, or fraction thereof.
Subpanels, Disconnects and Control Panels:
Up to 100 AMPS $50.00 $100.00
101-200 AMP $75.00 $125.00
§ 14-1.10 EDISON CODE § 14-1.10
AO:530
Devices
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
Over 200 AMP Add $25.00 per each 100 AMPS, or
fraction thereof.
Feeders:
Relocate, Replace, or Add
New
$50.00 $75.00
Pools:
Above Ground $75.00 $125.00
Inground $150.00 $250.00
Over 1,200 sq. ft. $250.00 $500.00
Bonding $75.00 $125.00
Annual Pool Inspection
One Pool $200.00 $200.00
Additional Pool $100.00 $100.00
Spa/Hot Tub $100.00 $150.00
Fish Pond $100.00 $150.00
Hydro Tub $75.00 $150.00
Reintroduction of
Service
$75.00 $150.00
Cubicles/Workstations N/A $10.00 Each
Transformers
Up to 10 KVA $75.00 $100.00
11-45 KVA $100.00 $125.00
46-112.5 KVA $200.00
113-500 KVA $500.00
Add $50.00 for each 100 KVA or fraction thereof over 500 KVA.
Motors All Use
Groups
Less than 1 HP $10.00
1-5 HP $40.00
6-25 HP $75.00
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.10
AO:531
Devices
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
26-50 HP $100.00
51-100 HP $150.00
Add $ 50.00 for each 50 HP or fraction thereof over 100 HP.
Generators Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not limited
to: A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4,
A-5, B, E, F-1, F-2, H-1,
H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1,
I-2, I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
Up to 10 KW $75.00 $100.00
11-25 KW $100.00 $150.00
26-50 KW $150.00 $250.00
51-100 KW $200.00 $300.00
101-300 KW $500.00
Add $100.00 for each 100 KW or fraction thereof over 300 KW.
Light Poles $50.00 each $75.00 each
Equipment
Boilers/Furnace $75.00 $125.00
Radon Fan $75.00 $125.00
HVAC CU $75.00 $125.00
Kitchen Appliances (Fixed
in Place)
$75.00 $125.00
Signs (each) $75.00 $75.00
Variation $250.00 $500.00
Minimum Fee $75.00 $150.00
CCO (UCC) Inspection $75.00 $150.00
Change of Contractor $75.00 $150.00
Update Minimum Fee $75.00 $150.00
§ 14-1.10 EDISON CODE § 14-1.10
AO:532
Devices
Use Group
R-5
All Other Groups,
including but not
limited to: A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E,
F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2,
H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2,
I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U
Fees for voltages in excess of 600 Volts AC shall be $50.00 per
$1,000.00 of Estimated Job Costs (with a minimum fee of
$500.00).
For other items not listed, the fee shall be $50.00 per $1,000.00
of Estimated Job Costs.
Solar Systems
1-50 KW $75.00 $125.00
51-100 KW $250.00
Over 101 KW $500.00
(All Related Equipment to be itemized for fees.)
Alarm Systems (Burglar, Fire, CCTV, Access, etc.)
1-15 DEVICES $50.00 $75.00
Add $ 5.00 for each additional 5 devices or fraction thereof over
15.
Alarm Panels $40.00 $50.00
Irrigation Systems $75.00 $100.00
Change of Use Review $600.00
Plan Review (revised plans): 20% of electrical permit fee (nonrefundable)
4. Fire Subcode Fees. The fee for the Fire Subcode shall be as follows:
Fee
Appliance Venting $75.00
Automatic Fire Alarm System $150.00
Boiler $75.00
Central Station Alarm $150.00
Chimney/Chimney liner $75.00
Exhaust System (gas, vapor &
smoke)
$125.00
Elevator Recall $150.00
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.10
AO:533
Fee
Fire Alarm Devices (horn, strobes, pull stations (& signaling
devices)
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Fire Dept Connection $125.00
Fire Flow Test $125.00
Fire Pump $300.00
Fire Protection Backflow
Preventor
$150.00
Fireplace $75.00
Foam Fire Suppression System $150.00
Furnace $75.00
Fuel Piping & Valve $150.00
Fuel Dispenser $150.00
Gas Fire Appliance $75.00
Generator $75.00
Hood Exhaust System
Type 1 $125.00
Type 2 $125.00
Hyraulically Designed System
Calculations
$75.00
Incinerator/crematorium $400.00
Main Sprinkler Alarm Valve
Replacement
$75.00
Manual Fire Alarm System $75.00
Post Indicator Control Valve
(PIV Valve)
$75.00
Pre-Engineered Fire
Suppression System
$125.00
Range Hood Extinguishing
System - Wet Chemical $125.00
Dry Chemical $125.00
CO2 Suppression $125.00
Security Locks for fire system $75.00
§ 14-1.10 EDISON CODE § 14-1.10
AO:534
Fee
Shear Valves per dispenser $150.00
Site Fire Protection
Underground & Mains
$200.00
Smoke Control/Removal System $75.00
Smoke/Fire Damper $75.00
Duct Smoke Detector
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Residential Smoke Detector
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Residential CO Detector
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Commercial CO Detector
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Commercial Smoke Detector
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Flame or Beam Smoke Detector
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Heat Detector
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.10
AO:535
Fee
1-5 $75.00
6-20 $100.00
Over 20 $150.00 (per lot of 20 or
fraction thereof)
Sprinkler
1-20 heads $150.00
21-100 heads $200.00
101-400 heads $400.00
401-600 heads $600.00
Each add'l head over 600 $5.00
Sprinkler Riser $100.00
Spray Booth $250.00
Standpipe Riser $225.00
Tank Installation/Removal/Abandonment
0-500 $100.00
501-1000 $200.00
1001-2000 $300.00
2001-5000 $400.00
5001-10,000 $500.00
10,001-20,000 $600.00
20,001-50,000 $700.00
50,001-and up $1,000.00
Vapor Recovery System $150.00
Water Heater $75.00
Water Storage Tank for Fire
Protection System
$400.00
Witnessing of Test $300.00
Plan Review of Emergency
Lights, Exit Signs (each five or
part of)
$75.00
Minimum Fee:
R-5 $75.00
All Other Groups $150.00
Variations
R-5 $150.00
§ 14-1.10 EDISON CODE § 14-1.10
AO:536
§ 14-1.11. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 15.04.110]
Fee
All Other Groups $500.00
Updates: 20% of Fire Subcode fee or fee listed.
Plan Review (revised plans): 20% of Fire Subcode fee (nonrefundable)
Continuing Certificate of Occupancy
Use Group R-5 $75.00
All Other Groups $150.00
Change of Contractor
Use Group R-5 $75.00
All Other Groups $150.00
Change of Use Review $600.00
Systems and Devices not listed above, fee shall be based on cost of
Alteration/Installation at $20.00/$1,000.00 with a minimum fee of
$75.00 for R-5 and $35.00/$1,000 with a minimum fee of $150.00
for all other Use Groups, including but not limited to: A-1, A-2, A-3,
A-4, A-5, B, E, F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, M,
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 & U.
e. Waiver of Fees.
Municipal fee waivers by local ordinance related to Senior Residents,
Volunteers, Disabled Residents and Disaster related permits shall be for
work limited to repairs, minor work and alterations only. New work fees
shall not be fee exempt.
a. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, who:
1. Violates any of the provisions of this section, the Act or the
regulations;
2. Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a
construction permit;
3. Fails to comply with any order issued by the enforcing agency or
the Department; or
4. Makes a false or misleading written statement, or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to the enforcing agency or the Department; shall be
subject to a penalty of not more than two thousand ($2,000.00)
dollars.
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.11
AO:537
b. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to any premises,
building or structure to an inspector lawfully authorized to inspect any
such premises, building or structure pursuant to this section, the Act or
the regulations, or who unreasonably interferes with such an
inspection, shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars.
c. With respect to paragraph a3 above, a person shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a stopconstruction
order validly issued by the enforcing agency or the
Department and for each week that he or she fails to comply with any
other order validly issued by the enforcing agency or the Department.
With respect to subsection paragraph a1 and a4, a person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each violation of any provisions of this
section, the Act or the regulations and for each false or misleading
written statement or omission of required information or statement
made in any application request for approval to the enforcing agency or
the Department. With respect to paragraph a2, a person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each violation of conditions of a construction
permit.
d. No such penalty shall be assessed except upon notice of violation and
orders to terminate, and upon the expiration of the time period
delineated in the notice, except that in the case of a false or misleading
statement pursuant to paragraph a4, an order to pay a penalty may be
issued immediately upon the discovery of a violation.
e. The Construction Official may separately serve a notice of penalty
assessment and an order to pay a penalty whenever he or she shall not
have done so in the original notice and orders.
f. The penalties pursuant to this section may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.). Jurisdiction to enforce such penalties is conferred upon Judges
of the Municipal Court in addition to the courts specified by N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq. Suit may be brought by a municipality or the State of
New Jersey. Payment of a money judgment pursuant hereto shall be
remitted, in the case of a suit brought by a municipality, to the
municipal treasurer and, in the case of a suit brought by the State of
New Jersey, to the State Treasurer.
g. The Construction Official may assess a monetary penalty whenever
such shall be likely to assist in bringing about compliance.
h. If the construction of a structure or building is being undertaken
contrary to the provisions of this section, the Act or the regulations, or
other applicable laws or ordinances, the enforcing agency may issue a
stop-construction order, in writing, which shall state the reasons for
such order and the conditions upon which construction may be resumed
and which shall be given to the owner or the holder of the construction
permit or to the person performing the construction. If the person doing
§ 14-1.11 EDISON CODE § 14-1.11
AO:538
§ 14-1.12. Waiver of Building Permit Fees. [1999 Code § 15.04.120]
§ 14-2. SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT.
§ 14-2.1. Intent; Administration. [Ord. No. O.1523-2006§ 15.50.010]
The Municipal Council declares its intent to regulate the modification and/
or improvements of any site within the Township of Edison. The Township
Engineer is therefore directed to determine whether changes to a site will
be covered under this section and to promulgate rules and regulations to
provide that site modifications and improvements are in conformance with
approved plans and have no adverse impacts upon other properties.
the construction is not known or cannot be located with reasonable
effort, the notice may be delivered to the person in charge of, or
apparently in charge of, the construction. It is unlawful to continue,
or cause or allow to be continued, the construction of a building or
structure in violation of a stop-construction order, except with the
permission of the enforcing agency to abate a dangerous condition or
remove a violation, or except by court order.
a. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing structure or any of the facilities
contained therein.
b. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his or her own living unit.
c. Disabled person means a person who has a total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of this
State who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social Security Act (42
USC Section 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45
USC Section 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a sixty (60%) percent
disability or higher pursuant to any Federal law administered by the
United States Veterans Act. For purposes of this paragraph, "blindness"
means central visual activity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the
use of a corrective lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in
the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than twenty (20°) degrees shall be
considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
§ 14-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.2
AO:539
§ 14-2.2. Site Improvement Permit Required. [Ord. No.
O.1523-2006§ 15.50.020]
Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or
improvement to any existing structure, proposed structure or to any lands
situated within the Township, which includes but is not limited to the
installation or modification of any stormwater and sanitary sewer facility,
grading change, paving, curbing, area lighting, landscaping and signage, a
site improvement permit shall be obtained from the Township Engineer.
§ 14-2.3. Site Improvement Permit Waiver. [Ord. No.
O.1523-2006§ 15.50.030]
The Township Engineer is hereby empowered to waive the requirements
outlined under this section if, in the Township Engineer's opinion, the
construction modification or improvement being proposed is de minimus.
§ 14-2.4. Township Engineer Authorized to Promulgate Rules. [Ord.
No. O.1523-2006§ 15.50.040]
The Township Engineer is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to implement the legislative intent of this section.
§ 14-2.5. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No.
O.1523-2006§ 15.50.050]
A certificate of occupancy will not be issued by the Construction Official
until a Certificate of Site Occupancy is received by the Construction Official
from the Township Engineer.
§ 14-2.6. Application Procedure. [Ord. No. O.1523-2006§ 15.50.060]
Application for a site improvement permit must be made at the office of the
Township Engineer. Upon review of a completed application, the Township
Engineer will, within seven (7) days, either approve or deny said permit. If
said permit is approved, work may then, and only then, commence. If said
permit is denied, the Township Engineer will supply supporting information
and list all deficiencies.
§ 14-2.7. Fees. [Ord. No. O.1523-2006§ 15.50.070]
The following fees will cover the costs incurred for plan review, periodic site
inspection, final site inspection and the issuance of the final site inspection
approval form by the Township Engineer to the Construction Official.
a. Plot grading plan—swimming pool: $100.00 each.
b. Plot grading plan—retaining wall $100.00 each.
c. Plot grading plan—residential addition, or detached garage: $200.00
each.
§ 14-2.2 EDISON CODE § 14-2.7
AO:540
§ 14-2.8. Inspection and Tests. [Ord. No. O.1523-2006§ 15.50.080]
All site improvements and/or modifications shall be inspected during the
time of their occurrence by the Township Engineer or a duly authorized
representative. A set of approved plans relative to the work being done must
be made available on site for inspection by any authorized Township official.
No underground installation shall be covered or backfilled until inspected
and approved. If backfilling or covering occurs prior to inspection, said
installation must either be uncovered or excavated for inspection or
inspected by some alternative means acceptable to the Township Engineer.
§ 14-2.9. Inspection Not Acceptance. [Ord. No.
O.1523-2006§ 15.50.090]
Inspection of any work by the Township Engineer or a duly authorized
representative shall not be considered to be final acceptance or rejection of
the work, but shall only be considered to be a determination of whether or
not the specific work involved was being done in accordance with Township
specifications or other required standards at the time of inspection. Any
damage to such work or other unforeseen circumstances, such as the effect
of the weather, other construction, changing conditions, settlement, etc.,
between the time of installation and the time of final inspection by the
Township Engineer or a duly authorized representative shall be the full
responsibility of the contractor/developer to remedy the condition prior to
acceptance.
§ 14-2.10. Approval by Township Engineer. [Ord. No.
O.1523-2006§ 15.50.100]
When a final inspection has been completed, and site improvements deemed
acceptable, the Township Engineer shall approve the subject site and issue
a certificate of site occupancy, if required.
§ 14-2.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No.
O.1523-2006§ 15.50.110]
d. Plot grading plan—new residential (1-family, or 2-family) dwelling:
$500.00.
e. Commercial/Industrial.
*NOTE: Fees to be waived if a performance guarantee is required,
and the performance guarantee and inspection fees are posted by the
owner.
1. Up to 10,000 square feet of lot area: $300.00.*
2. Ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area and over: $400.00.*
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section
1-5.
§ 14-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.11
AO:541
§ 14-3. (RESERVED)
§ 14-4. TENANT AND HOME BUYER PROTECTION.
§ 14-4.1. Short Title. [1999 Code § 5.64.010]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Tenant's and Home
Buyer's Protection Code of the Township of Edison."
§ 14-4.2. Regulatory Agency. [1999 Code § 5.64.020]
This section shall be administered, regulated and enforced by the
Construction Official and the Zoning Officer of the Township. The
Construction Official and the Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section.
§ 14-4.3. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.64.030]
As used in this section:
LOT — Means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or
portions by description, as on a subdivision of record or survey map or by
metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Means all subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions; provided, however, that for the purposes of this section, all
residential development to be constructed pursuant to the provisions of the
planned unit development ordinance of the Township shall be considered
"major subdivisions."
OFFICIAL MAP — Means a map adopted in accordance with the Official
Map and Building Permit Act, Chapter 434 of the Laws of 1953, or any prior
act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be conclusive
with respect to the locations and width of the streets, public parks and
playgrounds and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
OWNER — Means any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land subdivided and to be sold under this section of Chapter XXXVI,
Subdivision.
PLOT — Means the map or other drawing of a subdivision.
SALES MAP — Means the map, of sufficient accuracy, to be used by the
owner for the purpose of sale of the lots within the subdivision.
STREET — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing State, County or municipal
roadway or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant
b. Failure to obtain the proper permit, make satisfactory improvements, as
determined by the Township Engineer, or pay the proper permit fee
shall be considered a violation and shall be punishable under this
section.
§ 14-2.11 EDISON CODE § 14-4.3
AO:542
to law or approved by official action or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer, and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street.
SUBDIVIDER — Means any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity proceeding under
Chapter XXXVI, Subdivision, to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for
himself or herself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — Means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two (2) or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, except that
the following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions; provided,
however, that no new streets or roads are involved: the division of land
for any purpose where the resulting parcels are three (3) acres or greater
in size; the division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
divisions of property upon court order; or the division of land fronting
on presently existing streets or on filed and approved maps or on the
present Township Tax Map. Subdivision also includes resubdivision and,
where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or
to the lands or territory divided; provided, however, for the purposes of this
section, that all residential development to be constructed pursuant to the
provisions of the planned unit development regulations shall be considered
a "subdivision."
§ 14-4.4. Sales Office Requirements. [1999 Code § 5.64.040]
§ 14-4.5. Sales Map Requirements. [1999 Code § 5.64.050]
a. Any owner or seller of land within the Township who has obtained a
preliminary approval to subdivide the land into ten (10) or more
contiguous plots or tracts to construct homes thereon or has obtained
an approval to develop his or her land under the so-called land unit
development concept shall, prior to the sale or the lots or homes,
maintain a sales office, either within or without the Township.
b. The sales office shall have prominently displayed therein the following:
1. A sales map in such place in the office that the same may be
observed and reviewed by any persons calling at the office;
2. A copy, on standard legal-size paper, in type or clear print, of any
proposed protective covenants to be applied to all or any portion of
the lands within the subdivision.
a. The sales map shall be based on the official tax map information or
some other similarly accurate base at a scale of not less than one
hundred (100) feet to the inch throughout the map, which scale shall be
clearly indicated thereon and shall be consistent in all directions shown
thereon. The map shall show the owner's approved subdivision and all
§ 14-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-4.5
AO:543
lands contiguous thereto for a distance of one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet within or without the Township.
b. The sales map shall clearly show and include, for the area within one
thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the subdivision, the following
information:
1. The location of proposed streets and the layout of proposed lots
within the subdivision;
2. The location of all State, County and municipal roads in existence
on the date of the final approval of the subdivision;
3. The location of all State, County and municipal roads proposed and
approved by any governmental agency having jurisdiction to
establish such roads. The location of all such roads shall be as
shown on the official master plan adopted by the appropriate
agency of the State, County or municipality;
4. The location of all existing structures and wooded areas within the
subdivision and for a distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500)
feet beyond the boundaries of the subdivision;
5. A designation of the zoning district to be subdivided and the zoning
district of all contiguous property within a distance of one thousand
five hundred (1,500) feet;
6. The location of all railroads and railroad rights-of-way, airports and
airport runways, overhead easements for the transmission of power
or otherwise and rights-of-way for public utilities and pipelines. For
the purpose of this section, "pipeline" means any conduit through
which natural gas, petroleum or any of their products is conveyed
or intended to be conveyed. The definition of "pipeline" shall
include the compressor plants and other facilities integrated with
pipeline operations;
7. The location of all public or private utility plants and the location of
all sanitary landfill operations in existence or proposed;
8. The location of all schools, parks, playgrounds and public buildings;
9. The location of all streams, ponds and watercourses;
10. The location and description of any use approved by the Board of
Adjustment or other governmental agency having jurisdiction
during the previous three (3) years. The secretary of the Board of
Adjustment shall maintain a list of all variances granted during the
previous three (3) years and shall make the list available to the
Construction Official and the Zoning Officer;
11. The location of all drainage ditches within the area shown on the
sales map;
§ 14-4.5 EDISON CODE § 14-4.5
AO:544
§ 14-4.6. Duties of Construction Official and Zoning Officer. [1999
Code § 5.64.060]
§ 14-4.7. Application for Sales Map Information; Fee. [1999 Code
§ 5.64.070]
The applicant referred to in subsection 14-4.6a shall make his or her
application to the Construction Official and the Zoning Officer for that
purpose and shall pay over as an application fee the sum of five hundred
($500.00) dollars to compensate the Township for expenses incident to
marshalling the information requested, and as part of the application the
applicant shall acknowledge that he or she thereby waives any claim or
cause of action, either in law or in equity, against the Township or any of its
agents or employees for any error, omission or oversight in the information
12. The location of all flood hazard zones;
13. The location of any Federal or State-designated super fund sites.
c. The information required by paragraphs b4, b9, and b11 above may be
shown schematically or nondimensionally.
d. Any owner or seller of land referred to in subsection 14-4.4a may, as an
alternative to the requirements imposed by paragraph a., prepare an
aerial photograph covering the same geographical areas as set forth in
paragraph a., properly labeled so as to fairly and accurately designate
the information required by paragraph b.
a. The information to be depicted on the sales map shall be obtained from
the Construction Official and the Zoning Officer, who shall provide the
information to the applicant within thirty (30) days after a request is
made. The Construction Official and the Zoning Officer shall provide
such information as may be required by the applicant to prepare the
sales map, and, after a request for the same, the information so
provided shall be deemed complete for the purposes of complying with
the requirements of this section.
b. The Construction Official and the Zoning Officer shall review each sales
map displayed pursuant to the terms of this section not less than once
every six (6) months and shall provide such additional information as
they may deem necessary to maintain the sales map in an up-to-date
condition. The Construction Official and the Zoning Officer may, from
time to time as they deem necessary, direct the owner or seller to
display additional information on the sales map so that the same may be
maintained in an up-to-date condition. The information provided by the
Construction Official and the Zoning Officer to the owner or seller shall
be included on the sales map within thirty (30) days of the receipt of
such order from the Construction Official and the Zoning Officer. The
information provided by the Construction Official and the Zoning
Officer shall be deemed complete for the purposes of compliance with
the terms of this section.
§ 14-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-4.7
AO:545
supplied and shall further agree through his or her application to place
as a legend on the sales map referred to in subsection 14-4.6a that he or
she is solely responsible for that information contained or depicted thereon
and that the Township bears no responsibility for any error, omission or
inaccuracy contained in or designated on the sales map and for any defects
which may occur in connection with any construction related to the
development.
§ 14-4.8. Certificate of Compliance. [1999 Code § 5.64.080]
§ 14-4.9. Rental Property. [1999 Code § 5.64.090]
Any person offering for rental any residential property, excepting dwellings
with less than four (4) rental units, shall have available for inspection by
prospective tenants a map as described in subsection 14-4.5b.
§ 14-4.10. Notification of Pipeline Location. [1999 Code § 5.64.100]
Any person offering for sale any newly constructed residence not otherwise
covered by this section shall, at the time he or she obtains a certificate of
occupancy, certify that he or she has informed the purchaser of the property
of the location of any pipeline within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet
of the residence to be sold.
§ 14-4.11. Misrepresentation of Sale of a Single-Family Home.
[1999 Code § 5.64.110]
a. At or before the execution of the contract of sale for any lot within a
subdivision, the seller shall obtain, on a form approved by the
Construction Official and the Zoning Officer, a certification from the
purchaser that:
1. The sales map was on display and available for inspection on any
occasion of his or her visit to the sales office;
2. He or she had a reasonable opportunity to study and review the
sales map;
3. The owner or seller did not refuse or decline to answer any
questions directed to him or her pertaining to the sales map;
4. The purchaser waives any potential claim or cause of action in law
and equity which he or she may have against the Township as a
result of any error, omission or inaccuracy in the information
supplied by it and for any defects which may occur in connection
with any construction related to the development.
b. The seller shall file the certification mentioned in paragraph a. with the
Construction Official and the Zoning Officer within twenty (20) days of
the closing of title.
§ 14-4.7 EDISON CODE § 14-4.11
AO:546
§ 14-4.12. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.64.120]
a. No owner or his or her agent shall offer for sale a property located in a
single-family residential zone of the Township, and;
1. Represent that the property may be used in a manner not
consistent with the Township's zoning or other ordinances;
2. Represent that the property can be used as a multiple-family
residence when the property is located within a zone where such
use is prohibited;
3. Represent that the property is a prior, nonconforming use unless a
certificate to that effect has been issued by the Zoning Officer of
the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 within one (1) year of
the change in the zoning ordinance which rendered the property
nonconforming and/or an approval has been obtained from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
b. Any owner or his or her agent who offers for sale a multiple-family
residential property located in a single-family zone shall notify any
prospective purchaser, in writing, that the property is being used
contrary to the zoning law of the Township unless:
1. A certificate has been obtained from a Zoning Officer stating that
the property is a legal "prior non-conforming use" in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 issued within one (1) year of the change in
the Township zoning ordinance which rendered the property
nonconforming; or
2. The subject property has received approval, granted by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
a. If any person engages in the sale of lots within a subdivision or rental of
any property, as described herein, without first displaying the sales map
as required herein, the owner of the subdivision shall be subject to a
fine of two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars per day for each day that the
sales map is not displayed as required herein, and each day shall be
deemed a separate violation of this section.
b. The owner of a subdivision who shall fail to file the certification of
compliance as required herein shall be subject to a fine of one hundred
($100.00) dollars for the first violation thereof within the subdivision; a
fine of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for the second violation
within the subdivision; and a fine of two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars
for each violation within the subdivision thereafter.
c. In addition to the foregoing, if any person continuously for a period of
five (5) days or more fails and refuses to comply with the requirements
of this section, the Township may institute and maintain action for
injunctive relief to prohibit the continued sale of lots or rental of units
until compliance with this section is completed.
§ 14-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5
AO:547
§ 14-5. BUILDING IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS.
§ 14-5.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 15.16.010]
The purpose of this section is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers on every building fronting on
any street in the Township and to require disclosure of building layout in
(industrial also) apartment complexes, in order to assist the general public
and emergency services, public and private, in identifying any property in
case of emergency or otherwise.
§ 14-5.2. Applicability. [1999 Code § 15.16.020]
All residential, commercial, industrial or other structures erected or to
be erected within the Township shall display identification numbers as
provided herein and in accordance with specifications provided herein.
§ 14-5.3. Numbering Required. [1999 Code § 15.16.030]
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every structure which now fronts
or which may hereafter front upon any public or private street within the
Township shall, at his or her own expense, within one (1) month after the
adoption and publication of this section, cause the authorized and assigned
number of such structure to be permanently and conspicuously placed in
accordance with the specifications set forth herein.
§ 14-5.4. Numbering Specifications. [1999 Code § 15.16.040]
House or building numbers shall be:
§ 14-5.5. Placement of Numbers. [1999 Code § 15.16.050]
If numbers affixed to the front of the building would not be visible from
the street as required in subsection 14-5.4, requirements of this section are
satisfied if the owner, occupant or lessee shall provide the Arabic numbers,
as required by subsection 14-5.4, upon a post, rod or other type of fixture of
a. In Arabic numerals;
b. A minimum height of three (3) inches, provided that if the structure is
greater than fifty (50) feet from the street, the numerals shall be at least
five (5) inches in height;
c. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the building so
as to be clearly visible from the street;
d. d, Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement,
spacing and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street;
e. At least thirty (30) inches above ground level and so placed that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
§ 14-5 EDISON CODE § 14-5.5
AO:548
substantial nature or a mailbox at or near the road frontage with the same
number affixed thereon and so located upon the same, so that the number
may be conspicuous and visible from the street upon which the building
fronts. When the provisions of this subsection have been complied with, the
owner, occupant or lessee of the house or building shall not be otherwise
obligated to affix Arabic numbers to the house or building and shall be
permitted, at his or her option, to utilize cursive numbers or no numbers at
all upon the house or building.
§ 14-5.6. Assignment of Numbers. [1999 Code § 15.16.060]
House numbers shall be determined by the Tax Assessor of the Township.
Every owner, occupant or lessee of a building constructed in the Township
shall apply to the Tax Assessor if no number has been previously assigned
for an authorized number in accordance with this section.
§ 14-5.7. Garden Apartments and Townhouse Complexes. [1999
Code § 15.16.070]
Garden apartments and townhouse complexes shall provide such building
and apartment numbers as are provided for in the BOCA Code. Failure to so
comply will be a violation of this section.
§ 14-5.8. Plot Plans of Residential and Commercial Complexes.
[1999 Code § 15.16.080]
In any complex of residential or commercial structures composed of three
(3) or more buildings, a plan of the layout of the buildings shall be
prominently posted near the entrance of the complex. The posted plan shall
be clearly labeled, numbered and colored and of sufficient size to facilitate
rapid identification of the location of all structures within the complex.
§ 14-6. REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF UNDERGROUND
PETROLEUM LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
§ 14-6.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. O.1740-2010; Ord. No.
O.1753-2010]
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the residents within the Township of Edison to preserve the quality
and quantity of the Township's groundwater supply. Additionally, requiring
new petroleum liquid storage tanks to be installed above ground will also
facilitate the ability to inspect the tanks to determine if the tank needs
replacement before the tank fails and creates an adverse environmental
impact. This is accomplished by requiring that new petroleum liquid storage
tanks be installed above ground and by promoting the replacement of
underground petroleum liquid storage tanks on residential properties and
the installation and maintenance of above ground petroleum liquid storage
tanks and other fuel sources which do not require tanks such as natural gas.
§ 14-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-6.2
AO:549
§ 14-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1740-2010; Ord. No. O.1753-2010]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABOVE GROUND — Shall mean, when referring to an interior storage tank,
that greater than one hundred (100%) percent of the volumetric capacity of
the storage tank is above the surface of the ground or located in a basement
or crawl space.
PETROLEUM LIQUID — Shall mean oil or petroleum of any kind normally in
liquid form, including but not limited to waste oils and distillation products
such as fuel oil, propane, kerosene, naphtha, gasoline and benzene.
STORAGE TANK — Shall mean any facility used for storing any petroleum
liquid.
UNDERGROUND — Shall mean, when referring to a storage tank, that any
portion of the volumetric capacity of the storage tank is below the surface
of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the ground is
not fully visible for inspection.
§ 14-6.3. Prohibition of Underground Petroleum Liquid Storage
Tanks on Residential Properties. [Ord. No. O.1740-2010; Ord. No.
O.1753-2010]
Commencing on the effective date of this section23 and applied
prospectively, on any property that is in whole or in part used for residential
purposes, the installation of underground petroleum liquid storage tanks
intended for residential fuel oils or other petroleum liquids is prohibited.
Any new or replacement petroleum liquid storage tanks shall be located
above ground which may be located inside or outside of a structure and may
be located in a basement or cellar with sufficient access to allow for routine
inspection of the storage tank.
§ 14-6.4. Waiver of Municipal Permit Fees for Replacement of
Existing Tanks or Installation of a Natural Gas Line. [Ord. No.
O.1740-2010; Ord. No. O.1753-2010]
a. Beginning on the effective date of this section, June 8, 2010, and
continuing for a period of two (2) years, the Township of Edison will
waive any and all applicable municipal permit fees for the replacement
of any existing underground petroleum liquid storage tank with an
above ground petroleum liquid storage tanks or the installation of other
fuel storage sources which do not require tanks such as natural gas, on
any property that is in whole or in part used for residential purposes.
b. The aforementioned waiver of permit fees by the Township of Edison
does not apply to any fees that are required by the State of New Jersey
and/or the Department of Community Affairs.
23.Editor's Note: This subsection was originally adopted by Ord. No. O.1740-2010 adopted
May 12, 2010, and amended by Ord. No. O.1753-2010 adopted on September 22, 2010.
§ 14-6.2 EDISON CODE § 14-6.5
AO:550
§ 14-6.5. Indemnification of the Township. [Ord. No. O.1740-2010;
Ord. No. O.1753-2010]
In no event shall the Township of Edison's regulation of petroleum liquid
storage tanks pursuant to this section constitute a recommendation,
approval, endorsement or warranty of a petroleum liquid storage tank
or other fuel sources which do not require tanks such as natural gas.
The Township shall not thereby be deemed to have acquired any special
expertise with respect to any of the foregoing nor to have acquired or
incurred any special duty, liability or standard of care concerning any of the
foregoing. Accordingly, the Township shall not be responsible for or liable to
any person or entity for any injury to person, property or the environment
caused directly or indirectly by the leaking of any underground or above
ground petroleum liquid storage tanks or other fuel sources which do not
require tanks such as natural gas or by anything else claimed to have been
caused or facilitated by the acts or omissions of the Township in regulating
petroleum liquid storage tanks or undertaking to do so.
Chapter 15
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 15-1. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 15-1.1. Statutory Authority. [1999 Code § 8.32.010]
This section is enacted pursuant to the following New Jersey Statutes:
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2; 40:48-2.13; 40:48-2.14; 40:48-1, Subsection 15; 40:48-2.3
to 40:48-2.12; 40:48-2.12(a) to 40:48-2.12(g); 40:69A-30; and/or N.J.S.A.
2A:42-74 to 2A:42-78 and the general police powers.
§ 15-1.2. Short Title. [1999 Code § 8.32.020]
There is adopted a Property Maintenance Code reading as set out in this
section.
This section shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Township of Edison" and may be referred to in this section in the short form
as "this section."
§ 15-1.3. Findings; Declaration of Policy. [1999 Code § 8.32.030]
It is found, determined and declared that there exist in the Township
structures used for residential and nonresidential use which are or may
become in the future substandard with respect to structure, equipment
or maintenance. It is further found that conditions of the above-described
property, including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of
maintenance and appearance of the exterior of premises, infestation, lack
of essential heating, plumbing, storage of refrigeration equipment, lack of
maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, existence of fire
§ 14-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.3
AO:551
hazards, inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions and
overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare
and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township.
The Edison Township Council further finds and declares that, by reason
of lack of maintenance and the existence of progressive deterioration,
certain properties have the further effect and/or the further potential effect
of creating blighted conditions that, if the same are not curtailed and
removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate
in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and
eliminate the same and that, by reason of timely regulation and restrictions
as herein contained, the growth of depressed areas, slums and blight may
be prevented. It is further found that such prevention will maintain
neighborhood and property values, as well as the desirability and amenities
of residential and nonresidential uses; and it is further found that such
prevention will protect and foster the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 15-1.4. Purpose. [1999 Code § 8.32.040]
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare of citizens and inhabitants of the Township by establishing
minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance, condition and
occupancy of residential and nonresidential premises; to establish minimum
standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and
conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation,
occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners
and operators and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon
occupants; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of
residential and nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the violations
of this section; and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of
premises unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use.
§ 15-1.5. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.32.050; Ord. No. O.1913-2015]
a. All definitions of the BOCA Basic Building Code are included.
b. The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this
section, shall have the respected meanings assigned to them, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context; as used in this
section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Means any vehicle, including a trailer, which
is without a currently valid license plate and is in either a rusted,
wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or an
abandoned condition.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — Means a building or buildings or any
part thereof and the lot or tract of land upon which the building or
buildings are situated, where commercial activity of any kind takes
place. Commercial activity shall include but is not limited to gasoline
service stations; stores for retail sales; liquor stores, taverns and inns;
restaurants, including but not limited to drive-in restaurants, snack
§ 15-1.3 EDISON CODE § 15-1.5
AO:552
bars, hot dog, hamburger or ice cream stands; professional activities,
including but not limited to medical, dental, legal, architectural and
accounting; personal services, including but not limited to real estate,
insurance, barbershops and hairdressers; repair shops of all kinds; and
amusements, including but not limited to movies, skating rinks and
bowling alleys; whether part of a shopping area or not. Commercial
activity shall not include sale of agricultural products produced on the
premises.
DETERIORATION — Means the condition of a building or structure or
part thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DWELLING UNIT — Means a room or group of rooms located within
a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Means any premises or any part thereof
of any building or structure or any part thereof which may be lawfully
viewed by the public or any member thereof.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Means open space on the premises
outside of any building located thereon.
EXTERMINATION — Means the control and elimination of insects,
rodents and vermin.
GARBAGE — Means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food.
(See also refuse and rubbish.)
HABITABLE ROOMS — Means rooms used or designed for use by one
(1) or more persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but
not including bathrooms, water closet compartments, home laundries,
serving and storage pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars,
heater rooms, boiler rooms or utility rooms. Other rooms or spaces that
are not used frequently or for an extended period of time or have less
than fifty (50) square feet of interior floor area shall not be considered
as habitable rooms.
HARBORAGE — Means any condition, man-made or natural, which
affords a breeding place or hiding place for rodents, insects or other
pests.
INFESTATION — Means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard either to
the occupants of the premises and/or to surrounding properties and/or
residents.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Means any building containing one (1) or more
dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof
devoted to nondwelling uses or as a motel.
§ 15-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.5
AO:553
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Means any building or structure and any land
appurtenant thereto, and any portion thereof, in which three (3) or
more units of dwelling space are occupied or intended to be occupied
by three (3) or more persons living independently of each other,
provided that motels, hotels and boardinghouses are excluded from this
definition.
NUISANCE — Means:
OCCUPANT — Means any person having actual possession of the
premises or any part thereof.
Any public nuisance recognized in common law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the Statutes of the State of New
Jersey or the ordinances of the Township;
1.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the exterior of
premises or upon an unoccupied lot. Attractive nuisances include
but are not limited to: abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations, abandoned swimming pools, abandoned ice boxes
and/or refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound
fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation
such as poison ivy, oak or sumac which may prove hazardous for
inquisitive minors;
2.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist;
3.
Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of the State
Fire Code;
4.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation
of this section;
5.
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health in violation of this section;
6.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings;
7.
Fire hazards, which shall include but not be limited to the
maintenance and/or storage of combustible materials, the
maintenance and/or storage of flammable chemicals and/or the
maintenance of an uncontrolled open fire;
8.
9. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this section;
Failure to maintain sight triangles as required by subsection
37-4.13.
10.
§ 15-1.5 EDISON CODE § 15-1.5
AO:554
§ 15-1.6. Applicability; Liability of Owner. [1999 Code § 8.32.060]
OPERATOR — Means any person who has charge, care or control of a
dwelling or premises or any part thereof, whether with or without the
knowledge and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof, or who shall have
charge, care or control of any dwelling unit as owner or agent of the
owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee in possession,
regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a
lessee subletting or assigning any part of any dwelling or dwelling unit
shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by
said lessee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Means all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interest of record in a building and any who are
in actual possession thereof.
PERSON — Includes all manner of corporations and commercial
entities as well as individuals.
PREMISES — Means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings
or structures thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Means any officer who is in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the Township of Edison,
County of Middlesex or State of New Jersey, relating to health, fire,
building regulations or to other activities concerning buildings in the
Municipality.
PUBLIC OFFICER — See subsection 15-1.15.
REFUSE — Means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste
(except body waste), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid
market and industrial wastes. (See also garbage and rubbish.)
RUBBISH — Means nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials. (See also garbage and refuse.)
SHOPPING CENTER — Means one (1) or more buildings or parts
thereof designed or existing as a unit, occupied or to be occupied by
one (1) or more businesses for the conduct of retail sales, with parking
space.
a. Scope and Application. All commercial premises, shopping centers and
multifamily dwellings and any buildings situated thereon in the
Township shall comply with the provisions of this section, whether or
§ 15-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.6
AO:555
§ 15-1.7. Conflict with Other Provisions. [1999 Code § 8.32.070]
In any case where the provisions of this section impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or under the laws of
the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail;
but if the provisions of this section impose a lower standard than any other
ordinance of the Township or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the
higher standard contained in any such other ordinance or laws shall prevail.
§ 15-1.8. Effect on Other Provisions. [1999 Code § 8.32.080]
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this section
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other local ordinance
applicable to any structure or premises or use of such structure or
premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner, operator, tenant
or occupant from complying with any such other provision or any official of
the Township from enforcing any such other provision.
§ 15-1.9. Nuisances and Unsanitary Conditions; Removal or
Abatement; Notice; Lien for Costs of Township Remediation. [1999
Code § 8.32.090; Ord. No. O.1913-2015; Ord. No. O.1979-2017]
The exterior of the lands and/or premises, and all structures located on the
lands and/or premises, shall be kept free of all nuisances and any hazards
to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the lands
and/or premises, and shall be free of unsanitary conditions. Any of the
foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner, occupant
and/or operator in accordance with the notice provisions set forth below,
and in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. It shall be the duty
of the owner, occupant and/or operator to keep the lands and/or premises
free of hazards, which include but are not limited to the following:
not such buildings shall have been constructed, altered or repaired
before or after the enactment of this section. This section establishes
minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use
of all such buildings and premises and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration
or use of such buildings or premises contained therein. Where there
is a mixed occupancy with commercial and other uses on the same
premises, all such uses shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject
to the provisions of this section.
b. Owner Liability. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and
responsibilities prescribed in this section, and no owner or operator
shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled
to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact
that the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
a. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash, refuse and debris;
§ 15-1.6 EDISON CODE § 15-1.9
AO:556
b. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage,
constitute a hazard and/or a potential hazard to persons in the vicinity
thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such
conditions;
c. Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow
which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of
falling on persons in the vicinity thereof;
d. Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions, holes, excavations,
breaks, projections, obstructions, icy conditions, uncleared snow,
excretions of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways,
parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the lands and/or
premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the lands and/
or premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and repairs,
walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed where
necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery; [Ord. No. O.1979-2017]
e. Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained to eliminate
any recurrent or excessive accumulations of stormwater;
f. Sources of infestation;
g. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and
damage and capable of bearing imposed loads safely;
h. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be
maintained, structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained as
to capably perform at all times the functions for which they were
designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing
equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of
the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable and
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases;
i. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling; and the same shall be kept structurally
sound, in good repair and free from defects. This subsection does not
apply to single-family dwellings having steps with four (4) or fewer
risers, or a total height less than forty-eight (48) inches above ground
level;
j. Vegetative overgrowth and other impediments that obstruct the
maintenance of sight triangles and that constitute a hazard to vehicular
and/or pedestrian traffic.
The owner, occupant and/or operator of such lands and/or premises
is required to remove, or cause to be removed, from such lands and/
or premises, any and all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of
occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the lands and/or
§ 15-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.9
AO:557
§ 15-1.10. Maintenance of Exterior of Premises. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.100]
The exterior of the premises, the exterior of structures and the condition
of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining
property owners. Such maintenance shall include the following:
premises, as well as any unsanitary conditions, within ten (10) days
after receipt by such owner, occupant and/or operator, of written notice
from the Division of Health.
Notice to the owner, occupant and/or operator to cause the removal of
the conditions referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall be given
by the Division of Health, and may be served upon any such owner,
occupant and/or operator either personally or by certified mail, and,
if by the latter method, the ten (10) day period within which such
removal shall be accomplished shall be deemed to have commenced to
run from the date of the return receipt of such certified mail, obtained
by the postal authority for the delivery of such certified notice. Every
such notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal within then ten
(10) day period aforesaid, warn the owner, occupant and/or operator of
the lands and/or premises to which such notice refers, that failure to
accomplish such removal within the time stated therein will result in
further action by the Division of Health, including (i) prosecution of any
continuing violation in a court of competition jurisdiction in accordance
with the requirements of the Township Code, including this Chapter,
and (ii) removal, by or under the direction of the Division of Health,
and the cost of such removal shall be charged to the owner, occupant
and/or operator of such lands and/or premises, and shall be payable
to the Township within thirty (30) days after the date of submission of
the associated removal charges. An accurate record of the cost of such
removal to the Township shall be determined by the Health Officer, who
shall certify the cost thereof to the Governing Body.
Unless such charges are paid within the thirty (30) day period, the
Governing Body shall proceed to examine the certificate of removal
costs as determined by the Health Officer, against the lands and/or
premises the amount to examined and charged shall forthwith become
a lien upon such lands and/or premises, and shall be added to and
become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands and/or premises, the same to bear interest at the same rate
as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as taxes, including without limit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.14.
In the case of repeat violations, the Division of Health may take action
to abate subsequent violations without providing additional written
notice, upon confirmation of continued ownership or occupancy of the
lands and/or premises by the initial individual(s) served.
§ 15-1.9 EDISON CODE § 15-1.10
AO:558
§ 15-1.11. General Maintenance and Structural Standards. [1999
Code § 8.32.110]
a. In a residential zone, there shall not be stored or used at a location
visible from the sidewalk, street or other public areas equipment and
materials and/or vehicles relating to commercial or industrial uses
unless permitted under the zoning ordinance of the Township.
b. Premises with landscaping and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept
trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed
to public view and where the same constitute a blighting factor
depreciating adjoining property.
c. Reconstructed walls and sidings of nonresidential structures shall be of
standard quality and appearance commensurate with the character of
the properties in the same block and on both sides of the street on
which the premises front such that the materials used will not be of a
kind that, by their appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and
standards, would depreciate the values of the neighboring and
adjoining premises as aforesaid.
d. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences,
shall be maintained in good repair. The same shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or block, excessive
peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance, to the end that the property itself may be
preserved safely, fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties
protected from blighting influences.
a. Outside building walls shall not have any holes, loose boards or any
broken, cracked or damaged finish which admits rain, cold air,
dampness, rodents, insects and/or vermin.
b. Every building shall be so maintained as to be weathertight and
watertight. All exposed surfaces thereof subject to deterioration shall
be protected against weathering by a protective coating appropriate for
the particular material involved, as needed.
c. Basements, cellar and crawl spaces shall be free of moisture resulting
from seepage, and cross ventilation shall be required where necessary
to prevent accumulation of moisture and dampness, shall be paved with
stone or concrete not less than four (4) inches thick and shall be
maintained at all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean, free
from cracks, breaks and/or other hazards. This subsection does not
apply to single-family dwellings.
d. All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent
infestation.
e. All parts of the dwelling shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
free of nuisance and free from health, safety and fire hazards.
§ 15-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.11
AO:559
§ 15-1.12. Mixed-Occupancy Structures and Multiple Dwellings.
[1999 Code § 8.32.120]
f. Every roof, roof gutter, flashing, rainwater conductor and roof cornice
shall be weathertight and raintight and shall be kept in good repair.
a. The owner or operator shall have the duty and responsibility of
removing garbage whenever a janitor is required for the premises in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph c. below.
b. All accumulations of trash and debris shall be removed daily from
collection areas and trash chutes if a trash compactor is not provided or
if the existing trash compactor is out of order. In a dwelling containing
four (4) or more dwelling units, storage areas or storage bins of
fireproof construction and containing fireproof walls and partitions of at
least two (2) hours' rating shall be provided.
c. In every dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units or
rooming units, or combinations thereof, the owner shall provide or
designate a superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper who shall
at all times maintain the premises in compliance with this section and
keep the premises free from filthy garbage, refuse and rubbish and who
shall be responsible for the daily collection of garbage and other refuse
from the occupants on a regular schedule. Such person shall be
regularly available on the premises to perform the foregoing duties and,
in complexes of fifty (50) or more units, shall reside on the premises. In
the event that the superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper
does not reside on the premises, the owner or operator shall make his
or her name, address and telephone number known to all tenants and
shall register same with the public officer and shall also make available
and known to all tenants and the public officer the name of an alternate
individual who shall be responsible at all times during the absence of
the superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper to comply with
the provisions of this section. Actions of the superintendent, janitor,
caretaker or housekeeper or alternative individual referred to in this
section, even in disobedience of instructions received from the owner or
operator, shall not relieve the owner or operator from the duties and
responsibilities imposed by this section. It shall be the obligation of the
owner or operator to register the name, address and telephone number
of the owner and operator with the public officer.
d. Exterior parking areas, pedestrian walkways or other portions of the
premises subject to regular and recurrent use by occupants at night
shall be illuminated continually from one-half (1/2) hour before sunset
to one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise unless the lighting is connected to a
dusk-to-dawn photoelectric control device to enable safe passage of
persons of normal vision.
e. All interior walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces in units of
dwelling space shall be kept smooth, clean, free of flaking, loose or
peeling paint, plaster or paper and capable of being maintained free of
§ 15-1.11 EDISON CODE § 15-1.12
AO:560
§ 15-1.13. Depositing Leaves on Streets Restricted. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.130]
No person, owner, occupant and/or tenant of a residential property in the
Township shall rake, blow, push and/or drag leaves from his or her property
onto the public streets of the Township except that a person may deposit
leaves into the gutter or street immediately in front of his or her property
during periods announced by the Township for pick-up or collection thereof.
§ 15-1.14. Placement of Branches and Trees for Pickup. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.140]
No owner, occupant and/or tenant of residential properties in the township
shall place, put or stack branches, trees or parts of trees in the paved rightof-
way. Branches, trees and/or parts of trees may be placed immediately
adjacent to the curb of the premises in question so as not to block the
sidewalk extending not further than three (3) feet from the curb. Such
placement may occur not sooner than one (1) day prior to the scheduled
pickup of branches, trees and/or parts of trees after having scheduled such
pickup with the Division of Sanitation of the Township.
§ 15-1.15. Designation of Public Officer. [1999 Code § 8.32.150]
The Township Business Administrator is designated to serve as the public
officer hereunder, and all inspections, regulations, enforcement and
hearings on violations of the provisions of this section, unless expressly
stated to the contrary, shall be under his or her direction and supervision.
He or she may appoint or designate such other local public officers or
employees to perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this
section, including the making of inspections and the holding of hearings.
§ 15-1.16. Issuance of Complaint. [1999 Code § 8.32.160]
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or
by at least five (5) residents of the Municipality charging that any building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or whenever it appears to the
public officer, on his or her own motion, that any building is unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use or that the continuing of any condition
visible foreign matter, vermin and in a sanitary condition. If and where
necessary to accomplish the foregoing or any part thereof, by reason
of surface material, such interior surfaces shall be spackled, painted,
papered, or otherwise provided with a protective coating as needed
but not more frequently than once every three (3) years. Responsibility
for the cost of such painting, papering, surface preparation or other
protective coating shall be as set forth in the lease to the premises.
Where the lease makes no provision for the cost, it shall be presumed
to be the responsibility of the landlord. It shall also be the responsibility
of the landlord when required to correct conditions under this section
other than normal wear and tear.
§ 15-1.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.16
AO:561
constitutes a nuisance within the meaning of this section or is harmful to
the health and safety of the occupants of the building and the general public
of the Township, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the public officer or his or her designated agent at a place therein
fixed not less than seven (7) days and no more than thirty (30) days after
the service of the complaint. The complaint shall state that the owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint
and shall state further that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts
shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer.
§ 15-1.17. Issuance of Order to Repair or Remove. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.170]
If after such notice and hearing the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair, alteration or
improvement of the building to be made by the owner within a reasonable
time, which time shall be set forth in the order or at the option of the owner
to vacate or have the building vacated and closed within the time set forth
in the order or, if the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous
to the health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the building
within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
§ 15-1.18. Appeals. [1999 Code § 8.32.180]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by a public officer under this
section may, within thirty (30) days after the posting and service of such
order, bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the public officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The court may proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by
an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the public officer.
§ 15-1.19. Failure to Comply. [1999 Code § 8.32.190]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated and closed. In such event, the public officer may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
§ 15-1.16 EDISON CODE § 15-1.19
AO:562
or use; the use or occupancy of this building is prohibited and unlawful." If
the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the building,
the public officer may cause such building to be removed or demolished or
may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after advertisement for
and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 15-1.20. Costs to Become Lien. [1999 Code § 8.32.200]
a. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, fees of expert
witnesses, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course
of any proceeding taken under this section determined in favor of the
Municipality as well as the cost of the repairs, alterations or
improvements or the vacation, enclosing or removal or demolition, if
any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of
the sum, if any, realized from the sale of the materials derived from such
building or from any contracts for removal or demolition thereof shall
be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. The public officer shall certificate the costs thereof to the
Governing Body, which shall examine the certificate and, if found
correct, shall direct the Tax Assessor to charge such cost against the
subject lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the
taxes. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he
or she shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited
against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof, including the
clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale
of such materials or any demolition of the building. If there are no such
credits or if the total sum of the costs exceeds the total of such credits,
a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall
be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the
records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to
the owner by registered mail, return receipt requested. If the total of
the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer. Such sum shall be
secured in such manner as may be directed by the court and shall be
disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such court.
Any owner or party in interest may, within thirty (30) days from the date
of filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
b. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posted by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.
c. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Municipality to define and declare nuisances and to
§ 15-1.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.20
AO:563
§ 15-1.21. Service of Complaints and Orders. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.210]
Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this section
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, return
receipt requested, at the address listed in the most recent tax duplicate on
file in the offices of the Assessor of the Township, but if the whereabouts of
such person is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public
officer, then, upon the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public
officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, the serving of such complaint
or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once in
a newspaper printed and published in the Township or, in the absence of
such newspaper, in one printed and published in the County and circulated
in the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the County Recording Officer of the County of Middlesex.
§ 15-1.22. Powers and Duties of Public Officer. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.220]
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
section, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted:
cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor is anything in this section intended to limit the authority
of the enforcing agency or Construction Official under the State
Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., or any
rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
a. To investigate the building conditions in the Municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use;
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession, and provided
that any entrance without the permission of the occupant shall be
consistent with the laws and Constitution of the State of New Jersey and
of the United States;
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section;
e. To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this section to
such officers and agents as he or she may designate.
§ 15-1.20 EDISON CODE § 15-1.23
AO:564
§ 15-1.23. Conditions for Determination of Unfitness. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.230]
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health and safety of
the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings
or other residents of such municipality. Such conditions may include the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; deterioration; disrepair;
structural defects; and uncleanliness.
§ 15-1.24. Abatement of Nuisances. [1999 Code § 8.32.240]
The Township Council may, by resolution, order that a nuisance be abated,
a defect corrected or the premises put in condition so as to comply with the
requirements of any Township ordinance or State law applicable thereto,
at the cost of the owner or lessor, and expend municipal funds for such
purpose and charge the same against the premises in the amount thereof as
found by the Township Council to be reasonable and just, and it shall be a
lien against the premises and collectible as provided in this section.
§ 15-1.25. Emergencies. [1999 Code § 8.32.250]
a. Whenever the public officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he or
she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order requiring that such
action be taken as he or she determines necessary, applying the
statutes and provisions of this section to meet the emergency, and such
order shall be effective immediately, and any person to whom such
order is directed shall be obliged to comply immediately. Any such
person may petition to the public officer for a hearing on such order,
which hearing shall be conducted not later than five (5) days after
receipt of the petition. The provisions of this section to charge the cost
and make them assessable as taxes shall apply to such emergencies.
b. In the event that an emergency exists which requires immediate action
by the Township's Department of Public Works to protect the public
health or safety, the following costs and fees shall be charged to the
affected property owner or owners for such emergency work, and which
costs and fees shall be a lien against the subject property and
collectible as provided in this section:
1. During working hours: at thirty ($30.00) dollars per hour per
person.
2. After working hours: at forty-five ($45.00) dollars per hour per
person.
§ 15-1.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.25
AO:565
§ 15-1.26. Referral of Violations of Other Provisions. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.260]
Any violation of any ordinance other than this section discovered in the
enforcement of this section shall be reported to the public officer, who
shall refer the alleged violation to the official or agency responsible for the
enforcement of such ordinances.
§ 15-1.27. Withholding of Strict Enforcement. [1999 Code
§ 8.32.270]
The public officer shall have the power to withhold strict enforcement of this
section upon written application therefor by an owner or party in interest
after making a determination that:
§ 15-1.28. Appointment of Ex Officio Receiver of Income. [1999
Code § 8.32.280]
The public officer may, with the approval of the Township Council certified
to by resolution, bring an action to be appointed receiver ex officio of the
rents and income of such property for the purpose of collecting the rents
and income from such property and expending the same for the purpose of
abating the conditions against which this section is directed. The procedure
and other legal steps shall be governed by the provisions of applicable State
Statutes.
§ 15-1.29. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.32.290]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to exceed
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or by imprisonment in the County jail
3. Holidays and Sundays: at sixty ($60.00) dollars per hour per
person.
4. Materials and equipment used to be charged based upon costs
incurred by the Township.
a. Any variation or modification of structure use approved by the public
officer will not in any material way alter the standards of this section
and cannot detrimentally affect the health or safety of the occupants of
the premises or the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or owners
of adjacent premises or of the neighborhood; or
b. Strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, operator or occupant because it would compel
expenditures on the premises which would be substantially
disproportionate to any benefit to the health, safety or welfare that
might be derived therefrom; and
c. The owner, operator or occupant is without any practical or feasible
means to comply with the strict provisions of this section.
§ 15-1.25 EDISON CODE § 15-1.29
AO:566
for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and each violation of any of the provisions of this section and
each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate
and distinct offense.
§ 15-2. WEEDS AND BRUSH.
§ 15-2.1. Legislative Declaration. [1999 Code § 8.144.010]
The presence upon lands lying within the corporate limits of the Township of
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash and debris is decreed to be detrimental to public health,
safety and the general welfare and likely to present a fire hazard.
§ 15-2.2. Removal of Weeds and Obnoxious Growth Required. [1999
Code § 8.144.020]
The owner or tenant of lands lying within the corporate limits of the
Township is required to remove or cause to be removed from such lands any
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash and debris within ten (10) days after receipt by such owner
or tenant of written notice from the Division of Health.
§ 15-2.3. Notice to Remove. [1999 Code § 8.144.030; Ord. No.
O.1879-2014]
Notice to the owner or tenant to cause the removal of the substances
referred to in the preceding regulation shall be given by the Division of
Health and may be served upon any such owner or tenant either personally
or by certified mail, and, if the latter method, the ten-day period within
which such removal shall be accomplished shall be deemed to have
commenced to run from the date of the return receipt of such certified mail
obtained by the postal authority for the delivery of such certified notice.
Every such notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal aforesaid, warn
the owner or tenant of the lands to which such notice refers that failure
to accomplish such removal within the time stated therein will result in
removal by or under the direction of the Division of Health and the cost
of such removal shall be charged to the owner or tenant of such lands
and shall be payable to the Township within thirty (30) days after the date
of submission of the charges. Unless such charges are paid within the
30-day period, the costs aforesaid shall become a lien upon the lands and be
collected as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14.
In the case of repeat violations, the Division of Health may take action
to abate subsequent violations without providing additional notice, upon
confirmation of continued ownership or occupancy by the initial
individual(s) served.
§ 15-1.29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-2.4
AO:567
§ 15-2.4. Removal by Township; Lien for Costs. [1999 Code
§ 8.144.040]
Whenever the owner or the tenant of such lands within the Township,
receiving the notice provided for by the preceding regulation to remove
from such lands any of the substances hereinbefore mentioned, shall fail
and neglect, within the time prescribed in the notice, to effect removal
of such substances, such removal shall be accomplished by or under the
direction of the Division of Health. An accurate record of the cost of such
removal to the Township shall be determined by the Health Officer, who
shall certify the cost thereof to the Governing Body, which shall examine the
certificate against the lands; the amount so charged shall forthwith become
a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of
the taxes next to be, assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 15-3. ABANDONED AND VACANT PROPERTIES, REGISTRATION
AND MAINTENANCE.
§ 15-3.1. Definition of Terms. [Ord. No. O.1943-2016; Ord. No.
2024-2018]
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this section,
shall have the respected meanings assigned to them, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context; as used in this section:
CREDITOR — Shall mean a State chartered bank, savings bank, savings
and loan association or credit union, any person or entity required to be
licensed under the provisions of the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Act,"
P.L. 2009, c. 53 (C. 17:11C-51 et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject to the
provisions of C. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as amended from time
to time) and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in the debt
obligation including, but not limited to, servicers.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a structure which
are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots,
including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and the open land
space of any premises outside of any building or structure erected thereon,
including vacant lots.
NUISANCE — Shall mean:
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the Township.
a.
Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any premises
which is potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the life,
health or safety of persons on, near or passing within the proximity of
the premises where the condition exists.
b.
§ 15-2.4 EDISON CODE § 15-3.1
AO:568
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person, persons or entity not the owner, but
including any agent of the owner, who has charge, possession, custody, care
or control of a dwelling or premises or a part thereof.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, persons or entity who shall have legal
or equitable title in any form whatsoever to any premises or part thereof,
including any fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian or mortgagee in
possession. Any lessee, sublessee or assignee of a lessee of any part of any
premises shall be deemed an "owner" with respect to that portion of the
premises sublet, leased or assigned.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, right-of-way or
multiples thereof, including the building or structures thereon.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the individual designated by the Township,
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-80.
REFUSE or RUBBISH — Shall mean all discarded, useless, unusable,
unused or worthless solid waste matter or materials, combustible or
noncombustible, including but not limited to garbage, trash, ashes, paper,
paper goods and products, wrappings, cans, bottles, containers, yard
clippings, garden waste, debris, junk, glass, boxes, crockery, wood, plastic,
rubber, leather, furniture, household goods, appliances, bedding, scrap
lumber, scrap metal, construction material, inoperable machinery or parts
thereof, garden or farming implements and supplies, dead or rotting
vegetation, tires and abandoned, inoperative or unusable automobiles and
vehicles and solid commercial or industrial waste. Anything herein to the
contrary notwithstanding, a compost pile free of discarded foodstuffs shall
not be deemed to be "refuse" or "rubbish."
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle without
a valid and current State inspection sticker.
VACANT PROPERTY — Shall mean any building used or to be used as a
residence which is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful
construction operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which
is in such condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair
or rehabilitation; provided however, that any property that contains all
building systems in working order and is being actively marketed by its
owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed vacant. Residential properties
that meet the aforementioned criteria and are subject to a summons and
complaint in an action for foreclosure shall be deemed vacant property
in accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35. Property deemed to be "abandoned
property" in accordance with the meaning of such term in the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall also be deemed
to be vacant property for purposes of this section.
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — shall mean a
residential property which is not occupied and at least two of the following
conditions exist:
a. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
§ 15-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.1
AO:569
§ 15-3.2. Creation of Abandoned Property List. [Ord. No.
O.1943-2016; Ord. No. O.2024-2018]
The Public Officer is directed to identify abandoned property for the
purpose of creating an "abandoned property list" throughout the Township.
Each item of abandoned property so identified shall include the tax block
and lot number, the name and address of the owner of record, if known, the
street address of the lot and the basis for a determination that the property
is abandoned.
The accumulation of the newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
b.
c. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
material on the property;
d.
e. The accumulation of junk, liter, trash or debris on the property;
f. The absence of window treatment such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
g. The absences of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, association management, delivery person or
government employee indicating that the residence is vacant and
abandoned;
h.
Window or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
i.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continuously unlocked;
j.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property;
k.
An uncorrected violation of the municipal building, housing, or similar
code during preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
l.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
m.
A written statement issued by a mortgagor expressing the clear intent
of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
n.
o. Any responsible indicia of abandonment.
§ 15-3.1 EDISON CODE § 15-3.3
AO:570
§ 15-3.3. General Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1943-2016; Ord. No.
O.2024-2018]
§ 15-3.4. Registration for Abandoned and Vacant Property Owners.
[Ord. No. O.1943-2016; Ord. No. O.2024-2018]
a. Sixty (60) days after the effective date of this section or thirty (30) days
after a building or lot becomes abandoned as defined within this
section, the owner shall file a registration statement for each such
abandoned property with the Public Officer, on forms provided by the
Public Officer for such purposes. The registration shall remain valid for
one (1) year. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building or lot continues to be abandoned as
defined herein and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed within this section.
b. The owner shall notify the Public Officer within thirty (30) days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Public Officer for such purpose.
c. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township of Edison
against the owner or owners of the property.
a. The owner of abandoned and vacant properties shall provide the
following information to the Public Officer on the registration form or
form(s) prescribed by the Public Officer:
1. Name, address, email address and contact telephone number of the
owner; the owner's address must include a street address; a post
office box is not acceptable;
2. Name, address, email address and contact telephone number of
any local agent(s) or representative for the building or lot;
3. Name, address, email address and contact telephone number of the
person assigned to the property for the security and maintenance
of the building or lot;
4. Common address and Tax Assessor's block and lot designation of
the building or lot;
5. The date on which the building became abandoned;
6. Proof of utility (gas, electric, water) connections or disconnections;
and
7. Any other information reasonably required by the Township to
ensure the safety of all persons and to prevent neglect.
b. Any government entity that owns abandoned property will be exempt
from the provisions of this subsection. For purposes of this section, the
§ 15-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.4
AO:571
§ 15-3.5. Registration for Vacant and Abandoned Property
Creditors. [Ord. No. O.1943-2016; Ord. No. O.2024-2018]
holder of a Federal Housing Administration ("FHA") mortgage, United
States Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") mortgage, or any
other federally insured mortgage shall not be considered a government
entity and shall not be exempt from the provisions of this section.
The owner of any property that is acquired by the owner through the
foreclosure of a FHA mortgage, HUD mortgage or any other federally
insured mortgage shall also not be exempt from the provisions of this
section.
c. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this
subsection, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code
violations concerning the registered abandoned property and all
process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the
registered abandoned property by service of the notice of process on
the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized
agent under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to consent to
the continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this
section until the owner notifies the Township of a change of an
authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual registration
statement.
d. The owner is required to update the form within thirty (30) days of a
change of any information contained within the form.
e. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township of Edison
against the owner or owners of the abandoned property.
f. The Public Officer may identify abandoned properties through his/her
routine inspection process as well as through notification by residents,
or other community groups that a property may be eligible for inclusion
on the registry. Notice will be served upon, or sent by mail, to the owner
and will be deemed received by the owner, upon personal delivery; or
five (5) days after service by first class mail.
a. Every creditor filing an action to foreclose on a mortgage of any
residential property within the Township shall, within ten (10) days
thereof, notify the Township Clerk for the Township in writing by mail of
said filing. (See N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51). The notice shall also include the
street address, lot and block number of the property, and the full name
and contact information of an individual located within the State who is
authorized to accept service on behalf of the creditor.
b. The notice shall also contain the name and contact information of the
representative of the creditor who is responsible for receiving
complaints of property maintenance and code violations. In the event
§ 15-3.4 EDISON CODE § 15-3.5
AO:572
the creditor that has served a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property is located out-of-State, the notice
shall also contain the full name and contact information of an in-
State representative or agent who shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of the property if it
becomes vacant and abandoned.
1. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on a vacant and abandoned property, or a creditor who has
previously filed a summons and complaint to foreclose on a
residential property which subsequently becomes vacant and
abandoned, shall within thirty (30) calendar days after the building
becomes vacant and abandoned or within thirty (30) calendar days
after assuming ownership of the vacant and abandoned property,
whichever is earlier; or within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of
notice from the Township, and annually thereafter, file a
registration statement for such vacant and abandoned property
with the Public Officer consistent with subsection 15-3.4a, of this
section, for such purposes. Any failure to receive notice from the
Township shall not constitute grounds for failing to register the
vacant and abandoned property.
2. Each vacant and abandoned property having a separate block and
lot number as designated in the official tax maps of the Township
shall be registered separately.
3. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of a person
twenty-one (21) years or older, designated by the creditor as the
authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for
receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding on behalf of such creditor in connection
with the enforcement of any applicable code.
4. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of the firm and
the actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s) responsible
for maintaining the abandoned and vacant property. The individual
or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the
abandoned and vacant property shall be available by telephone or
in person on a twenty-four (24) hour per day, seven (7) day per
week basis. The two (2) entities may be the same or different
persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New
Jersey.
5. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration which shall be valid
through December 31st of the year in which it was filed. The
creditor shall be required to renew the registration annually as
long as the building remains vacant and abandoned and shall pay a
§ 15-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.5
AO:573
§ 15-3.6. Abandoned Property Inspection. [Ord. No. O.1943-2016;
Ord. No. O.2024-2018]
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement
and upon reasonable notice, the owner and/or creditor of any abandoned
property shall provide access to the Township to conduct an exterior and
interior inspection of the building to determine compliance with the
Municipal Code, during the period covered by the initial registration or any
subsequent renewal.
§ 15-3.7. Requirements for Owners and/or Creditors of Abandoned
Properties. [Ord. No. O.1943-2016; Ord. No. O.2024-2018]
registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in subsection
15-3.8 for each vacant and abandoned property registered.
6. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1st each year.
The initial registration fee shall be pro-rated for registration
statements received less than ten (10) months prior to that date.
7. The creditor shall notify the Municipal Clerk within thirty (30)
calendar days of any change in the registration information by
filing an amended registration statement on a form provided by the
Municipal Clerk for such purpose.
8. The registration statements shall be deemed prima facie proof of
the statements therein contained in any administrative
enforcement processing or court proceeding instituted by the
Township against the creditor.
a. The owner and/or creditor of any abandoned property, shall
immediately upon possession or the filing of a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose on a residential property within the Township
be immediately responsible for the care, maintenance, security and
upkeep of the exterior of the property, after the property becomes
vacant and abandoned and shall:
1. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code of the
Township of Edison and as per the specifications established by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") for
securing abandoned and/or vacant properties.
2. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to this
section) and a New Jersey resident responsible for day-to-day
supervision and management of the property, if such person is
different from the owner or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a
size and placed in such a location so as to be visible from the
nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be
§ 15-3.5 EDISON CODE § 15-3.7
AO:574
§ 15-3.8. Fees, Penalties, and Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1943-2016;
Ord. No. O.2024-2018]
no smaller than 8" x 10" and shall state "WARNING: THIS
BUILDING IS SECURED PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 15 OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF EDISON CODE. ANYONE ENTERING THIS
BUILDING WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION WILL BE SUBJECT TO
ARREST."
3. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign
until the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until
repair or rehabilitation of the property is complete.
4. Ensure that all bushes and trees are trimmed and that they do not
interfere with neighboring properties.
5. Ensure that grass does not exceed eight (8) inches in height and
that all grass clippings are removed from the lot when the grass is
cut.
6. Lots must be clear of all garbage, litter and debris. Abandoned
properties must be clear of all vehicles: cars, boats, campers, etc.
7. All sidewalks bordering abandoned properties must be maintained
and be cleared of snow, ice, tripping hazards, obstructions,
garbage, litter and debris.
8. The owner and/or creditor shall perform regular weekly
inspections of the abandoned property to ensure compliance with
the requirements of this section.
9. The owner and/or creditor shall maintain a property insurance
policy for each registered property. Buildings with fewer than four
(4) residential units are required to be insured at a minimum of
$300,000.00. All other properties must be insured at a minimum of
$1,000,000.00.
b. If the owner and/or creditor of the abandoned property fails to comply
with all provisions of this section, the Township shall take the necessary
steps to bring the property into compliance with this section. All costs
incurred by the Township in connection with its efforts to bring the
property into compliance shall be forwarded to the Tax Collector for
inclusion as a municipal lien on the property.
a. The initial registration fee for each abandoned property shall be one
thousand ($1,000.00) dollars. The fee for a second year renewal shall be
two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars, and three thousand ($3,000.00)
dollars for each subsequent year thereafter. The registration shall
remain valid for one (1) year from the date of registration except for the
initial registration which shall be valid through December 31st of the
year in which it was filed. The owner and/or creditor shall be required
to renew the registration annually as long as the building remains
§ 15-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.8
AO:575
vacant and abandoned and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in
the amount prescribed in paragraph b. of this subsection for each
vacant and abandoned property registered. The annual renewal shall be
completed by January 1st each year. The initial registration fee shall be
pro-rated for registration statements received less than ten (10) months
prior to that date.
b. Any owner who is not in full compliance with this section or who
otherwise violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than
five hundred ($500.00) dollars and not more than two-thousand five
hundred ($2,500.00) dollars. Every day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this
section shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on the
property.
c. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, and/or failure to comply with any other provisions of this
section shall be deemed to be a violation hereunder.
d. The Public Officer shall be authorized to issue a notice to an owner and/
or creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Township, if the Public
Officer determines that the owner and/or creditor has failed to provide
for the care, maintenance, security, and/or upkeep of a vacant property.
e. Where an owner and/or creditor is an out-of-State owner and/or
creditor, the notice shall be issued to the representative or agent that
has been identified by the owner and/or creditor pursuant to subsection
15-3.3a-b of this section.
f. The notice referenced in paragraph d. of this subsection shall require
the owner and/or creditor to correct the violation within twenty (20)
days of receipt of the notice, or within five (5) days of receipt of the
notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health and
safety.
g. The issuance of notice pursuant to paragraph d. of this subsection shall
constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and abandoned for
the purposes of this section.
h. An entity designated as a redeveloper pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1, et seq., may
apply for a registration fee exemption if all approved plans for the
property comply with Township regulations, and development has been
delayed as a result project financing applications.
i. Any fee collected pursuant to subsection a. above shall be utilized by
the Township for the further maintenance and regulation of abandoned
properties.
§ 15-3.8 EDISON CODE § 15-3.8
AO:576
Chapter 16
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
§ 16-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 16-1.1. Local Enforcement. [New]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1
et seq.) shall be locally enforced in the municipality of the Township of
Edison.
§ 16-1.2. Enforcing Agency Designated; Duties; Organization. [1999
Code § 18.12.030; New]
§ 16-1.3. Inspection of Life Hazard Uses. [1999 Code § 18-12-030;
New; Ord. No. O.1828-2013; Ord. No. O.2019-2018]
The local enforcing agency established in this section shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
a. Agency Designation. The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of
Fire Prevention. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall hereinafter be
known as the local enforcing agency.
b. Duties of Agency. The local enforcement agency shall enforce the
Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) and the codes and
regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and premises
within the established boundaries of the Township of Edison, other than
owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings and buildings owned or
operated by the Federal government, the State and interstate agencies
and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
c. Organization. The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Chief Fire Inspector/Fire Official, who
shall report directly to the Chief of the Division of Fire.
a. Registration Fees. All life hazard uses are subject to a one time
registration fee. This fee is to be submitted along with the Business
Registration form prior to opening and or conducting business within
the Township. The form and fee are to be submitted to the Fire
Prevention Bureau. Listed below is the fee schedule that is based on the
square footage of building and or structure.
1. Up to four hundred ninety-nine (499) square feet of occupiable
space: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
§ 15-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.3
AO:577
§ 16-1.4. Inspection of Non-Life Hazard Uses.
A non-life hazard use shall include any use that is not a life hazard use under
the Uniform Fire Code.
2. Five hundred (500) square feet to nine hundred ninety nine (999)
square feet of occupiable space: fifty ($50.00) dollars.
3. One thousand (1,000) square feet to two thousand four hundred
ninety-nine (2499) square feet of occupiable space: one hundred
($100.00) dollars.
4. Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet to four thousand
nine hundred ninety-nine (4999) square feet of occupiable space:
one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars.
5. Five thousand (5,000) square feet to eleven thousand nine hundred
ninety-nine (11,999) square feet of occupiable space: two hundred
($200.00) dollars.
6. Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet to fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet of occupiable space: two hundred seventy-five (275.00)
dollars.
7. An additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each thousand (1,000)
square feet over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of occupiable
space to be inspected.
b. The owner(s) of businesses, occupancies, buildings, structures, or
premises to be inspected shall submit an owner registration application
for each space to be inspected.
It shall be a violation of this subsection for an owner to fail to return
such forms within thirty (30) days. If the ownership is transferred
whether by sale, gift, reorganization, receivership, foreclosure or
execution of process, the new owner shall file with the local
enforcement agency within thirty (30) days of transfer.
Applications shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the
subsection.
a. Inspections. The local enforcing agency shall inspect all non-life hazard
buildings, structures or premises other than one- and two-family
dwellings during a two-year cycle for the purpose of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to
the spread of fire, interfere with fire operations, endanger life, or any
conditions constituting violation of the provision or intent of the
Uniform Fire Code.
b. Registration Fees. The owner(s) of all businesses, occupancies,
buildings, structures or premises to be inspected in paragraph a. shall
be subject to the following annual fee schedule.
§ 16-1.3 EDISON CODE § 16-1.4
AO:578
§ 16-1.5. Permit Fees; Fire Code Status Requests. [1999 Code
§ 8.12.090; Ord. No. O.2019-2018]
1. Up to four hundred ninety-nine (499) square feet of occupiable
space: twenty five ($25.00) dollars.
2. Five hundred (500) to nine hundred ninety-nine (999) square feet of
occupiable space: one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
3. One thousand (1,000) square feet to two thousand four hundred
ninety-nine (2,499) square feet of occupiable space: one hundred
($100.00) dollars.
4. Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet to four thousand
nine hundred ninety-nine (4,999) square feet of occupiable space:
one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars.
5. Five thousand (5,000) square feet to eleven thousand nine hundred
ninety-nine (11,999) square feet of occupiable space: two hundred
($200.00) dollars.
6. Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet to fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet of occupiable space: two hundred seventy-five ($275)
dollars.
7. An additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each thousand (1,000)
square feet over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of occupiable
space to be inspected.
c. The owner(s) of businesses, occupancies, buildings, structures or
premises to be inspected shall submit an owner registration application
for each space to be inspected.
It shall be a violation of this section for an owner to fail to return such
forms within thirty (30) days. If the ownership is transferred whether
by sale, gift, reorganization, receivership, foreclosure or execution of
process, the new owner shall file with the local enforcement agency
within thirty (30) days of transfer.
Applications shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the
section.
a. Permit Fees. The application fee for a permit shall be as follows:
Permit Fee
Type 1 $54.00
Type 2 $214.00
Type 3 $427.00
Type 4 $641.00
Type 5 $1,380.00
§ 16-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.5
AO:579
Permit Fee
Special Event Permit Fees:
Per special event, up to 3 days duration, including
setup and takedown
$100.00
Per special event, 4 days to 6 days of duration,
including setup and takedown
$150.00
Per special event, 7 days to 10 days of duration,
including setup and takedown
$200.00
Per special event, 10 days of duration or longer,
including setup and takedown
$250.00
Tent Permit Fees:
Per tent up to 900 square feet in area $25.00
Per tent from 900-16,800 square feet in area $42.00
Per tent 16,800 square feet in area and greater $250.00
Storage of Solid or Liquid Oxidizing Agent Permit
Fees:
Pool chlorine storage fee $250.00
b. Permits Required.
1. Type 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 permits are required per N.J.A.C. 570-1.1 et
seq., of the Uniform Fire Code.
2. Special Event Permits shall be required for short-term special
events, including but not limited to concerts, conferences,
conventions, demonstrations, exhibits, expositions, fairs and sports
events, wherein an unusual mass assembly of persons is expected
to occur. This permit shall apply to convention centers, cultural
centers and exhibition halls. Public buildings are excluded. This
permit shall be required for each special event and shall be in
addition to any other permits or approvals required by law.
3. Tent Permits shall be required for the erection, operation, or
maintenance of any tent, tensioned membrane structure, or canopy,
excluding those used for recreational camping purposes. This
permit shall be required for each tent erected and shall be in
addition to any other permits or approvals required by law.
4. Storage of Solid or Liquid Oxidizing Agent Permits shall be
required for the seasonal storage of chlorine in solid or liquid
forms. This permit shall also be required for any building used for
the storage or distribution of solid or liquid oxidizing agents.
c. Request for Fire Code Status. Request for Fire Code Status, as required
in N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq., shall be obliged only after the completion of
a fire safety inspection, the fee for which shall be fifty ($50.00) dollars.
§ 16-1.5 EDISON CODE § 16-1.6
AO:580
§ 16-1.6. Registration; Inspection; Fees. [1999 Code § 8.12.100]
The following buildings are subject to registration with the Edison Division
of Fire and five-year periodic inspections that are not covered by the New
Jersey State Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.
§ 16-2. (RESERVED)
§ 16-3. SMOKE DETECTORS.
§ 16-3.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.40.010]
As used in this section:
DWELLING — Means a building or structure which is wholly or partly used
or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Means any building, structure or trailer containing one
(1) or more rooms arranged for the use of one (1) or more persons as a
single housekeeping unit.
SMOKE DETECTOR — Means a device sensing visible or invisible smoke
particles or combustion which, when activated, shall provide an alarm
sufficiently audible to warn occupants in the dwelling unit, whether such
occupants are sleeping or awake. Any such smoke detector shall bear a
seal, tested and listed by an approved, nationally recognized fire testing
laboratory, shall comply in design to all applicable State, Federal and
industrial requirements, and, if such smoke detector is electrically
a. Multiple Dwellings.
1. All multiple dwellings with less than thirteen (13) units per building
shall be inspected every five (5) years. The registration fee shall be
one hundred twenty ($120.00) dollars per building.
2. All multiple dwellings with thirteen (13) units and no more than
twenty-four (24) units per building shall be inspected every five (5)
years. The registration fee shall be one hundred eighty ($180.00)
dollars per building.
3. All multiple dwellings with more than twenty-four (24) units per
building shall be inspected every five (5) years. The registration fee
shall be two hundred forty ($240.00) dollars per building.
4. The registration fee shall be paid prior to inspection and shall
remain valid for a period of five (5) years.
5. All multiple dwellings shall be subject to a reinspection fee of
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per building.
b. Hotel/Motels. All hotels/motels that constitute life hazard uses which
are subject to registration with the Edison Division of Fire and are
covered by the New Jersey State Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.,
shall be exempt.
§ 16-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3.1
AO:581
operated, then it shall be installed in conformance with the National
Electrical Code Standard 70 and comply with all applicable permits and
building subcode inspection requirements.
§ 16-3.2. Exceptions. [1999 Code § 8.40.020]
Any new, rehabilitated or existing dwelling which is required by law or
regulation to have installed therein any smoke detector or fire prevention
system other than that which is required by this section and does in fact
have such system installed shall be exempted from the provisions of this
section.
§ 16-3.3. Existing Dwellings. [1999 Code § 8.40.030]
One (1) smoke detector shall be installed on the highest habitable level of
every dwelling unit and on each floor level, including the basement, where
one (1) of such detectors shall be located on the basement or cellar ceiling
as close as possible to the stairway opening.
§ 16-3.4. Responsibility for Installation and Maintenance. [1999
Code § 8.40.040; Ord. No. O-1828-2013; Ord. No. O.2016-2018]
a. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each dwelling unit to
comply with this section. It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail or
refuse to install such detectors in accordance with this section or fail to
maintain the detectors in proper working order.
b. It shall be the duty of the tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit, at his or
her own cost and expense, to maintain and replace all batteries of
battery-operated smoke detector devices installed by the owner in the
dwelling unit. Any tenant who fails to so maintain and replace such
batteries shall be guilty of violating this section.
c. The duty of the tenant to maintain the batteries shall not relieve the
owner of the duty to maintain the detector unit in proper operating
order other than the batteries in the dwelling unit, as well as the duty to
maintain both the batteries and the unit installed in the common areas
of the dwelling.
d. Upon compliance with this section and the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:70-1 et seq., by any owner by resale or change in occupancy of a
single-family dwelling, a CO and a certificate of smoke detector
compliance shall be issued by the Fire Code Official in charge of
enforcement. Requests ten (10) business days prior to issuance, sixty
($60.00) dollars. Requests four (4) to ten (10) business days prior,
ninety ($90.00) dollars. Requests fewer than four (4) business days
prior, one hundred forty ($140.00) dollars. Should a reinspection be
required due to a failure to appear for an appointment a fifty ($50.00)
dollar fee shall be applied. Should a reinspection be required due to a
failure to comply with the conditions set forth within the Uniform Fire
Code a twenty ($20.00) dollar fee shall be applied.
§ 16-3.1 EDISON CODE § 16-3.5
AO:582
§ 16-3.5. Interference with Detectors. [1999 Code § 8.40.050]
It is unlawful for any tenant, occupant, owner or any other person to tamper
with, damage, destroy, steal, paint over or do anything to cause such smoke
detector to malfunction or fail to operate.
§ 16-3.6. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 8.40.060]
§ 16-3.7. Enforcing Official. [1999 Code § 8.40.070]
The Construction Official responsible for enforcement shall be the Fire
Protection Subcode Official and Electrical Official and any other duly
qualified inspector whose responsibilities are directly related to the
function, whether or not specifically provided for.
§ 16-3.8. Right to File Complaint. [1999 Code § 8.40.080]
In addition to the enforcement of this section by the Township Officials,
any person may institute and file a complaint in the Municipal Court of
Edison against any other person who is found violating any provisions of
this section.
§ 16-3.9. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.40.090]
Any person violating this section shall be liable for a minimum fine of
fifty ($50.00) dollars and a maximum fine not to exceed the penalty stated
in Chapter I, Section 1-5 together with the penalty stated in N.J.S.A.
52:27D-198.3.
§ 16-4. UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
§ 16-4.1. Adoption of Standards. [1999 Code § 8.12.010]
There is adopted by the Township, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire
and explosion, that certain Code known as the "Uniform Fire Code, State of
New Jersey, of the New Jersey Administrative Code" thereof and all changes
and additions that are adopted from time to time, of which Code not less
than three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the Clerk
a. Effective immediately, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any new dwelling or newly rehabilitated dwelling unless the Division of
Fire certifies that such dwelling has complied with this section.
b. After the enactment of this section, the Tax Collector shall promptly
notify all owners of record of dwelling units and thereafter all new
owners of record of dwelling units of the requirements of this section
and, in the same communication, forward the owners a certification, to
be executed under penalty of perjury, reciting that the owner has
complied with the requirements of this section and to be returned to the
Division of Fire.
§ 16-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.1
AO:583
of the Township; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set
forth herein, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the Township.
§ 16-5. FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS ADOPTED.
§ 16-5.1. Storage of Explosives. [1999 Code § 8.16.040]
The limits referred to in Article 26 of the Uniform Fire Code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are established as
prescribed in the zoning ordinance of the Township.
§ 16-5.2. Storage of Flammable Liquids. [1999 Code § 8.16.050]
§ 16-5.3. Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases. [1999 Code
§ 8.16.060]
The limits referred to in Article 30 of the Uniform Fire Code, in which
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are established as
prescribed in the zoning ordinance of the Township.
§ 16-5.4. New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May
Require Permits. [1999 Code § 8.16.070]
The Director of Public Safety, the Chief of the Paid Fire Division and
a member of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall act as a committee to
determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be
heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require
permits in addition to those now enumerated in the Uniform Fire Code. The
Chief of the Paid Fire Division shall post such list in a conspicuous place in
his or her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
§ 16-5.5. Fire and Emergency Access Lanes. [1999 Code § 8.16.080;
Ord. No. O.1607-2008§ 7; Ord. No. O.1722-2009§ 2]
a. The limits referred to in Article 28 of the Uniform Fire Code, in which
storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited, are established as prescribed in the zoning ordinance of the
Township.
b. The limits referred to in Article 28 of the Uniform Fire Code, in which
new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited,
are established as prescribed in the zoning ordinance of the Township.
a. Authority is vested in the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of
Police or his/her designee to establish and designate fire and
emergency access lanes in and around private property, parking areas
and parking places which are open to the public or to which the public
is invited.
§ 16-4.1 EDISON CODE § 16-5.5
AO:584
§ 16-5.6. Barbecue Grills. [1999 Code § 8.16.090]
§ 16-5.7. Key Lock Box System. [Ord. No. O.1725-2009§ I]
b. The fire and emergency access lanes may include, but are not limited
to, no-parking or no-standing areas, traffic directional lanes and areas
designated solely for pedestrian traffic. Parking shall be in the
designated areas.
c. Fire and emergency access lanes shall be in those locations and of
sufficient design as may be reasonably required by the public safety and
welfare. The purpose of these lanes is to guarantee unimpaired ingress
and egress in and around public parking areas and to and around all
buildings located in these areas in the event of fire or other emergency,
for police, fire and other emergency vehicles. These lanes shall be
installed by the property owner with acceptable signs and paint on the
pavement provided by the property owner and installed and maintained
under the guidance and direction of the Chief of the Fire Department
and the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
d. No person, firm or corporation, or any of their agents or employees,
shall leave standing or cause to be parked any vehicle in any of the
aforementioned lanes nor cause any other obstruction in these
designated lanes.
e. All fire hydrants, standpipes and ten (10) feet on either side of the
hydrant and standpipes shall be designated as fire zones. Such
designation shall apply to all fire hydrants and standpipes located
within the Township.
f. The Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of Police or his/her
designee shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provision of
this subsection by the issuance of summonses or complaints. In addition
to the penalties provided hereafter, any vehicle parked in violation of
the regulations provided under this subsection may be towed away
summarily by the Police Department at the expense of the violator.
g. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or by
imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or both, at the
discretion of the court.
a. Barbecue grills using propane fuel with fuel tanks attached shall not be
located or operated within or upon any building or within five (5) feet
laterally of any building, wall or overhang.
b. Barbecue grills using charcoal or wood fuel shall not be operated within
or upon any building or within five (5) feet laterally of any building, wall
or overhang.
§ 16-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-5.7
AO:585
§ 16-5.8. Modifications of Provisions. [1999 Code § 8.16.100; Ord.
No. O.1725-2009§ I]
The Chief of the Paid Fire Division shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Code upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee or his or her duly authorized agent when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Uniform Fire
Code, provided that the spirit of the Uniform Fire Code shall be observed,
a. The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or
near the main entrance or such other location required by the Fire
Official:
1. Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic
alarm system or automatic suppression system, or such structures
that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an
emergency;
2. Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access
through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the
living units;
3. Governmental structures and nursing care facilities.
b. All newly constructed structures subject to this subsection shall have
the key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit. All structures in existence on the effective date of
this section and subject to this section shall have one (1) year from the
effective date of this section to have a key lock box installed and
operational.
c. The Fire Official shall designate the type of key lock box system to be
implemented within the Township and shall have the authority to
require all structures to use the designated system.
d. The owner of or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box
shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access to
the structure.
e. Key Box Maintenance. The operator of the building shall immediately
notify the Fire Official and provide the new keys when a lock is changed
or re-keyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the key box
(N.J.A.C. 5:70-3, 506.2).
f. The Fire Official shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations
for the use of the lock box system.
g. Any person who owns or operates a structure subject to this section
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 16-6 of this Code for
any violation of this subsection, provided that the MAXIMUM fine for a
conviction for a violation of this section shall be two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 16-5.7 EDISON CODE § 16-5.8
AO:586
public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Chief of the
Paid Fire Division thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Division,
and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 16-5.9. Appeals. [1999 Code § 8.16.110; Ord. No. O.1725-2009§ I]
Whenever the Chief of the Paid Fire Division shall disapprove an application
or refuse to approve a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Code do not apply or that the true intent
and meaning of the Uniform Fire Code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the
Paid Fire Division to the Board of Adjustment of the Township within thirty
(30) days from the date of the decision appealed. Pursuant to Sections 15
and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, (see N.J.S.A. 52-27D-206 and N.J.S.A.
52-27D-208) any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement
agency or agencies shall have the right to appeal to the Construction Board
of Appeals of the County of Middlesex.
§ 16-6. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. [1999 Code § 8.16.120; Ord. No.
O.1725-2009§ I]
a. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Uniform Fire
Code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail
to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Board of
Adjustment of the Township or by a court of competent jurisdiction
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such
violation and noncompliance respectively be liable, upon conviction, to
the penalty stated in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12. The imposition of one (1)
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
b. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
c. Fire Department Costs.
1. When an owner has been given notice of the existence of a violation
of this Code and has not abated the violation, he or she shall be
liable to a penalty in the amount of the actual cost to the Fire
Department of suppressing any fire directly or indirectly resulting
from the violation.
2. Such cost shall be certified by the Chief of the Paid Fire Division,
and he or she shall assess the amount certified and collect it under
§ 16-5.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6
AO:587
Chapter 17
HOUSING
§ 17-1. HOUSING STANDARDS.
§ 17-1.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.92.010]
As used in this section:
APPROVED — Means in accordance with regulations established by the
Health Department.
BASEMENT — Means a portion of any dwelling located partly underground
but having less than half (1/2) its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — Means a portion of any dwelling having half (1/2) or more than
half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Means a building or structure which is wholly or partly used
or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Means a room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — Means the control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest-elimination
methods approved by the public officer.
FACTORY — Means any building, structure or facility in which occupants
are engaged in fabrication, assembling, packaging, repackaging or
processing of products or materials.
HABITABLE ROOM — Means a room or enclosed floor space used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, foyers,
pantries, communicating corridors, stairways, closets and storage spaces.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Means any dwelling or part thereof
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Means any person (including an owner or operator) over one
(1) year of age living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.) in the
Superior Court, County district court or Municipal Court.
3. All moneys collected pursuant to this subsection shall be paid to the
Municipality and appropriated to the Fire Department to defray the
certified costs.
§ 16-6 EDISON CODE § 17-1.1
AO:588
OPENABLE AREA — Means the part of a window or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Means any person having charge, care, management or
control of any dwelling or part of it in which dwelling units or rooming units
are let.
OWNER — Means any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others,
holds legal or equitable title to any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit
or rooming unit.
PERSON — Means an individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURES — Means gas pipes and gas-burning
equipment, water-heating facilities, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents and other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer and gas lines.
PREMISES — Means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building and
structures thereon.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Means the Health Officer of the Township, or his or
her authorized representative.
ROOMING HOUSE — Means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling
containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner
or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not husband and wife, son
or daughter or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Means any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not
for cooking or eating purposes.
§ 17-1.2. Basic Equipment and Facilities Standards. [1999 Code
§ 8.92.020]
a. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for basic
equipment and facilities:
1. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate
from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and which is
equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin.
2. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate
from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy to a person in the
room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower.
3. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a kitchen sink.
§ 17-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.2
AO:589
§ 17-1.3. Light, Ventilation and Heating Standards. [1999 Code
§ 8.92.030]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for light,
ventilation and heating:
4. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
by this section shall be properly connected with both hot and cold
water lines. The hot water lines shall be connected with supplied
water-heating facilities which are capable of heating water to such
a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be
drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty
degrees Fahrenheit (120° F) even when the dwelling heating
facilities required by subsection 17-1.3e are not in operation.
5. All plumbing fixtures required by this section shall be properly
connected to an approved water system and to an approved
sewerage system, and to a gas system, if such systems are
available.
6. Every dwelling unit shall have approved garbage and rubbish
storage or disposal facilities. In every multifamily dwelling, such
facilities shall be placed in an approved location.
b. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, equipment or
utility which is required by this section, to be removed, shut off or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him or her,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary
emergencies
a. Every habitable room shall have a window or skylight opening directly
to the outside. The total area of such window or skylight shall not be
less than ten (10%) percent of the floor area of such room. All windows
and skylights shall be enclosed with glass and shall be provided with
suitable hardware and sash cords and made to open to the extent of five
(5%) percent of the floor area. Every dwelling, habitable room and hall
shall be equipped with a safe, artificial lighting service, and all
electrical wiring, outlets and fixtures thereof shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of local municipal
ordinances and statutes of this State and the code of the National Board
of Fire Underwriters. In the absence of natural ventilation, every
habitable room shall be ventilated by approved mechanical means.
b. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have at least one
(1) window facing to the outdoors and having a minimum openable area
of four (4%) percent of the floor area of such room, except where there
§ 17-1.2 EDISON CODE § 17-1.3
AO:590
is supplied some other device approved by the Health Department as
affording adequate ventilation.
c. Every laundry room shall have a minimum openable area of at least two
(2) square feet, except where there is supplied some other device
approved by the Health Department as affording adequate ventilation.
d. Every dwelling shall be supplied with electricity if within three hundred
(300) feet of available service from power lines. Within such dwelling:
1. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate flooror
wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one (1) such
convenience outlet and one (1) supplied ceiling-type electric light
fixture;
2. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room and public hall shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceilingor
wall-type electric light fixture; and
3. Every outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained
in good and safe working condition.
e. Any person who contacts to supply heat to a building or any part thereof
shall furnish heat to every occupied portion of such building so that the
prescribed minimum temperatures shall be maintained during the
times specified as follows:
1. At all times during the heating season (September 1 to June 1)
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., every unit of
dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall be
maintained at least sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68° F).
Between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the temperature shall be
maintained at least sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit (65° F), provided
that the owner shall not be responsible for heat loss and
consequent temperature drop arising out of action by occupants in
leaving windows or doors open. At times other than the heating
season whenever the temperature falls below forty degrees
Fahrenheit (40° F), the interior dwelling space shall be maintained
at fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit (55° F). Official recording of
temperatures shall be taken at the center of a room at a location
three (3) feet above floor level;
2. In any other building, except those specified herein, during the
usual working hours of occupants, a temperature of at least sixtyeight
degrees Fahrenheit (68° F) whenever the outside
temperature falls below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50° F).
(a) Commercial establishments: sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit
(68° F),
(b) Factories: sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68° F),
§ 17-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.3
AO:591
(c) Warehouses: fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit (55° F), unless
otherwise specifically required for product safety;
3. The owner, agent, lessee, superintendent or janitor of a one- or twofamily
home which is occupied in whole or part by a tenant or
tenants.
f. All fuel-burning heating facilities shall be permanent installations
attached to an outside flue. No portable room-heating units using liquid
fuel shall be permitted in any dwelling unit. All structures with three (3)
or more dwelling units shall have a central heating facility sufficient to
maintain adequate heat in all units within the structure.
g. A multiple dwelling owner shall cause the furnace, boiler or other
central heating system under his or her control in such building to be
inspected by a qualified person between May 1 and September 1 of
each year. In addition to testing the efficiency of the heating system to
provide the heat required in paragraph e1 above, the central heating
system or water heating appliance and its flues, vents and dampers
shall be inspected for escape of carbon monoxide gas. The findings shall
be recorded on forms approved by the Edison Division of Health within
fifteen (15) days following the inspection and shall be kept on file by the
owner for a period of one (1) year, and a copy thereof shall be forwarded
to the Edison Division of Health prior to the fifteenth day of September.
All defects indicated by the inspection required herein shall be repaired
before the fifteenth day of September of each year.
h. At any time that heat is required as prescribed, the heating unit shall be
in proper working order. In the event that the heating equipment fails to
operate in good working order, it shall be the duty of the owner to have
same working properly within twenty-four (24) hours of notice.
i. Auxiliary Heating Devices.
1. At any time when the heating equipment fails to operate as
required within this section and has not been repaired within the
time period specified within paragraph h. above, it shall be the duty
of the owner to supply heat to the tenants by either of the following
acceptable temporary alternative methods:
(a) No less than two (2) portable electric heaters per dwelling unit
shall be supplied at no cost to the tenants thereof provided that
the electrical wiring is sufficient; or
(b) Auxiliary boilers must be connected to the existing heating
plant.
2. It shall be the duty of the owner to have the auxiliary heating
devices specified in paragraph 1. above on the premises and in
operating condition at the termination of the time period specified
for repairs to be completed within paragraph h. above.
§ 17-1.3 EDISON CODE § 17-1.4
AO:592
§ 17-1.4. Fire Safety Standards. [1999 Code § 8.92.040]
No person shall occupy as owner-tenant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for safety
from fire:
§ 17-1.5. Space, Use and Location Standards. [1999 Code
§ 8.92.050]
a. No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a building
containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing
flammable liquids in any quantity which endangers the lives of the
occupants.
b. Every dwelling unit and every rooming unit shall have safe,
unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground
level.
c. Every hallway, stairway, corridor, exit, fire escape door and other means
of egress shall be kept clear at all times.
d. Storage rooms and storage lockers shall not be used for storage of junk,
rubbish or waste.
e. Closets or storage beneath stairways are prohibited in any multifamily
dwelling or any rooming house.
f. There shall be at least two (2) means of egress available from each story
of every multifamily dwelling and of every rooming house if the
dwelling is four (4) or more stories in height, or is three (3) stories or
more in height and has at least five (5) habitable rooms on the third
story. A basement used as a dwelling unit shall not count as a story for
the purpose of this subsection.
a. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for
space, use and location:
1. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least
one hundred (100) square feet of additional habitable floor area for
each of the next three (3) occupants and at least seventy-five (75)
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional
occupant.
2. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at
least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall
contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant
§ 17-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.5
AO:593
twelve (12) years of age and over and at least thirty-five (35) square
feet of floor area for each occupant under twelve (12) years of age.
3. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area.
However, closet area and hall area within the dwelling unit, where
provided, may count for not more than ten (10%) percent of the
required habitable floor area. At least one-half (1/2) of the floor
area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least
seven (7) feet; and the floor area of any part of any room where the
ceiling height is less than four and one-half (4 1/2) feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor
area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
4. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping
rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a sleeping
room can be had only by going through a bathroom or water closet
compartment.
5. No sleeping room shall be occupied by more than two (2) adults,
except that one (1) child under eight (8) years of age in addition to
the two (2) adults may be permitted, and except that rooms
occupied by persons of the same sex or by children under twelve
(12) years of age may be occupied by more than two (2) persons
where space permits.
6. No cellar shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
7. No basement shall be used as dwelling unit unless:
(a) The floors and walls are substantially watertight;
(b) The total window area, total openable area and ceiling height
are in accordance with the section; and
(c) The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window
area, not including stairwells or accessways.
b. No owner or occupant shall permit the use of any room for sleeping
purposes, which room is commonly known as the kitchen, and/or any
room that is used for the cooking and preparing of food and/or the
serving and consumption of food.
c. No owner or occupant shall permit the use of any room for sleeping
purposes used as a storage closet, utility, work room, bathroom, toilet
room and/or any hallway, passageway or foyer.
d. Not more than one (1) family, plus two (2) occupants unrelated to the
family, except for guests or domestic employees, shall occupy a
dwelling unit unless a license for a rooming house has been granted by
the appropriate authority.
§ 17-1.5 EDISON CODE § 17-1.6
AO:594
§ 17-1.6. Safe and Sanitary Maintenance Standards. [1999 Code
§ 8.92.060]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for safe and
sanitary maintenance:
a. Every foundation, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
b. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof,
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be safe to
use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to
be placed thereon.
c. Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar door and hatchway
shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and
shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
d. Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenances thereto
shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair.
e. Every plumbing fixture shall be properly installed and maintained in
sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions,
and in accordance with the Plumbing Code for the Township.
f. Every water closet compartment shall be constructed and maintained
so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such
floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
g. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this section, and every chimney and smoke pipe, shall be so
constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in sound working condition.
h. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough drainage
and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
i. During that portion of each year when, as determined by the Health
Advisory Board, it is necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies
and other insects, every door opening directly from any dwelling to
outdoor space shall be supplied with a screen, together with a selfclosing
device in good working condition; and in each room at least one
(1) window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or
intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be provided with a
screen.
§ 17-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.6
AO:595
§ 17-1.7. Cooking Equipment Standards. [1999 Code § 8.92.070]
§ 17-1.8. Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants. [1999 Code
§ 8.92.080]
j. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement or cellar which
might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or
other device which will effectively prevent their entrance.
a. No owner, operator or occupant shall furnish or use any cooking
equipment which does not comply with the following minimum
standards:
1. Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be
maintained in sound working condition.
2. Portable cooking equipment employing flame and the use of
gasoline as fuel for cooking is prohibited.
b. No owner or occupant shall install or maintain any gas appliance in any
room used for sleeping purposes.
a. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and yard which he or she occupies and controls.
b. Every owner or operator of a two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling
or rooming house shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public areas of the dwelling and yard.
c. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all
rubbish, ashes, garbage and other organic waste in a clean and sanitary
manner by placing it in approved storage or disposal facilities which are
safe and sanitary. Every occupant shall provide such facilities and shall
maintain them in a clean and sanitary manner. The owner or operator of
a multifamily dwelling shall furnish common storage or disposal
facilities and shall be responsible for the clean and sanitary
maintenance of them. Every owner or operator of every rooming house
shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it
in approved storage or disposal facilities which are safe and sanitary.
d. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single-dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
in it or in the yard. In a two-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling,
the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his
or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. When, however, infestation
is caused by failure of the owner or operator to maintain a dwelling in a
rodentproof or substantially insectproof condition, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner or operator.
§ 17-1.6 EDISON CODE § 17-1.8
AO:596
§ 17-1.9. Rooming Houses. [1999 Code § 8.92.090]
e. Every owner or operator shall be responsible for extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests whenever infestation exists in two (2) or
more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public
area of any two-family dwelling or any multifamily dwelling.
f. Every owner or operator of a rooming house shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests in it or in the yard.
g. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures in it
in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation.
h. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging and
removing all screens required for his or her dwelling unit by this
section, except where the owner or operator has agreed to supply such
service.
i. Every owner or operator of a two-family dwelling or multifamily
dwelling shall be responsible for hanging and removing all screens
required by this section for windows and doors opening to outdoor
space from shared or public areas.
j. During that time of the year when it is necessary, as determined by
regulations issued by the Health Advisory Board, every owner or
operator of every two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling and
rooming house shall supply adequate heat to every habitable room
therein except where there are separate facilities for each dwelling
unit, which facilities are under the sole control of the occupant of such
dwelling unit.
k. No accumulation or obstruction from garbage, refuse and other matter
shall be permitted on common stairways, areaways, balconies, porches,
hallways, basements or cellars which may pose a health, safety or fire
hazard.
l. All porches, landings, stairs, fire escapes and balconies shall be kept
structurally sound and in good repair.
m. All buildings shall be kept in good repair and maintained for the
purpose of preservation and appearance to protect the neighborhood
from blight.
n. It shall be the duty of the owner or his or her agent to ascertain that
driveways and parking areas are maintained free of potholes or other
unsafe conditions throughout the year.
a. No person shall operate a rooming house unless he or she holds a valid
rooming house permit issued by the Health Officer and the Zoning
Officer in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or
dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the Health Officer and the
§ 17-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.9
AO:597
Zoning Officer for such a permit, which shall be issued by the Health
Officer and the Zoning Officer upon compliance by the operator with
the applicable provisions of this section and of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This permit shall be displayed
in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all times. No such
permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall
give notice in writing to the Health Officer and the Zoning Officer
within twenty-four (24) hours after having sold, transferred, given away
or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any
rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the
person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming house.
Every rooming house permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year
following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as
hereinafter provided.
b. Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house
has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Health Officer and the Zoning Officer, under the
procedure provided by paragraph c. below.
c. Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house the Health Officer and
the Zoning Officer find that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this section or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the Health Officer and the Zoning Officer
shall give notice in writing to the operator of such rooming house that
unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable
period, to be determined by the Health Officer and the Zoning Officer,
the operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of
such period the Health Officer and the Zoning Officer shall reinspect
such rooming house, and if they find that such conditions or practices
have not been corrected, they shall give notice in writing to the
operator that the latter's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of
notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation
of such rooming house, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living
purposes any rooming unit therein.
d. Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been
suspended, or who has received notice from the Health Officer and the
Zoning Officer that his or her permit is to be suspended unless existing
conditions or practices at his or her rooming house are corrected, may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Health
Officer and the Zoning Officer, under the procedure provided by this
section; provided that if no petition for such hearing is filed within ten
(10) days following the day on which such permit was suspended, such
permit shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
e. At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub, or
shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by
the Health Officer and the Zoning Officer and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or fraction
thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the
§ 17-1.9 EDISON CODE § 17-1.9
AO:598
§ 17-1.10. Inspection and Access to Dwellings. [1999 Code
§ 8.92.100]
§ 17-1.11. Reoccupancy Inspection of Rental Dwelling Units. [1999
Code § 8.92.110; Ord. No. O.1857-2014]
operator's family wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided,
that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush
urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required
number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within
the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or
passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No
such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval
of the Health Officer and the Zoning Officer.
f. The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen
and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of
any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
g. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) person shall
contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) person shall
contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each occupant
thereof.
h. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws
of the State of New Jersey and the Township.
a. The public officer is authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine compliance with this section. For this purpose he or she is
authorized, upon showing adequate identification, to enter and examine
any dwelling, yard or part of either at all reasonable times, and every
owner, operator or occupant shall provide him or her free access to it.
b. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner
thereof or his or her agent or employee access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this section or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
a. Definitions. As used in this section:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL — Means the document issued by the
Division of Health when inspections indicate rental dwelling unit is in
substantial compliance with applicable codes, regulations, statutes and
ordinances.
§ 17-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.11
AO:599
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, association,
society, firm, partnership, joint stock company or agent of any of the
preceding.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT — Means any dwelling or dwelling unit
used or intended to be used for human occupancy and which is to
be rented, leased or subleased, provided, that habitable rooms for
rent in motels, hotels, travel lodges, rooming houses, boardinghouses,
etc., where rapid turnover in rental units is customary are expressly
excluded from the effect of this section.
REOCCUPANCY INSPECTION FORM — Means the inspection form
used by the Edison Division of Health inspectors as a checklist to
determine compliance with applicable codes, regulations, statutes and
ordinances. This form shall be issued in triplicate.
REOCCUPANCY INSPECTION LOG BOOK — Means a journal
maintained for each rental dwelling unit rented. Each unit shall have
entries indicating if a unit is rented or not, if rented, to whom, and the
date on which any changes in rental status occurred.
b. Reoccupancy Inspection. No person who owns, purports to own or
exercises control of any residential rental dwelling unit shall rent, lease
or sublease any rental dwelling unit until a reoccupancy inspection is
performed by the Division of Health and a certificate of approval is
issued therefor.
c. Required Notice and Fees for Inspection and Reinspection. Requests for
inspection shall be made to and upon forms provided by the Division of
Health at least seven (7) business days prior to the expected date of
reoccupancy of the building. A charge of seventy-five ($75.00) dollars
shall be paid by the person responsible for renting the dwelling unit at
the time a reoccupancy inspection is requested. Any violation
emanating from the failure of any person to apply for a certificate of
approval shall not be subject to appeal under the provisions of
subsection 17-1.12, but shall only be heard in Municipal Court. An
additional charge of one hundred ($100.00) dollars shall be paid prior
to each mandated reinspection until a certificate of approval is issued
for the dwelling unit. All charges for reinspection shall be payable
solely by the landlord.
d. Maintaining Reoccupancy Log Book Required. The person responsible
for renting dwelling units shall maintain a reoccupancy inspection log
book accessible to inspectors of the Division of Health at all reasonable
times. This log book shall be produced no later than one (1) business
day after a request by the Division of Health made orally or in writing.
e. Records to Be Maintained for No Less Than Two (2) Years. The
reoccupancy inspection log book shall be kept, starting with the first
day this section is enforceable. Thereafter it shall be corrected to
indicate any change in rental status or tenants and past records for no
less than two (2) years shall be kept.
§ 17-1.11 EDISON CODE § 17-1.11
AO:600
§ 17-1.12. Notices and Appeals. [1999 Code § 8.92.120]
f. Distribution of Inspection Form and Copies. The triplicate copies of the
reoccupancy inspection form shall be distributed as follows:
1. Original to be retained by the person renting the dwelling unit;
2. One (1) copy to be retained by the Division of Health;
3. It shall be the responsibility of the renter to issue the last copy to
the tenant and retain a signed receipt therefor. This receipt shall be
maintained in the reoccupancy inspection log book and must also
be retained for no less than two (2) years.
a. If a preliminary investigation shall disclose to the public officer that
there exists a violation of any provision of this section, he or she shall
serve written notice of such violation upon the violator. The notice of
violation shall specify the violation which exists, shall specify a
reasonable time for compliance and shall contain a notice that a
hearing will be held before the public officer at a place therein fixed,
not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the
serving of notice of violation. If after the expiration of such compliance
period, the Municipal Court has determined that the abatement of the
violation has not been substantially completed, a maximum fine of two
thousand ($2,000.00) dollars may be imposed by the Judge of the
Municipal Court for each such violation.
b. The owner or any other party of interest affected by the health advisory
violation may appeal to the Department of Health for a review of the
decision of the public officer in accordance with the procedures
prescribed by the Health Advisory Committee, except as provided in
paragraph e. Compliance with the notice of violation shall not be
required when an appeal is pending before the Department of Health or
a court.
c. The Department of Health may modify any notice so as to authorize a
variance from the terms of this section when, because of special
conditions, undue hardship would result from literal enforcement and
when such variance substantially meets the spirit of this section.
d. After the expiration of that time for compliance as stated on the notice
of violation, a reinspection shall be made to determine compliance. If
the violation has not been corrected and no appeal is pending, the
public officer shall order the violation corrected as specified in
subsection 17-1.13 or shall institute prosecution for the violation, or
both. However, the Department of Health may grant a reasonable
extension of time for compliance in cases of hardship.
e. Whenever the public officer finds that there exists any violation of this
section which creates an emergency requiring immediate correction to
protect the health or safety of any occupant of a dwelling or the public,
he or she may issue a notice of violation stating the facts which
§ 17-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.12
AO:601
§ 17-1.13. Abatement of Violations. [1999 Code § 8.92.130]
constitute the emergency and requiring necessary action to be taken
immediately. Any person to whom such notice is directed shall comply
immediately even though an appeal is taken to the Department of
Health. Any person aggrieved by such notice of violation may appeal to
the Department of Health as provided in paragraph b. The Department
of Health shall give priority to such appeal.
a. When upon reexamination, after the expiration of the time for
compliance, the public officer finds that the violation has not been
corrected, then he or she is authorized to cause such dwelling to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated or closed.
b. Whenever the public officer finds that any dwelling constitutes a
serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or to the public
because it is dilapidated, insanitary, vermin-infested or lacking in the
facilities required by this section, he or she shall designate such
dwelling unfit for human habitation and shall cause to be posted on the
main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or
occupancy of this building for human habitation is prohibited and
unlawful." If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be
removed or demolished.
c. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, when done by the public
officer, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which
such cost was incurred. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the
public officer, he or she shall sell the materials of such dwelling and
shall credit the proceeds of such against the cost of the removal or
demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division, by the public officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court and
shall be disbursed by such Court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or decree of such Court; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise.
d. Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this
section shall be served upon the owner or operator either personally or
by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown
and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to
that effect, the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two (2)
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
§ 17-1.12 EDISON CODE § 17-1.13
AO:602
§ 17-1.14. Conflicting Provisions; Additional Provisions. [1999 Code
§ 8.92.140]
§ 17-1.15. Rent Increases. [1999 Code § 8.92.150]
§ 17-1.16. Compliance with Housing Code Required. [1999 Code
§ 8.112.060]
It is unlawful for any person to rent, lease or otherwise permit the
occupancy of any building as a residence, or for any person to reside in
any building as its owner, which does not comply with the Housing Code of
Edison Township.
§ 17-2. MULTIPLE DWELLING REGISTRATION.
§ 17-2.1. Construction of Provisions. [1999 Code § 5.36.010]
This section, being necessary for the welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the general intended
purposes.
§ 17-2.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.36.020]
As used in this section:
LANDLORD — Means the person or persons who own or purport to own any
multiple dwelling, as defined herein.
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for
record with the County Clerk of Middlesex County.
a. Where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with a
provision in any building or zoning ordinance or in any other ordinance
of the Township existing on the effective date of this section, or in any
regulation issued under the authority of such ordinances, the provision
which establishes the higher standards for the protection of health,
safety and welfare shall prevail.
b. All camps, boardinghouses, dormitories, hotels, motels and trailer
parks shall comply with the regulations essential to public health and
welfare as prescribed by this section and all other applicable
ordinances.
a. The provisions of this section notwithstanding, no owner of a rental unit
which has been deemed in violation of the standards set forth in this
section, shall increase the rent on said unit until such time as all
violations have been abated.
b. Any application for rent increase pursuant to Section 17-4 of the Code
of the Township of Edison shall contain a statement that there are no
pending, unabated violations of the provisions of this section.
§ 17-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-2.2
AO:603
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Includes any building or structure or trailer or
land used as a trailer park, rented or offered for rent to one (1) or more
tenants or family units. Excluded from this definition and from the operation
of this section are motels, hotels and similar-type buildings and those
buildings in which one-third (1/3) or more of the occupied space is devoted
to commercial purposes and housing units are less than three (3) units.
§ 17-2.3. Registration Statement. [1999 Code § 5.36.030]
Every landlord within the Township shall, by January 15 of each and every
year, file under oath with the Municipal Clerk of the Township and the
Secretary to the Rent Control Board of the Township a statement containing
the following information, on forms provided by the municipality and
available at the Township Clerk's office:
§ 17-2.4. Records; Availability to Public. [1999 Code § 5.36.040]
A copy of the registration statements shall be kept at the office of the
Municipal Clerk and shall be available for public inspection and copying
during normal business hours.
§ 17-2.5. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.36.050]
Any violation of any of the provisions hereof, including but not limited to
material misstatements contained in the registration statement required
herein, shall be punishable in the Municipal Court by fines of not more than
a. The address of the premises; the name and address of the owner of the
premises; the name and address of the superintendent and/or the name
and address of the agent in charge of the premises; the number of
apartments in the premises; the number of square feet in the entire
premises, building or combination of buildings;
b. The number or other designation of each apartment;
c. The total square footage for each apartment;
d. The current base rent chargeable for each apartment;
e. The immediately previous base rent charged for each apartment;
f. The most current tax surcharge chargeable to each apartment, if any;
g. The most current energy surcharge chargeable to each apartment, if
any;
h. Any capital improvement surcharge chargeable to the apartment;
i. The effective date of the most recent lease, if any;
j. If no lease, then the date that the last increase in the base rent became
effective.
§ 17-2.2 EDISON CODE § 17-2.5
AO:604
two hundred ($200.00) dollars for a first offense and not more than the
penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 17-3. (RESERVED)
§ 17-4. RENT CONTROL.
§ 17-4.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 5.52.010]
As used in this section:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANT — Means fit for habitation as defined
by the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of
New Jersey, County of Middlesex and Township of Edison, and occupied or
unoccupied and offered for rent.
BASE RENT — Means for the first twelve (12) months after the effective
date of this section, the present monthly rental, excluding hardship
surcharge and improvement surcharge. Thereafter, "base rent" shall mean
the base rent for the prior twelve (12) month period, excluding hardship
surcharge and improvement surcharge.
COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION — Means issuance of a certificate of
occupancy pursuant to the "State Uniform Construction Code Act," N.J.S.A.
52:27D-133;
CONSTRUCTED — Means constructed, erected or converted but excludes
rehabilitation of premises rented previously for residential purposes
without an intervening use for other purposes for a period of at least two
(2) years prior to conversion. Mere vacancy shall not be considered an
intervening use for the purposes of this subsection;
CONSTRUCTED FOR SENIOR CITIZENS — Means constructed under a
governmental program restricting occupancy of at least ninety (90%)
percent of the dwelling units to senior citizens and any members of their
immediate households or their occupant surviving spouses, or constructed
as a retirement subdivision or retirement community as defined in the
"Retirement Community Full Disclosure Act," N.J.S.A. 45:22A-1 et seq.
DWELLING — Includes any building or structure or manufactured home or
land used as a manufactured home community, rented or offered for rent to
one (1) or more tenants or family units. Excluded from this definition, and
from the operation of this section, are motels, hotels and similar types of
buildings, those buildings in which one-third (1/3) or more of the occupied
floor space is devoted to commercial purposes and housing units which are
less than three (3) units.
EQUITY IN REAL PROPERTY INVESTMENT — Means the actual cash
contribution of the purchaser-landlord at the time of closing of title and any
principal payments to outstanding mortgages.
HOUSING SPACE — Means that portion of a dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling purposes to an individual or family unit,
together with all privileges, services, furnishing, furniture, equipment,
§ 17-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-4.1
AO:605
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property.
JUST CAUSE — Means any action by or on behalf of a landlord in refusing
to let, rent, re-let or re-rent residential premises to a tenant, or any action
toward a dispossess, including but not limited to the following:
MUNICIPAL DWELLING — Means any building or structure and land
appurtenant thereto containing four (4) or more dwelling units, other than
dwelling units constructed for occupation by senior citizens, rented or
offered for rent to four (4) or more tenants or family units;
PERIOD OF AMORTIZATION — Means the time during which the principal
amount of the mortgage loan and interest thereon would be paid entirely
through periodic payments, whether or not the term of the mortgage loan is
for a shorter period concluding with a balloon payment; and
PRICE INDEX — Means the consumer price index (all items) for that region
of the United States in which the Township is included, which index is
periodically published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States
Department of Labor.
SENIOR CITIZENS — Means persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older.
§ 17-4.2. Establishment of Rents. [1999 Code § 5.52.020]
Failure on the part of the tenant to pay rent due and owing whether the
same shall have become due by virtue of a written lease, an oral letting
or a month-to-month tenancy;
a.
Disorderly, disturbing, damaging or malicious conduct on the part of
the tenant that is harmful to the peace and tranquility of the landlord,
other tenants or neighbors or destructive of personal property;
b.
Intentional or neglectful conduct that creates or permits dirt, filth,
noise, damage or destruction of any kind;
c.
Frequent or repeated violations by the tenant of contractual obligations
contained in the lease or of reasonable rules or regulations established
by the landlord previously having been agreed to;
d.
e. Substantial breach of terms and conditions contained in a lease;
Clear and convincing proof that the owner intends to occupy the
premises personally. Any owner seeking eviction of a tenant or
possession of the premises on the ground that it shall be for his or her
own use must occupy the premises within sixty (60) days and for not
less than one (1) year;
f.
Owner seeks to close the premises down and will not permit any further
occupancy in the future.
g.
§ 17-4.1 EDISON CODE § 17-4.2
AO:606
§ 17-4.3. Vacancy Decontrol. [1999 Code § 5.52.025]
a. Rates and Increases. Establishment of rents between the landlord and
tenants to whom this section is applicable shall be determined by the
provisions of this section.
b. Maximum Rent Increase. Beginning with the sixtieth (60th) day
preceding the adoption of this section, at the expiration of a lease or at
the termination of the lease of a periodic tenant, no landlord shall
request or receive a percentage increase in rent above the base rent
which is greater than the percentage five (5%) percent per annum.
c. Other Charges.
1. No landlord shall charge to any tenant a separate charge or fee for
any privilege, service or facility normally connected with the use or
occupancy of a dwelling.
2. Any separate charge or fee presently in effect for services or
facilities, such as garage spaces, parking spaces, swimming pool
membership or similar services and facilities, if mandatory, shall be
subject to the same percentage increase as shall the base rent.
3. No landlord shall charge any application fee to prospective tenants
unless said fee bears a reasonable relationship to some expense
incurred by the landlord in processing the application. Any fee in
excess of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars shall be presumed
unreasonable and subject to prosecution unless the landlord can
establish the reasonableness of same.
4. No tenant shall be charged any brokerage commission or charge.
Any such charge shall be borne solely by the landlord.
5. No landlord may rent a dwelling as a furnished dwelling for any
additional charge or rental unless the dwelling is equipped with
furniture sufficient in and of itself to make the dwelling habitable.
No landlord may sell any item of personality to a tenant for more
than the cost of same to the landlord, less a reasonable adjustment
for depreciation. No landlord shall rent or lease any item of
personality to a tenant for a monthly charge or fee more than onethirty-
sixth of the cost of same to the landlord, less a reasonable
adjustment for depreciation.
d. Rent Rolls. All Landlords of rental units subject to regulation by this
section shall provide the Fair Rental Housing Board with certified
yearly rent rolls on February 1, 2003 and on February 1 every year
thereafter. The rent rolls shall include all units.
a. Notwithstanding the language contained in subsection 17-4.2, the
provisions of this section limiting rent increases shall not apply upon
the vacancy of a dwelling unit and its subsequent re-rental to a new
tenant. Upon the re-rental of the dwelling unit to a new tenant, the
§ 17-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-4.3
AO:607
§ 17-4.4. Rental Increases. [1999 Code § 5.52.030]
Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease is prohibited and void. Any rental increase in
excess of that authorized by the provisions of this section is prohibited and
void.
§ 17-4.5. Notice of Intent to Increase Rent. [1999 Code § 5.52.040]
Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall first notify the tenant, by
ordinary mail, with proof of mailing, of the calculations involved in
computing the allowable increase against the previous year's base rent. The
notice shall be sent no later that sixty (60) days prior to the date that the
increased rent sought is to be effective, and notice shall detail the prior
rent, the amount of the increase in dollars and the new base rent sought.
landlord is free to rent the unit at a rental price mutually agreeable to
the landlord and the prospective tenant for the initial one (1) year term
of the lease. Thereafter the provision of this section shall apply.
b. Upon the vacancy and re-rental of a dwelling unit the landlord shall
within thirty (30) days after the commencement of the new lease file an
amendment to its multiple-dwelling registration statement as required
to be filed pursuant to Section 17-2, Multiple Dwelling Regulations. The
amendment shall be on a form prescribed by the Fair Rental Housing
Board and shall indicate the apartment number, the new base rental,
the date of the commencement of the new lease and such other
information as the Fair Rental Housing Boards deems reasonable to
include.
c. Upon the vacancy and re-rental of a dwelling unit, the landlord shall file
with the Fair Rental Housing Board a certification on a form prescribed
by the Board stating that the vacancy was accomplished by voluntary
choice of the former tenant or by legal process of law or by willful
abandonment by the former tenant. The certification shall also contain
a statement by landlord that the vacancy was not induced by
harassment or annoyance by landlord.
d. It is unlawful for any landlord or his or her agents to willfully harass,
annoy, intimidate or take any similar action designed to induce a tenant
to quit the premises except such action as a landlord is entitled to
pursue under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
e. A landlord shall not unreasonably deny a request by a tenant to transfer
to a different unit in the complex. Should a tenant request and should
the landlord approve a move by tenant from one apartment in a multiple
dwelling to another apartment in a multiple dwelling, the apartment
vacated by the tenant shall no longer be subject to the application of
this section, whereas the apartment to which the tenant removes
himself shall remain subject to the application of this section.
§ 17-4.3 EDISON CODE § 17-4.6
AO:608
§ 17-4.6. Tax Appeals. [1999 Code § 5.52.050]
In the event that a landlord perfects a successful tax appeal, the tenant shall
receive one hundred (100%) percent of all reductions as applied pro rata to
the tenant's living space so leased, after deducting all reasonable expenses
incurred by the landlord in perfecting the tax appeal.
§ 17-4.7. Increases Due to Hardship or Capital Improvement. [1999
Code § 5.52.060]
a. Financial Hardship.
1. After public hearing and upon a finding that a landlord cannot meet
his or her mortgage payments, taxes, current operating expenses
on the multiple dwelling or cannot otherwise earn a fair and
reasonable rate of return upon his or her investment in the
dwelling, the Fair Rental Housing Board may grant to the landlord
a specific hardship increase for each unit of housing space in the
dwelling, based upon the number of square feet of each unit of
housing space.
2. The hardship surcharge so allowed shall not be considered base
rent for purposes of computing the annual percentage increase
provided in subsection 17-4.2, nor shall such surcharge be
continued for a duration in excess of one (1) year without first
being reconsidered by the Fair Rental Housing Board after due and
timely notice to tenants as hereinafter provided. The Board may,
upon good cause shown and upon notice to tenants, continue a
surcharge for more than one (1) year without being reconsidered
by the Board, but such extension shall not exceed one (1) additional
year and shall be granted only if the landlord agrees to terms and
conditions required in the discretion of the Board, including
security and a rollback in the event that it is subsequently
determined that the hardship surcharge was not warranted for
more than the initial one-year period.
3. Any application by a landlord for a hardship increase shall be
accompanied by such financial statements and other
documentation as the Fair Rental Housing Board shall require.
Such application shall be accompanied by a sworn statement or
certification that each tenant was notified of the date, time and
place of the public hearing at least five (5) business days prior
thereto, and the notice shall contain the amount of surcharge
requested by the landlord for each apartment. The notice shall
advise each tenant of the right to examine copies of all
documentation submitted to the Fair Rental Housing Board. As a
condition precedent to each application being considered, the
landlord must make a copy of the complete application, including
copies of financial documentation, available to the tenants affected
during normal business hours.
§ 17-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-4.7
AO:609
4. In determining the inability of the landlord to earn a fair and
reasonable rate of return upon his investment in the dwelling such
as to justify the hardship increase, the Fair Rental Housing Board
may consider the following factors:
(a) Taxes;
(b) Costs of maintenance and operation of the property;
(c) The kind, quality and quantity of the services being furnished
or withheld by the landlord;
(d) The number and frequency of prior hardship or capital
improvement increases for the multiple dwelling;
(e) The landlord's original and current investment;
(f) The dates, amounts, terms and interest rates of all past and
current mortgages;
(g) The amount of current professional and management fees and
the relation, if any, between the landlord and the recipients of
such fees;
(h) The age of the dwelling as well as its original and current
appraisal value;
(i) The present and past rates of vacancy;
(j) The efficiency of current management;
(k) Cash flow history;
(l) Fair return, meaning the percentage of return on equity in real
property investment. The amount of return shall be measured
by the net income before depreciation. The Board shall
consider a fair rate of return in an efficiently run multiple
dwelling to be six (6%) percent above the maximum passbook
demand deposit savings account interest rate available in the
municipality. The six (6%) percent is provided to reflect the
higher risk [three (3%) percent] and lesser liquidity [three (3%)
percent] of the real property investment in comparison to
savings account investments. This factor is to be considered
along with the other factors provided herein;
(m) Other factors which the Board, through its experience, shall
determine to affect the rate of return.
5. The Board shall make its determination in writing, and the landlord
shall serve a copy of the determination to each tenant by ordinary
mail or personally.
b. Improvements.
§ 17-4.7 EDISON CODE § 17-4.7
AO:610
§ 17-4.8. Escrow Account. [1999 Code § 5.52.070]
1. The landlord may also seek rental increases where major capital
improvements have been provided or where additional services,
not previously accorded, have been instituted. As a prerequisite for
such an increase, notices outlined in paragraph a. above must be
given, which notices must contain the total cost of the completed
capital improvement or service, projection of useful life of the
project in years as claimed by the landlord for purposes of
depreciation for income tax purposes, the average cost of the
improvement, the total number of square feet of the dwelling or the
dwelling complex, the total square feet demised to the tenant and
the capital improvement increase that the landlord is seeking from
each tenant.
2. On receipt of such an appeal, the Fair Rental Housing Board shall
determine if the improvement is major in character, and if so, may
permit the increase up to but not in excess of fifteen (15%) percent
of the amount of the rent on the hearing date.
a. Establishment of Account upon Hardship or Improvement Surcharge
Application.
1. Upon submission of an application, the applicant shall be required
to establish an escrow account with the Township.
2. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Fair Rental Housing Board
shall determine if the improvement is major in character, and if so,
may permit the increase up to but not in excess of fifteen (15%)
percent of the amount of the rent on the hearing date.
3. The applicant shall forthwith deposit such funds in the escrow
account maintained by the Tax Collector of the Township. The
professional experts shall submit vouchers for all reasonable and
necessary fees for the professional services rendered, which fees
shall be paid from the escrow account in the manner prescribed by
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16 through 18.
4. The professional expert shall, at the time of submission of any such
voucher, forward a copy of same to the applicant. In the event that
the applicant questions the reasonableness of any such voucher,
the applicant shall, not later than five (5) days after receipt of a
copy of said voucher, make written protest of such voucher to the
Board. In no event shall the Board authorize the payment of any
voucher submitted pursuant to this subsection sooner than ten (10)
days from its submission.
5. Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account upon
completion of the application shall be returned to the applicant as
soon as it is practicably possible.
§ 17-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-4.8
AO:611
§ 17-4.9. Fair Rental Housing Board Established. [1999 Code
§ 5.52.080]
6. Should additional funds be required after the original funds are
exhausted and should such funds be deemed necessary in the
judgment of the Board, then such funds shall be paid by the
applicant to the Tax Collector of the Township and placed in the
escrow account.
7. The Board shall take no formal action on any application unless and
until all escrow funds have been deposited with the Tax Collector of
the Township.
b. Fee for Application for Improvement.
1. At or before the filing by a landlord for a capital improvement
increase, the landlord shall pay to the Township Clerk a fee for the
application in the amount of fifty ($50.00) dollars for each separate
capital improvement for which the landlord claims an increase.
2. Prior to processing any application for a capital improvement
increase, the Fair Rental Housing Board shall be furnished with
proof of payment of the application fee.
3. Should the Board grant a capital improvement increase to the
landlord, the amount of the increase shall take into consideration
the application fee incurred by the landlord.
a. There is created a Fair Rental Housing Board within the Township to be
known as the "Edison Township Fair Rental Housing Board." This Board
shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Municipal Council. The terms of office of the
seven (7) board members shall be three (3) years and shall be staggered
in such a manner that two (2) board members' terms will end in the first
year, another two (2) members' terms will end in the second year, and
the remaining three (3) members' terms will end in the third year from
the date of the original appointments under this section.
b. The powers of the Board hereinafter granted and defined are final. Four
(4) members thereof shall constitute a quorum; provided, however, that
the quorum shall be increased to five (5) members in cases of hardship
applications and capital improvement applications. The majority vote at
any hearing shall be legally sufficient to render a final determination.
All determinations of the Board reflecting the decisions, findings and
determinations shall be final.
c. The adoption of this section shall not effect the terms or appointment of
any member of the Rent Control Board appointed prior to the adoption
of this section pursuant to an ordinance in effect at that time. Members
so appointed shall continue for their terms as members of the Fair
Rental Housing Board.
§ 17-4.8 EDISON CODE § 17-4.9
AO:612
§ 17-4.10. Fair Rental Housing Board; Powers. [1999 Code
§ 5.52.090]
§ 17-4.11. Maintenance of Standards. [1999 Code § 5.52.100]
Landlords shall maintain the same standards of service and maintenance
of all real and personal property and equipment in and around the housing
spaces and dwellings in the same manner as was provided on the date of
adoption of this section.
§ 17-4.12. Initial Rents. [1999 Code § 5.52.110]
The owner of housing space or dwelling units being rented for the first time
shall not be restricted to the initial rent they charge. Any subsequent rental
increase, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
d. In addition to the seven (7) regular members of the Board, the Mayor,
with the approval of the Council, shall also appoint two (2) alternate
members, who shall be so designated; and an alternate shall act only in
the absence of a regular member of the Board. The term of each
alternate shall be three (3) years. The alternates shall serve without
compensation.
a. Promulgate and issue rules and regulations to give effect to the
purposes of this section and revise, repeal and amend the same from
time to time. Sufficient copies of the current rules and regulations shall
be on file with the Township Clerk;
b. Supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants and aid
them in compliance with this section;
c. Hold hearings, after due notice, and record findings;
d. To order a landlord to adjust rental, surcharges and increases allowed
under this section to the lawful amount after due and timely notice,
after public hearing and with recorded findings;
e. To order a landlord to refund to affected tenants any overcharge in
rental, surcharges or increases in rental after due and timely notice,
after public hearing and with recorded findings;
f. Orders by the Fair Rental Housing Board directing a landlord to adjust
rental, surcharges and/or increases or directing a landlord to refund
overcharges in same shall be enforceable by criminal prosecution in the
Municipal Court if the landlord refuses to comply and shall also be
enforceable by civil proceedings brought by the Board in the Superior
Court of New Jersey;
g. In civil actions instituted by the Board pursuant to paragraph f., the
landlord shall be responsible for counsel fees and costs reasonably
incurred by the Board in instituting and prosecuting the civil
proceedings to enforce its orders.
§ 17-4.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-4.13
AO:613
§ 17-4.13. Exemption. [1999 Code § 5.52.120]
a. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq. this
section, which limits the periodic or regular increases in base rentals of
dwelling units, shall not apply to multiple dwellings constructed after
June 25, 1987, for a period of time not to exceed the period of
amortization of any initial mortgage loan obtained for the multiple
dwelling, or for thirty (30) years following completion of construction,
whichever is less.
b. In the event that there is no initial mortgage financing, the period of
exemption from this section shall be thirty (30) years from the
completion of construction.
c. Exemption Statement. The owner of any multiple dwelling exempted
from this section pursuant to this paragraph, shall, prior to entering
into any lease with a person for tenancy of any premises located in the
multiple dwelling, furnish the prospective tenant with a written
statement that the multiple dwelling in which the premises is located is
exempt from this section for such time as may remain in the exemption
period. Each lease offered to a prospective tenant for any dwelling unit
therein during the period the multiple dwelling is so exempted shall
contain a provision notifying the tenant of the exemption.
d. Filing of Exemption; Contents; Notice of Termination.
1. The owner of any multiple dwelling claiming an exemption from
this section pursuant to this paragraph shall file with the municipal
Construction Official, within sixty (60) days of the passage of this
section, the following:
(a) A written statement of the owner's claim of exemption from
this section;
(b) A statement of the date upon which the exemption period so
claimed commenced;
(c) The address of the multiple dwelling;
(d) The name and address of the owner of the multiple dwelling;
(e) The name and address of the superintendent and/or the name
and address of the agent in charge of the multiple dwelling;
(f) A statement of the number of rental dwelling units in the
multiple dwelling for which the exemption is claimed;
(g) The number of square feet in the entire multiple dwelling;
(h) The number or other designation of each dwelling unit;
(i) The total square footage for each dwelling unit;
§ 17-4.13 EDISON CODE § 17-4.13
AO:614
§ 17-4.14. Notice to Tenants. [1999 Code § 5.52.130]
A landlord renting to a new tenant shall be required to submit the following
information to the tenant, in writing, and the failure of the landlord to do so
shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 17-4.15. Condominium Conversion. [1999 Code § 5.52.140]
(j) The immediately previous base rent charged for each dwelling
unit;
(k) The most current hardship surcharge chargeable to each
dwelling unit, if any;
(l) Any capital improvement surcharge chargeable to each
dwelling unit;
(m) The effective date of the most recent lease, if any; and
(n) A copy of the lease containing a provision notifying the tenant
of the exemption.
2. The owner shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the
termination of the exemption period afforded pursuant to this
subsection, file with the municipal Construction Official a notice of
the date of termination of the exemption period for the affected
multiple dwelling.
a. The landlord shall supply a statement to each new tenant, in writing,
that there is a rent control and stabilization ordinance or code within
the Township, and that copies of the rent control and stabilization code
or ordinance are available to the tenant from the office of the Municipal
Clerk at a minimal cost.
b. The landlord shall notify the tenant at the time of entering into a lease
of all charges to be paid for by the tenant, including the base rent,
hardship surcharges and improvement surcharges.
a. The Fair Rental Housing Board shall be designated as the local agency
to administer the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act.
In administering the Act, the Fair Rental Housing Board shall be
governed by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq. and
regulations promulgated by the Department of Community Affairs,
N.J.A.C. 5:24-1 et seq.
b. The Fair Rental Housing Board shall have the power to issue rules and
regulations to administer the Act and regulations consistent with the
provisions of the Act and regulations.
c. The Mayor shall have the authority to appoint a panel of three (3)
hearing officers to hear appeals or challenges to determinations made
by the Fair Rental Housing Board with regard to eligibility under the
Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act. Each member
§ 17-4.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-4.15
AO:615
§ 17-4.16. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 5.52.150]
Willful violations of any of the provisions hereof, including but not limited
to material misstatements contained in any of the notices required herein,
shall be punishable in the Municipal Court by fines of not more than two
hundred ($200.00) dollars for the first offense and not more than the
penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. Violations affecting more than one
(1) leasehold shall be considered separate violations.
§ 17-4.17. Construction and Severability. [1999 Code § 5.52.160]
§ 17-5. (RESERVED)
§ 17-6. HOUSING DISCRIMINATION.
§ 17-6.1. Declaration of Policy. [1999 Code § 9.24.010]
In the Township, having a population encompassing people of various races,
creeds, colors and national origins, there is no greater danger to the health,
morals, safety and welfare of the town and its inhabitants than the existence
of groups of individuals reflecting prejudice against one another and
antagonistic to each other because of differences of race, creed, color
shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey. The assignment
of appeals shall be on an equal rotating basis. The appeal officer shall
act in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq., and in accordance
with the regulations of the rules promulgated by the Department of
Community Affairs, N.J.A.C. 5:24-1.
d. Upon notification by a landlord/sponsor to the Fair Rental Housing
Board of intention to convert, the landlord/sponsor shall pay to the
Township Clerk a fee of ten ($10.00) dollars per individual unit. This
shall be paid at the time that the landlord/sponsor submits its tenant
lists, forms and mailing envelopes. This fee shall be designed to cover
the cost of administering the Act. It shall be reviewed annually to
determine whether it is covering the cost to the municipality to
administer the Act.
e. Any person requesting an appeal to an appeal officer shall pay an
appeal fee to the Township Clerk in the amount of one hundred fifty
($150.00) dollars. This fee, less a reasonable administrative expense to
the Township, shall be paid to the hearing officer to cover his or her
services in hearing the appeal and issuing a written determination.
a. This section, being necessary for the welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the general
intended purposes.
b. If any portion or clause of this section is declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, same shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other part or portion of this section.
§ 17-4.15 EDISON CODE § 17-6.1
AO:616
or national origin; the Township Council finds and declares that acts of
prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination which deny a person
the opportunity to sell, purchase, lease, rent or obtain financing for the
purchase or lease of housing accommodation because of race, creed, color
or national origin threaten the fundamental rights and privileges of the
Township and undermine the foundations of a free democratic society. In
an effort to promote goodwill among various racial, religious and ethnic
groups of the Township and in an endeavor to alleviate restraint, upon
those fundamental rights which are the sense of freedom, the Township
Council declares it to be the public policy of the Township to eliminate and
prevent discrimination and involuntary segregation based on race, creed,
color or national origin and to safeguard the right of every person to
sell, purchase, lease, rent or obtain financing for the purchase or lease of
housing accommodation without regard to race, creed, color or national
origin.
§ 17-6.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 9.24.020]
As used in this section:
COMPLAINANT — Means a person who has filed a complaint under
subsection 17-6.6.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Means any place permitted for human
habitation within the limits of this Township.
PERSON — Means natural persons, firms, partnerships, corporations,
associations or other artificial bodies, forms of business designated or
known as cooperatives, trustees, receivers and officers, employees, agents
and others acting for or on behalf of any person.
REAL PROPERTY — Means real estate, lands, tenements and/or
hereditaments.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION — Means only those unlawful practices and
acts specified herein as violations of this section.
§ 17-6.3. Unfair Housing Practices Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 9.24.030]
a. It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any owner, or person
acting for or on behalf of any owner or rights to housing or real
property, with or without compensation, including but not limited to
persons licensed as real estate brokers or salesmen, attorneys, agents,
auctioneers, or representatives by power of attorney or appointment, or
any person acting under court order or will or any other such person:
1. To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease any real property or
housing accommodation or part, portion or interest therein to any
person because of the race, color, creed, religion or national origin
of such person;
§ 17-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-6.3
AO:617
2. To represent that any housing accommodation or real property is
not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when, in fact, it is
so available, or to otherwise deny or withhold information about
any housing accommodation or real property or any facilities of any
housing accommodations or real property which are available for
inspection, sale, rental or lease from any person or group of
persons because of the race, color, creed, religion or national origin
of such person;
3. To discriminate against any person because of his or her race,
color, creed, religion or national origin in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any
real property or housing accommodation or in the furnishing of
facilities or services in connection therewith;
4. To directly or indirectly advertise or in any other manner indicate
or publicize that the purchase, rental, accommodation or any part,
portion or interest therein by persons of any particular race, creed,
color, religion or national origin is unwelcome, objectionable,
unacceptable or not solicited;
5. To use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of
any housing accommodation or real property or to make any record
of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or
lease of any housing accommodation or property which expresses,
directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination
as to race, creed, color, religion or national origin or any intent to
make such limitation, specification or discrimination.
b. No person, private banker, bank or financial institution or lender doing
business in the Township, or any officer, agent or employee thereof, to
whom application is made for the lending of money for the purchase,
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any
housing accommodation or property shall:
1. Discriminate against any such applicant because of the race, creed,
color, religion or national background of such applicant or against
the prospective occupants or tenants of such housing
accommodation or property in the granting, extending or renewing
of rates, terms or conditions of any such loan;
2. Use any form of application for such loan or make any record of
inquiry in connection with applications therefor which expresses,
directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination
because of race, creed, color, religion or national origin.
c. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar any religious
institution or organization, or any organization operated for charitable
or educational purposes which is operated, supervised or controlled by
or in connection with a religious organization, in the sale, lease or rent
of real property, from limiting admission to or giving preference to
persons of the same religion or denomination or from making such
§ 17-6.3 EDISON CODE § 17-6.3
AO:618
§ 17-6.4. Aiding or Abetting in Unfair Practices. [1999 Code
§ 9.24.040]
It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for:
§ 17-6.5. Copy of Regulations to Be Delivered to Certain Persons.
[1999 Code § 9.24.050]
The Township Building Inspector shall deliver a copy of this section and
all amendments thereto to every person to whom a building permit and
certificate of occupancy is issued after this section takes effect.
§ 17-6.6. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 9.24.060]
selection as is calculated by such organization to promote the religious
principles for which it is established or maintained. The provisions
of this subsection shall apply only to those religious, charitable and
educational institutions and organizations which have been granted an
exemption from taxation by the Township of Edison, the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
d. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any person who
owns a one- or two-family dwelling, in which he or she then resides,
from refusing to lease one (1) or more rooms in such dwelling to any
other person for reasons which would otherwise constitute a violation
of the provisions of this section.
a. Any person to intentionally aid, abet, compel or coerce another person
to engage in any of the practices declared unfair or discriminatory by
this section;
b. Any person to discriminate against another person in any of the rights
protected against discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color,
religion or national origin by this section because such person has
lawfully opposed any practice forbidden under this section, obeys the
provisions of this section or has filed a charge, testified or assisted in
any proceeding under this section.
a. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair
practice within the Township may, by himself or his or her attorney,
make, sign and file a written complaint with the Clerk of the Municipal
Court of the Township, which complaint shall set forth the basis thereof
and specify those regulations violated. Any complaint filed under this
section shall be filed within ninety (90) days after the most recent act
constituting the alleged discriminatory or unfair practice.
b. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall promptly give notice to the party
complained of by mailing or delivering a copy of the complaint to such
person at his last known address, and shall fix a day for a hearing with
respect to such complaint not later than fifteen (15) days from the filing
thereof.
§ 17-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-6.7
AO:619
§ 17-6.7. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.24.070]
§ 17-6.8. Additional Remedies. [1999 Code § 9.24.080]
In no instance shall any complainant hereunder be precluded from pursuing
his or her lawful remedies under the New Jersey Fair Housing Law, N.J.S.A.
18:25-4, or any other similar New Jersey statute.
§ 17-7. CANVASSING FOR PROPERTY LISTINGS OR SALES.
§ 17-7.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 9.24.090]
As used in this section:
CANVASSING — Means door-to-door soliciting or soliciting by the use
of circulars, visitations or any other means where the canvasser or his
employer has not been invited or requested by the owner, as defined in
this subsection, to obtain a listing of real property or to confer with the
owner regarding a real estate transaction. The term "canvassing" as defined
shall not apply when such soliciting is restricted to a specific house on a
particular day.
OWNER — Means the lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other
person having the right to ownership or possession or the right to sell, rent
or lease any real property.
PERSON — Means any firm, association, partnership or corporation, as
well as a natural person. The term "person" as applied to partnerships
or other associations includes their members and as applied to firms and
corporations includes their officers and employees.
PURCHASER — Means any occupant, prospective occupant, lessee,
prospective lessee, buyer, prospective buyer or any agent of these.
§ 17-7.2. Information to Be Filed Prior to Canvassing. [1999 Code
§ 9.24.100]
a. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
Each and every offense shall be deemed to be and constitute a separate
and distinct violation of this section.
b. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided in the case of
conviction under this section, upon any four (4) convictions for
violations of this section, the premises in or upon which the violation
occurred shall be deemed a nuisance, and the owners, tenants and
occupants of such premises shall be liable for the penalties and
additional penalties provided for the maintenance of nuisances in
accordance with such acts made and provided.
a. Any person who receives or expects to receive pecuniary gain from the
sale of real property in the Township shall be required to complete and
file a form provided by the Township Clerk in accordance with
§ 17-6.7 EDISON CODE § 17-7.2
AO:620
§ 17-7.3. Prohibited Acts. [1999 Code § 9.24.110]
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
to commit any one (1) or more of the following acts:
paragraphs b. and c. prior to engaging in any activities to canvass in
the Township in an attempt to obtain listings of real property or in an
attempt to bring about the sale or purchase of real property.
b. The form shall contain the following information:
1. Name and address of the person completing the form;
2. Name and address of the person by whom such person is employed;
3. A listing of the particular block or blocks in the Township which the
person intends to canvass, as well as the date or dates of canvass.
This listing shall be a realistic estimate of the actual intent of the
canvasser.
c. The form shall be completed and filed no less than ten (10) days nor
more than thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the canvass will
take place.
a. To induce directly or indirectly or attempt to induce directly or
indirectly the sale or listing for sale of real property by representing
that an adverse change has occurred or will or may occur with respect
to the racial, religious or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood
or area in which the property is located;
b. To induce directly or indirectly or attempt to induce directly or
indirectly the sale or listing for sale of real property by representing
that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular
race, religion or national origin in the area will or may result in:
1. The lowering of property values,
2. An increase in the criminal or antisocial behavior in the area,
3. A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area;
c. To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the
anticipated listing for sale or the sale of real property in the area for the
purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale
of real property;
d. To make any representation to any prospective purchaser that any
block, neighborhood or area has, will or might undergo an adverse
change with respect to the religious, racial or ethnic composition of the
block, neighborhood or area for the purpose of discouraging the
purchase of property in a particular area;
e. To place a sign purporting to offer for sale any property that is not in
fact offered for sale;
§ 17-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-7.3
AO:621
§ 17-7.4. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 9.24.120]
f. To advertise for sale or rental property which is nonexistent or which is
not actually for sale or rental;
g. To engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or activities
of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite
unrest or create or play upon fear with the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of real property;
h. To solicit a listing from any homeowner who has previously requested in
writing that such person refrain from soliciting such homeowner;
i. To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of intimidation
against any person because that person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding
or conference under the terms of this section;
j. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the
practices forbidden by this section or to obstruct or prevent any person
from complying with the provisions of this section.
a. The Director of Law shall have the following functions, powers and
duties in addition to those provided otherwise by law:
1. To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind suitable rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this section, provided that
such rules and regulations shall be approved by the Township
Council and, upon approval, filed with the Township Clerk;
2. To receive and investigate complaints alleging violations of the
provisions of this section;
3. To hold conferences and make investigations and, for this purpose,
to call upon Township officials and employees and other bodies to
aid and assist him therein;
4. To render each year to the Township Council a written report of
activities pertaining to this section.
b. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful practice
forbidden by this section may, by himself or herself or by his or her
attorney at law, make, sign and file with the Director of Law a verified
complaint in writing which shall state the name and address of the
person, firm, partnership or corporation alleged to have committed the
unlawful practice complained of and which shall set forth the
particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be
reasonably required by the Director of Law.
c. After the filing of a complaint by an aggrieved person or by any
Township resident, the Director of Law shall cause a prompt
investigation to be made of the alleged unlawful practice.
§ 17-7.3 EDISON CODE § 17-7.4
AO:622
§ 17-7.5. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 9.24.130]
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who violates any
provision of this section shall, after conviction, be punishable by a fine of
not more than two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or by imprisonment for not
more than ninety (90) days, or both.
Chapter 18
(RESERVED)
Chapter 19
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 19-1. STREET EXCAVATIONS AND OCCUPATION.
Prior ordinances: 1999 Code §§ 12.04.010 — 12.04.120.
§ 19-1.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
d. If, after such investigation, the Director of Law shall determine that no
probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the complainant,
he or she shall, within ten (10) days from such determination, cause to
be issued and served upon the complainant written notice of such
determination.
e. If, after such investigation, the Director of Law shall determine that
probable cause exists in accordance with the allegations of the
complaint, he or she shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the
unlawful practice complained of by conference and conciliation. Such
conference shall be opened to the public unless otherwise requested by
one (1) or both of the parties to the conference. He or she may refer the
matter to Township officials or employees to conduct or assist in such
conferences.
f. If the practice complained of is not eliminated, the Director of Law may:
1. Refer the matter to the Real Estate Commission of the State of New
Jersey for such disciplinary action as may seem appropriate and
make any records available to the Commission as may relate to the
matter, notwithstanding any other action which the Director of Law
may take or may have already taken;
2. Sign a complaint against the alleged offending person for trial
before the Municipal Court or cause a complaint to be signed by
any aggrieved person or interested party;
3. Prosecute the matter as he may deem proper or necessary under
the circumstances.
§ 17-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.1
AO:623
§ 19-1.2. Application. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
a. No person (defined to mean any corporation, company, association,
firm, partnership or individual) shall make an excavation in or tunnel
under any street for the laying of gas, water or sewer or for any other
purpose without first obtaining a permit from the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
b. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to start work
immediately, provided that the application for permit shall be
retroactive to the date on which the work was begun and that the Police
Department and the Department of Public Works be notified before
work commences. The permit shall be applied for within 24 hours of the
known emergency or on the next business day, whichever is more
practical.
c. The Director of the Department of Public Works or the Township
Engineer shall be notified within 24 hours of a road opening for an
emergency situation. If a road opening commences on a Saturday or
Sunday as a result of emergency work, the Police Department shall be
notified prior to the start of work, and the Director of the Department of
Public Works or the Township Engineer shall be notified on the morning
of the first business day thereafter.
d. No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or public place in the
Township of Edison by placing therein or thereon any building materials
or any articles whatsoever without first obtaining the written
permission from the Director of Public Works.
e. The Director of Public Works shall have the power to grant permits to
builders and others to occupy space not to exceed one-third (1/3) of the
width of a vehicular lane of any street with building material if, in his
opinion, the public interest or inconvenience will not suffer thereby. The
fee for a permit to occupy the street shall be seventy-five ($75.00)
dollars.
f. The Director of the Department of Public Works [supervisor of the
Division of Licenses and Permits may issue permits to municipal public
bodies without fee.
a. Applications for a permit shall be made to the Director of the
Department of Public Works and shall contain the following
information:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The name of the street where the opening is to be made and the
street number, if any, of the abutting property;
§ 19-1.1 EDISON CODE § 19-1.2
AO:624
§ 19-1.3. Fees and Deposits. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
3. The nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made
(whether sewer, water or gas and whether new construction or the
repair of an existing street);
4. The character and purpose of the work proposed;
5. The date when the work is to be commenced and date when work is
to be completed.
6. A plan or sketch in proper scale indicating the size and location of
the proposed opening(s) which shall include:
(a) The distance in feet from the nearest intersection and from the
nearest curbline;
(b) The dimensions of the opening including length and width; and
(c) The type of pavement or surface to be opened.
7. Any applicant for a permit shall provide to the Township proof of
general liability insurance coverage
8. A utility mark-out within the area affected
9. Traffic Control Plan
10. A written agreement to completely restore the area affected within
a specified number of calendar days after the first disruption
thereof to the condition it was in at the time it was first completed.
The selected period of time is subject to the approval of the
Director of the Department of Public Works and the Township
Engineer.
b. Each application shall state the identity and address of the applicant,
the party responsible for performing such construction, the location
where the excavation or tunnel is to be made, the dimensions of the
opening and the date when the work is to be commenced and
completed.
c. The Department of Public Works shall issue a permit to the applicant
when it determines that (i) the necessary documents are acceptable in
form and substance, (ii) the applicant has paid the review and
inspection fee, (iii) the applicant has posted sufficient security, (iv) the
applicant has satisfied all other requirements applicable to the issuance
of permits in the Township of Edison.
a. An administrative application fee must be paid in the form of a check or
money order when the application is made. The applicant shall be
charged an administrative application fee of two hundred ($200.00)
dollars for each permit.
§ 19-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.3
AO:625
b. A deposit must be paid in form of a check or money order when the
application is made. For each opening made in any unimproved street,
street paved with macadam, street paved with reinforced concrete, or
any similar type of finished pavement, or tunneling the applicant shall
be charged twenty ($20.00) dollars per square foot or portion thereof;
minimum charge, two hundred ($200.00) dollars in the Township's
escrow account maintained by the Chief Financial Officer. There shall
be filed with the posted security a written consent that if the restoration
work is not completed by the date specified then the Township may
retain a private contractor to perform the restoration work and draw
upon the security to the contractor. Security shall be returned upon
final inspection.
c. In the event that any person shall make an application for a permit after
the excavation shall have been made or the tunneling operation shall
have been performed, the administrative application fee shall be
increased to five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
d. The deposit shall be retained by the Township for the duration of one (1)
year after the surface has been restored. Refunds of deposits will be
made upon satisfactory completion of street opening restoration.
e. Qualified Utilities.
1. Qualified utilities shall be exempt from the individual permit
schedule but must notify the Department of Public Works before
any excavations are made. In lieu of individual permits, a company/
security bond shall serve as a guaranty of fee payments. Such
bonds shall have a duration of one (1) year.
2. Qualified utilities are defined as utilities regulated by New Jersey
Board of Regulatory Commissions.
3. Qualified utilities shall make payment to the Director of the
Department of Public Works on a quarterly basis for all permits
obtained in the preceding quarter.
f. Indemnification.
1. Every permittee, as a condition of accepting any permit issued
hereunder, shall save and hold harmless the Township of Edison
and indemnify the Township of Edison, its officials, agents, servants
and employees for and against any and all loss, damage, claim,
expense or demand whatsoever arising out of any matter or
resulting from the opening or excavation of any street and the
issuance of a permit therefor as provided in this section.
2. Notice of Failure to Make Progress. If the permittee, in installing
the permanent pavement shall fail to make progress satisfactory to
the Director of the Department of Public Works, the Township may
give written notice of such failure to the permittee. If, within
twenty (20) days after the receipt of such notice, the permittee
§ 19-1.3 EDISON CODE § 19-1.3
AO:626
§ 19-1.4. Additional Deposits. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
If the Department of Public Works determines that an excavation for which
a permit has been issued is of greater dimensions than those stated in the
permit, the Department of Public Works shall notify the permittee that an
additional deposit shall be required.
§ 19-1.5. Insurance. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
§ 19-1.6. Rules and Regulations for Excavations. [Ord. No.
O.1999-2018]
All permits issued under this section shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
shall fail to make progress at a rate satisfactory to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, the Township
shall have the right to complete the installation of such pavement,
in which event the permittee shall be charged for the cost thereof
at the rate the Township is billed by the contractor who performs
the work, or at the rate it costs the Township to perform such work
itself, which charges shall be billed after the receipt of the bill
therefore.
a. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished the Director
of the Department of Public Works with satisfactory proof that he or she
is insured against injury to persons and damage to property caused by
any act or mission of the applicant, his or her agents, employees or
subcontractors done in the course of the work to be performed under
the permit. The insurance shall cover all hazards likely to arise in
connection with the work, including but not limited to collapse and
explosion, and shall also insure against liability arising from completed
operations. The limits of the policy of insurance shall be two hundred
fifty thousand ($250,000.00) dollars for injury to any one (1) person,
five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars for injuries to more than
one (1) person in the same accident and an aggregate of one hundred
thousand ($100,000.00) dollars for property damage for a single
incident.
b. Qualified utilities, as defined under subsection 19-1.3e2, shall be
exempt from this subsection, provided that proof of liability insurance is
on file with the Department of Public Works.
a. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and,
during the hours of darkness, shall be provided with proper warning
lights. This regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any
other precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property.
b. All work shall be done in such manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
§ 19-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.6
AO:627
§ 19-1.7. Restoration of Surface. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
In all cases the permittee shall restore the surface of the street in
accordance with the following rules, regulations and requirements:
to traffic unless the closing is approved by the Department of Public
Works. It shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Works
to notify the Department of Public Safety of any such street closing. The
Department of Public Works shall be informed of all street closings at
least twenty-four (24) hours in advance when practical.
c. The Department of Public Works may, upon application by the
permittee, extend the time limit during which the permit shall be valid.
d. If the Department of Public Works or Engineering Department
determines that any backfilled excavation has settled or caved in, it
shall so notify the permittee, who shall promptly continue backfilling
with the materials specified until the Department of Public Works or
Engineering Department determines that settlement is complete.
e. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall
be done in strict compliance with all applicable State laws and
regulations.
f. Utilities shall notify the Department of Public Works a minimum of one
(1) week in advance of scheduled street openings.
g. Street openings shall be straight cut by saw/jackhammer.
h. All work shall be done in accordance with Edison Township standard
details and specifications.
i. Permittee and owners of underground facilities shall comply with the
State of New Jersey's standards relating to construction, excavation
and demolition operations at or near underground facilities.
j. Permittees shall take the precautions necessary to project such pipes,
mains, conduits, and other appurtenances at their own expense.
k. All work shall be done in accordance with the specifications and
provisions of the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT).
l. All debris on the street shall be removed at the expiration of the permit
unless otherwise stipulated.
a. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation
or surface until the Department of Public Works or Engineering
Department has determined that settlement of the subsurface is
complete and the area is properly prepared for restoration. The
Department of Public Works or the Engineering Department will
determine, prior to restoration of the surface, if a pre-construction
meeting is necessary in order to review the scope of the improvements,
§ 19-1.6 EDISON CODE § 19-1.7
AO:628
limits of construction and timeframe necessary to complete said
restoration.
b. The extent of surface restoration will be determined based on the
following criteria. However, the exact area of restoration will be
considered on a case by case basis as approved by the Department of
Public Works or Engineering Department.
1. Roadways Under Five-Year Roadway Disturbance Moratorium
(a) For the installation of a residential service, the minimum
restoration work required will be to mill and resurface
(minimum of two inches as determined by the Engineering
Department) the roadway from the lane line nearest lane or
curb line beyond the furthest point of the excavation for the
entire width of the property.
(b) For an excavation running roughly parallel with the roadway
and within the paved limits of the roadway, the minimum
restoration work required will be to mill and resurface
(minimum of two inches as determined by the Engineering
Department) the roadway from the nearest striped lane line
(furthest from the curb) to the nearest curb line, for a minimum
of 100 feet in each direction or to the nearest cross street
beyond the limit of effected roadway, as determined by the
Engineering Department. Should at any time, the excavation
extend beyond the centerline of the roadway, the entire
roadway width will be required to be milled and resurfaced
(minimum of two inches as determined by the Engineering
Department) for the distance previously described.
(c) For an excavation running roughly perpendicular with the
roadway and within the paved limits of the roadway, the
minimum restoration work required shall follow the prescribed
limits as described in subsection 19-17b1(a)
(d) For any scenario not covered above, the pavement restoration
required will be the milling and paving of any lane occupied by
the excavation, for a length to be determined by the
Department of Public Works or Engineering Department. If at
any point, the excavation crosses the centerline of the roadway,
full width paving of the roadway will be required.
2. Roadways Not Currently Under Roadway Disturbance Moratorium
(a) For the installation of residential services, the street surface
shall be restored to extend at a minimum, two (2) foot beyond
the excavation on all sides. The distance along the curb line
shall be no less than ten (10) feet in width and extend to the
nearest lane line beyond the excavation.
§ 19-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.7
AO:629
(b) For an excavation running roughly parallel with the roadway
and within the paved limits of the roadway the minimum
restoration work required will be to mill and resurface the
roadway (minimum of two inches as determined by the
Engineering Department) from the nearest striped lane line
(furthest from the curb) to the nearest curb line, for the entire
length of the excavation, or for a distance of fifty (50) feet in
each direction, whichever is greater.
(c) For an excavation running roughly perpendicular with the
roadway and within the paved limits of the roadway, the
minimum restoration work required shall following the
prescribed limits as described in subsection 19-17b1(b)
(d) For any scenario not covered above, the pavement restoration
required will be the milling and paving of any lane occupied by
the excavation, for a length to be determined by the
Department of Public Works or Engineering Department. If at
any point, the excavation crosses the centerline of the roadway,
full width paving of the roadway will be required.
c. When any foundation is restored by the use of portland cement
concrete, the same shall consist of a mixture by volume of one (1) part
of portland cement, two (2) parts of sand and four (4) parts of gravel or
stone, so as to attain a compressive strength of four thousand (4,000)
pounds per square inch after twenty-eight (28) days.
d. The permittee shall clean up and promptly remove from the site of work
all surplus excavated material and debris, and shall leave the site of the
work in a neat and orderly condition.
1. Where top soil, seeded areas or sod are disturbed in the course of
the work, the permittee shall restore the ground surface to its
original condition.
2. Upon completion of repairs in a street, permittees shall backfill
street openings and excavations in a manner in accordance with
the specifications. All materials used for backfill shall be free from
bricks, blocks, excavated pavement materials and/or organic
material or other debris.
3. Backfill material shall be deposited in horizontal layers not
exceeding twelve (12) inches in thickness prior to compaction. A
minimum of ninety-five (95%) percent of Standard Proctor
Maximum Density will be required after compaction.
4. When placing fill or backfill around pipes, layers shall be deposited
to progressively bury the pipe to equal depths on both sides.
Backfill immediately adjacent to pipes and conduits shall not
contain particles larger than three (3) inches in diameter.
§ 19-1.7 EDISON CODE § 19-1.7
AO:630
5. Compaction shall be attained by the use of impact rammers, plate
or small drum vibrators, or pneumatic button head compaction
equipment. Hand tamping shall not be permitted except in the
immediate area of the underground facility, where it shall be lightly
hand tamped with as many strokes as required to achieve
maximum density. The definition of the "immediate area" shall be a
maximum of eighteen (18) inches from the facility.
6. Where sheeting has been used for the excavation, it shall be pulled
when the excavation has been filled or backfilled to the maximum
unsupported depth allowed by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation guidelines.
7. As a measure of maximum density achieved for temporary
restoration, the pavement surface shall not sink more than two (2)
inches from the surrounding existing surface during the life of the
temporary restoration. More than two (2) inches of settlement shall
be deemed a failure of the compaction of the backfill and cause the
removal of said backfill to the subsurface facility and new fill
installed and properly compacted.
e. Temporary Asphaltic Pavement.
1. Immediately upon completion of the compaction of the backfill of
any street opening, the permittee shall install a temporary
pavement of an acceptable stabilized asphalt paving mixture,
course size one and one-half (1.5) to two (2) inches, not less than
four (4) inches in thickness after compaction, flush with the
adjacent surfaces.
2. The permittee has the option of installing full depth pavement
using an acceptable asphalt paving mixture immediately upon
completion of the compaction of the backfill excluding
reconstructed protected streets and full-depth concreted
roadways.
3. Upon the expiration of the permit, all equipment, construction
materials and debris shall be removed from the site, unless
otherwise stipulated.
4. When final restoration is to be done the materials are to be
removed with hand tools to a depth necessary to accomplish the
final restoration.
5. In the event that two or more unconnected road openings are
requested and dug only ten (10) feet or less apart, the restoration
requirements shall include the milling and paving of a continuous
area including the undisturbed area between the trenches.
f. Plating and Decking.
§ 19-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.7
AO:631
1. All plating and decking installed by the permittee shall be made
safe for vehicles and/or pedestrians and shall be adequate to carry
the load. Plates must be designed by a Professional Engineer and
be rated for traffic. A corresponding certification signed and sealed
by a Licensed Professional Engineer in the state of New Jersey
must be submitted to the Township for each plate, prior to use.
2. The size of the plate or decking shall be large enough to span the
opening, be firmly placed to prevent rocking and shall overlap the
edges of trenches and openings and be sufficiently ramped to
provide smooth riding and a safe condition.
3. All plating and decking shall be fastened by splicing,
countersinking or otherwise protected to prevent movement.
4. Where deflections are more than three-fourths (3/4) inches, heavier
sections of plates or decking or intermediate supports shall be
installed.
5. All plating and decking shall have a skid-resistant surface equal to
or greater than the adjacent existing street or roadway surface.
6. Plating of open excavation is not allowed during winter months.
g. Base.
1. Concrete and asphalt base material shall conform to specifications.
2. Concrete for base shall be plated in a driving lane and intersections
or barricaded in accordance with the Federal Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices in a parking lane for a minimum of three (3)
days to permit proper cure of concrete, unless otherwise specified.
3. Hot asphalt binder materials may be used in place of concrete for
non-protected and/or resurfaced streets at a thickness ratio of one
and one-half (1 1/2) inch of asphalt for every inch of concrete.
4. The concrete base shall be restored at the same grade as the
existing base.
5. At no time will asphalt other than binder be permitted as a base
course. Conduit or pipes shall be installed at a minimum depth of
eighteen (18) inches from the surface of the roadway, or below the
base, whichever is greater. Where conduits and pipes cannot be
installed at the required minimum depth, protective plating shall
be installed over the facilities upon written request from the
permittee and receipt of written approval by the Township
Engineer.
h. Guarantee Period. Permittees shall be responsible for permanent
restoration and maintenance of street openings and excavations for a
period of three (3) years on unprotected streets, and up to five (5) years
§ 19-1.7 EDISON CODE § 19-1.7
AO:632
§ 19-1.8. Conditions of Permit. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
§ 19-1.9. Barricades and Signs. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
on protected streets commencing on the restoration completion date.
This period shall be the guarantee period.
1. Permittees shall comply with all applicable sections of these rules,
the specifications, and all other applicable laws or rules.
2. The Township Engineer may require the use of infrared pavement
repair technology in order to repair the pavement roadway.
Coordination on the use of this method will be required for any
roadway within the five (5) year roadway moratorium.
3. Any street opening in connection with the installation of
telecommunication equipment that is not confined to within eight
(8) feet of the curbline, including the required cut back, on any
street, regardless of status—protected or unprotected—or where
located within the Township, and/or within any sidewalk area
within the Township, shall require full curb-to-curb roadway
restoration under all circumstances.
a. Transferability. Every permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable. Permits issued to utilities shall
show the identity of the utility.
b. Commencement of Work. Work under a permit shall commence with
forty-five (45) days from the date of issuance of the permit. If work is
not commenced within that time, the permit shall automatically
terminate unless extended, in writing, by the Department of Public
Works.
c. Possession of Permit. A copy of the permit must be kept in possession of
the person actually performing the work and shall be exhibited on
demand to any duly authorized employee of the Township.
d. Revocation of Permit. The Department of Public Works may revoke a
permit for any of the following reasons:
1. Violation of any provision of this section or any other applicable
rules, regulations, laws or ordinances;
2. Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
a. The permit holder shall conform to the requirements in the current
manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Part VI, when required by
the Township to provide barricades and/or signs.
b. The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barricades around all
work while excavation or other work is in progress and shall arrange
work in such a manner as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and
delay to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. In the event that such
§ 19-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.9
AO:633
requirement is not complied with by the permittee, the Director of the
Department of Public Works may, in his discretion, cause all or part
of the work covered by the permit to be backfilled and temporarily
resurfaced by the City's own forces or by contract or otherwise. In
which case the City shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred
thereby.
c. Unless otherwise authorized by the Police Department, vehicular traffic
shall be maintained at all times during the progress of the work being
performed under the permit.
d. Permittees shall notify the Police Department of the construction and
street operations that require street closing permits at least twentyfour
(24) hours in advance of the commencement of nonemergency
work.
e. The permittee shall be responsible for keeping the construction area as
clean and neat as possible during the permit life. No material shall
restrict water flow in gutters. All possible arrangements for the safety
of the general public shall be maintained. Every effort shall be made to
keep the pavement opening dimensions to an absolute minimum.
f. Traffic.
1. No more than one (1) lane of traffic may be obstructed, except as
provided by Edison Police Department stipulation.
2. It shall be the duty of the permittee to properly guard the
excavation by the execution of suitable barriers by day and lights
by night and permittee shall be liable for any neglect to safeguard
the traveling public.
3. All unattended street openings or excavations in a driving lane,
including intersections, shall be plated. In the case of gas or steam
leak, barricades in accordance with the New Jersey or Federal
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be used until the
leak is corrected.
4. Barricades, signs, lights and other approved safety devices shall be
displayed in accordance with the New Jersey or Federal Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
5. The permit may restrict street operations and construction within
the critical areas to nights, weekends or off-traffic hours.
6. Flagpersons. Permittees whose work results in the closing of a
moving traffic lane, which requires traffic to be diverted to another
lane, shall, at all times when actively working at the site, post a
flagperson or utilize an authorized plan for the maintenance and
protection of traffic at the point where traffic is diverted to assist
motorists and pedestrians to proceed around the obstructed lane.
§ 19-1.9 EDISON CODE § 19-1.9
AO:634
§ 19-1.10. Notice of Street Improvement; Completion Required.
[Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
Before any street is improved or paved, the Department of Public Works
shall give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street and to
all public utilities and authorities operating in the Township that the street
is about to be paved or improved. All connections and repairs to utilities in
the street and all other work which requires excavation of the street shall
be completed within forty-five (45) days from receipt of notice. The time for
the completion of the work may be extended, in writing, by the Director of
the Department of Public Works upon application by the person performing
the work. This section shall not excuse any person from the requirement of
obtaining a permit as provided in subsection 19-1.1.
§ 19-1.11. Special Permission for Excavations in Recently Improved
Streets. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
g. Temporary Closing of Sidewalks. A minimum of four (4) feet sidewalk
width of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all
times. Where openings and excavations do not allow for four (4) feet of
unobstructed pedestrian passageway, a temporary sidewalk closing
plan should be submitted to the Department of Public Works.
h. Work Site Maintenance.
1. All excavated material shall be removed from the site or stockpiled
at a designated curb, properly barricaded in accordance with the
Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and stored to
keep gutters clear and unobstructed.
2. All obstructions on the street shall be protected by barricades,
fencing or railing, with flags, lights or signs in accordance with the
Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices placed at
proper intervals and during the hours prescribed. During twilight
hours the flags shall be replaced with amber lights.
a. The Township, in an attempt to preserve the integrity of recently
repaved streets, will not issue a street opening permit for a street that
has been repaved with the last five (5) years except in an emergency or
where the public health or safety requires the performance of the work
in question. The five (5) year road moratorium will require the
permittee to install the finished pavement surface to like-new
conditions by the use of infrared pavement technology, full width
milling and paving operations or any other measures as recommended
by the Township Engineer.
b. In cases where the street has been repaved within the last five (5) years
the extent of finished pavement surface repairs will extend beyond the
repair limits so that a natural transition will occur as described in
subsection 19-1.7b1 above. Inspection and bonding requirements
specific to this item shall be adjusted per site disturbance and shall be
§ 19-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.11
AO:635
§ 19-1.12. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1999-2018]
Any person who shall willfully violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5,
and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a
separate violation.
In cases where the street has been repaved within the last five (5) years
and is under the Five-Year Roadway Disturbance Moratorium, any person
who shall willfully violate any provision of this section specific to said
moratorium, shall be fined a minimum of fifteen thousand ($15,000) dollars,
if the excavation occurs within the first three (3) years post construction;
twelve thousand five hundred ($12,500) dollars if the excavation occurs
within year four (4) post construction; ten thousand ($10,000) dollars in
excavation occurs within year five (5) post construction. Fines may be
increased depending upon the severity of the violation and if the offender
does not utilize the guidelines set forth within this ordinance. Each day's
failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate
violation.
In addition, the Township reserves the right to increase the fine to the
equivalent cost for milling and repaving the roadway (minimum of two
inches as determined by the Engineering Department) at the time of the
disturbance. The extent and limits will be as determined by the Township
Engineer. The fine shall be calculated utilizing the most recent public bid
prices for paving operations within the Township of Edison.
§ 19-2. SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS AND
BUSINESS PREMISES.
overseen by the Township Engineering Department. The permittee shall
post the necessary bonding and escrow inspection fees for the
Township Engineering Department to properly oversee the construction
improvements. The Township shall pay from the escrow deposit any
costs incurred by its designated representative(s) or professional
consultant(s) for inspection, other engineering services or legal
services required in connection with the proposed opening, excavation,
backfilling or final paving at the rate established with the Township.
If the escrow deposit fee is or will become insufficient to cover all
costs incurred by the designated representative(s) or professional
consultant(s) for said services, additional escrow deposit fees shall be
estimated by the Director of the Department of Public Works and the
Township Engineer based on the scope of improvements necessary
to install the finished pavement surface to like-new conditions. This
procedure shall be repeated as often as necessary to guarantee
sufficient escrow deposit fees being available. Upon completion and
acceptance of the area by the Township, if any escrow balance remains
then the balance shall be forthwith returned to the applicant.
§ 19-1.11 EDISON CODE § 19-2.1
AO:636
§ 19-2.1. Duty of Owners, Occupants, Tenants to Remove Snow and
Ice. [1999 Code § 12.08.010]
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of premises
abutting or bordering upon any street in the Township shall remove all snow
and ice from the abutting sidewalks of such streets or, in the event of ice
which may be so frozen as to make removal impracticable, shall cause the
same to be thoroughly covered with sand or ashes, within twelve (12) hours
of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 19-2.2. Removal Required at Public Premises and Businesses.
[1999 Code § 12.08.020]
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of premises
used by the public or business invitees shall remove all snow and ice
from the sidewalks, streets and parking areas used by the public in the
transaction of business thereat or, in the event of ice which may be so frozen
as to make removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly
covered with sand or ashes, within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the
same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 19-2.3. Removal by Township; Costs of Removal. [1999 Code
§ 12.08.030]
In case such snow or ice shall not be removed from such sidewalks or public
and business areas as provided in subsections 19-2.1 and 19-2.2, the same
may be removed forthwith and under the direction of the Director of Public
Works, and the cost of such removal as nearly as can be ascertained shall
be certified by the Director of Public Works to the Governing Body. The
Governing Body shall examine such certification and if found to be correct
shall cause such cost to be charged against such real estate so abutting or
bordering upon such sidewalks, and the amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien and a tax upon such real estate or land and be added to,
recorded and collected in the same way and manner as the taxes next to
be levied and assessed upon such premises and shall bear interest and be
enforced and collected by the same officers and in the same manner as
other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine or fines imposed by the
provisions of this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of the
Township to collect the cost as certified for the removal of said snow or ice
in the manner authorized.
§ 19-2.4. Legislative Authority. [1999 Code § 12.08.040]
This section is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by N.J.S.A.
40:65-12.
a. No owner or operator of premises having parking spaces reserved for
handicapped drivers, and no tenant, contractor or other person may
block access to such parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers by
plowing, piling or placement of snow or ice in such spaces.
§ 19-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-2.5
AO:637
§ 19-2.5. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 12.08.050; New; Ord.
No. O.1859-2014]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be liable to a fine of fifty ($50.00) dollars for a first offense, one
hundred ($100.00) dollars for a second offense and two hundred ($200.00)
dollars for any subsequent offense. Each and every day in which said
violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 19-3. SNOW REMOVAL ON PRIVATE STREETS OPEN TO THE
PUBLIC.
§ 19-3.1. Legislative Authority; Application of Provisions. [1999
Code § 12.08.060]
This section is authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.47 and shall apply only to the
owners of real property on which there has been constructed a multipledwelling
housing development containing three (3) or more units of
dwelling space which are occupied or are intended to be occupied by three
(3) or more persons who live independently of each other.
§ 19-3.2. Removal Required; Time Limit. [1999 Code § 12.08.070]
The owner or owners of any multifamily dwelling complex as described
in subsection 19-3.1 above, which complex contains any private street,
driveway, parking lot, highway, lane, alley or other roadway which is open
to the public or to which the public is invited, shall remove all snow and ice
from such streets, driveways, parking lots, highways, lanes, alleys or other
roadways within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon.
§ 19-3.3. Removal from Sidewalks in Multifamily Dwelling
Complexes. [1999 Code § 12.08.080]
The owner or owners of any multifamily dwelling complex as described in
subsection 19-3.1, which complex contains any sidewalk open to the public
or to which the public is invited, shall remove all snow and ice from such
sidewalks or, in the event of ice which may be so frozen as to make removal
impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand and
ashes within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon.
§ 19-3.4. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 12.08.090]
Any owner or owners who fail to comply with the requirements hereinabove
set forth shall be liable, upon conviction of a complaint in the Municipal
Court, to a fine of up to two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for a first offense
and to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 for subsequent offenses.
Each twenty-four (24) hour period (calendar day) following the twelve (12)
hour period described in subsection 19-3.2 may be considered a separate
violation.
§ 19-2.5 EDISON CODE § 19-4
AO:638
§ 19-4. SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS AND DRYWELLS. [Ord. No.
O.1598-2007§ 2; Ord. No. O.1657-2008§ I; Ord. No. O.1938-2016]
a. It is the duty of any owner of abutting lands in the Township to
construct, repair, alter or relay any sidewalk, curb, gutter or drywell, or
section thereof.
b. In the event that a sidewalk, curb, gutter or drywell falls into disrepair,
the Department of Public Works, may by resolution presented to the
Township Council, cause a notice in writing to be served upon the
owner or occupants of said lands, requiring the necessary specified
work to said sidewalk, curb, gutter or drywell to be done by the owner
or occupant within a period of not less than thirty (30) days from the
date of service of such notice. Whenever any lands are unoccupied and
the owner cannot be found within the Township, the notice may be
mailed, postage prepaid, to his, her or its post-office address if the
address can be ascertained. In the case where the owner is a
nonresident of Edison Township or his, her or its address cannot be
ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for four (4) weeks, once a
week in a local newspaper.
c. In the event the owner or occupant of such lands fails to comply with
the requirements of the notice, it shall be lawful for the Department of
Public Works, upon the filing due proof of service or publication of the
aforesaid notice to cause the work to be done and paid out of the
municipal funds available for that purpose. The Department of Public
Works shall certify the cost of such work. Upon the filing of a certificate,
the amount of the cost of work shall become a lien upon the abutting
lands in front of where such repairs took place.
d. In the event that the property owner fails to satisfy the lien on said
property, the Township reserves the right to collect said funds from the
property owner in a court having competent jurisdiction.
e. Exception. The Township Council may provide for the repair or
reconstruction of any sidewalk, curb, gutter or drywell at public
expense under the conditions hereinafter stated; both of which much
exist:
1. When any sidewalk, curb, gutter or drywell previously constructed
or reconstructed as a local improvement under N.J.S.A. 40:65 et
seq. is dilapidated or in need of repair or reconstruction, where
such condition is not attributable to the acts of negligence of the
abutting property owner or his predecessor in title nor that of any
one for whose acts or negligence they are chargeable; and
2. When the abutting property owner or his predecessor in title shall
have paid within twenty (20) years then last past, or shall pay, in
full with interest all the assessment for the laying or relaying of
sidewalk, curb, gutter or drywell in front of his property (at least to
the extent that the installments of such assessments are then due.)
§ 19-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-4
AO:639
3. The Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment shall not grant any
requests for waivers for any property within a two (2) mile radius of
any school property line. Any property outside the two (2) mile
radius of any school property line, an applicant seeking a waiver
from the required sidewalk installation pursuant to Chapter XIX
and/or the Code will be considered on the basis of whether the
requested waiver is reasonable and within the general purposes
and intent of the Chapter XIX and/or the Code, and/or that literal
enforcement of Chapter XIX and/or the Code is impractical and will
exact undue hardship because of the peculiar conditions pertaining
a certain property and can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the intent and purpose of the Township's Master Plan and Zoning
Ordinances and redevelopment plan if applicable. [Ord. No.
O.1938-2016]
f. Curbs, Sidewalks and Gutter Improvements. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary as set forth in paragraphs a. through e. of this Section
19-4, the Township may undertake as a local improvement under
N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq., the cost of which, or a portion thereof, may be
assessed upon the lands in the vicinity thereof benefited thereby, the
repair and/or installation of a sidewalk and the curbing or recurbing,
guttering or reguttering of a sidewalk in, upon or along a street, alley or
other public highway, or portion thereof on a priority of needs basis as
determined by the Township based upon the Maser Consulting Group
study entitled "Township of Edison Curb and Sidewalk Management
System" dated August, 2005, revised October, 2005. The procedures set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40-56-1 et seq. for the undertaking of such local
improvement shall govern. The Township's Director of the Department
of Public Works shall determine priorities for the undertaking of any
such local improvement based upon the condition of such curbs,
sidewalks and gutters and any other practical considerations he or she
may deem appropriate under the circumstances. The Director of the
Department of Public Works shall provide his or her recommendations
to the Township Council in writing in connection with any local
improvement appropriation ordinance. The Township Council may, by
resolution, provide that the owner of any real estate upon which any
assessment for such improvements shall have been made may pay such
assessments in such equal yearly or quarterly installments, not
exceeding ten (10) years in duration, with legal interest thereon (not to
exceed three (3%) percent) and at such time in each year as the
Township Council shall determine. The Township Council may fix the
yearly installments in such amount as in its opinion are equitable and
just.
g. Low and Very Low Income Subsidy. The Township may subsidize the
payment of up to one hundred (100%) percent of the cost of the repair
or reconstruction of any sidewalk, curb or gutter which is dilapidated or
in need of repair or reconstruction for any single family dwelling
occupied by a household meeting the Council on Affordable Housing
§ 19-4 EDISON CODE § 19-4
AO:640
§ 19-5. PUBLIC UTILITY POLES.
§ 19-5.1. Notice to Township by Public Utility. [Ord. No.
O.1980-2017]
Before a public utility places, replaces or removes a pole or an underground
facility located in the Township of Edison, the public utility shall notify
both the Township Engineer and the Township Code Official in writing,
which may be by fax or e-mail, at least, but not less than, twenty-four
(24) hours before undertaking any excavation related to the placement,
replacement or removal of the utility pole or underground facility, which
pole or underground facility is used for the supplying and distribution of
electricity for light, heat or power, or for the furnishing of water service
or telephone, television or other telecommunications service on or below a
public right-of-way in the Township. The Township Council of the Township
of Edison shall notify any public utility that provides service in the Township
of the application of the provisions of this section.
For the purposes of this section, underground facility means one (1) or more
underground pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures or conduits used
for the supplying and distribution of electricity for light, heat or power or for
the providing of water service, or for the furnishing of telephone, television
or other telecommunications service.
("COAH") Region 3 low income and very low income limits in the
year in which the application is made for such subsidy. The Township
may also subsidize fifty (50%) percent of the cost of the repair or
reconstruction of any sidewalk, curb and gutter which is dilapidated
or in need of repair or reconstruction for any single-family dwelling
occupied by a household meeting up to two (2) times the COAH Region
3 moderate income limits in the year in which the application is made
for such subsidy. Eligibility for any such subsidiary shall be determined
by the Department of Planning and Engineering which shall certify
such eligibility to the Director of the Department of Public Works.
The amount of any subsidy provided to any household certified as
to income eligibility by the Department of Planning and Engineering
shall be dependant upon the overall amount of funding available in the
Township's sidewalk, curb, gutter and drywell waiver fund or in any
Township capital improvement fund. The Director of the Department of
Public Works shall require, as a condition to the release of any funds
to an income eligible household, the presentation of a written proposal
from a reputable contractor who shall perform the work. The Director
of the Public Works may reject any proposal which he determines, in his
or her reasonable discretion, is not appropriate to perform the work.
Once the proposal has been approved by the Director of Department
of Public Works, payment shall be as specified by the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 19-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-5.2
AO:641
§ 19-5.2. Public Utility Responsibility after Placement, Replacement
or Removal. [Ord. No. O.1980-2017]
After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this section, the public utility shall remove
from such right-of-way any pole or underground facility no longer in use,
as well as any other debris created from such placement, replacement or
removal, including without limit any wires or appurtenances to any such
replaced or removed pole or underground facility, and restore the property
including, but not limited to, the installation of a hot patch as needed to
restore the property within the right-of-way to its previous condition as
much as possible. As used in this section, hot patch means the installation
of a mixture of asphalt to restore property within the right-of-way to its
previous condition subsequent to the construction or excavation of a site
required for the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this section.
§ 19-5.3. Pole Defined. [Ord. No. O.1980-2017]
For the purposes of this section, pole means, in addition to its commonly
accepted meaning, any wires or cable connected thereto, and any
replacements therefor which are similar in construction and use.
§ 19-5.4. Fines. [Ord. No. O.1980-2017]
In the event a public utility does not meet the requirements of subsection
19-5.2 of this section concerning the removal of debris, including without
limit any wires or appurtenances to any such replaced or removed pole or
underground facility, and the restoring of property including, but not limited
to, the installation of a hot patch, within a right-of-way to its previous
condition within ninety (90) days of placement, replacement or removal of
a pole or an underground facility, said public utility will be fined up to an
amount not to exceed one hundred ($100.00) dollars each day, until the
requirements of subsection 19-5.2 are met, except that if the public utility
is unable to complete the installation of a hot patch due to the unavailability
of asphalt material during the period of time from November through April,
the public utility shall not be required to complete the hot patch installation
until sixty (60) days immediately following the end of the November through
April period. At least five (5) business days prior to the end of the ninety
(90) day period established by this subsection, the Township shall notify the
public utility that the penalties authorized by this subsection shall begin to
be assessed against the utility after the end of the ninety (90) day period,
unless the utility complies with the requirements of subsection 19-5.2 of this
section. Any penalty imposed shall be collected or enforced in a summary
manner, without a jury, in any court of competent jurisdiction according
to the procedures provided for by the New Jersey Penalty Enforcement
Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. The Superior Court, Middlesex
County and the Edison Township Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to
enforce the provisions of this section. In the case of removal or replacement
of a pole or an underground facility utilized by two (2) or more public
§ 19-5.2 EDISON CODE § 19-5.4
AO:642
utilities, the public utility last removing its pipes, cables, wires, lines or
other structures shall be liable for the removal and restoration required
under subsection 19-5.2 of this section, unless a written agreement between
the public utilities provides otherwise.
§ 19-5.5. Emergency. [Ord. No. O.1980-2017]
Under emergency conditions which significantly impact the placement,
replacement or the removal of a pole or underground facility resulting from
natural forces or human activities beyond the control of the public utility,
or which pose an imminent or existing threat of loss of electrical, water,
power, telephone, television or other telecommunication service, or which
pose an imminent or existing threat to the safety and security of persons
or property, or both, or which require immediate action by a public utility
to prevent bodily harm or substantial property damage from occurring,
the provisions of subsection 19-5.1 of this section shall not apply when
a public utility undertakes any construction or excavation related to the
placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an underground facility in
response to such an emergency, provided that the public utility undertaking
such construction or excavation notifies the Township Engineer and the
Township Code Official at the earliest reasonable opportunity, and that
all reasonable efforts are taken by the public utility to comply with the
removal and restoration requirements of subsection 19-5.2 of this section
after responding to the emergency.
Chapter 20
(RESERVED)
Chapter 21
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 21-1. GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
§ 21-1.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.88.010]
As used in this section:
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE — Means yard trimmings, rags, waste wood or
cardboard and other combustible waste of a nonvolatile or nonexplosive
nature.
GARBAGE — Means animal and/or vegetable waste solids resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE — Means all solid waste material which does
not burn.
REFUSE — Means garbage, combustible and/or noncombustible waste
solids.
§ 19-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.2
AO:643
§ 21-1.2. Receptacles Required. [1999 Code § 8.88.020]
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of every dwelling or other
premises where refuse accumulates shall provide and keep on such
premises sufficient and suitable receptacles for receiving and holding
refuse.
§ 21-1.3. Broken Receptacles. [1999 Code § 8.88.030]
Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section may be classed as refuse and collected and
disposed as such by the person or agency responsible for the collection of
refuse.
§ 21-1.4. Time for Placement of Receptacles for Collection. [1999
Code § 8.88.040]
Receptacles or refuse shall not be set out for collection except during hours
of the day or days scheduled for collection of refuse, or the evening before.
§ 21-1.5. Location of Receptacles on Premises. [1999 Code
§ 8.88.050]
Receptacles shall be conveniently located on premises for storage of refuse
and maintained in such a manner as to prevent creation of a nuisance or
menace to public health.
§ 21-1.6. Garbage to Be Drained and Wrapped. [1999 Code
§ 8.88.060]
Garbage shall be thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids, wrapped
securely in paper and placed in a disposal receptacle.
a. At least one (1) receptacle is required for each family unit or other
occupant of premises, and at least two (2) receptacles for each
restaurant, store or similar business establishment where refuse shall
accumulate.
b. The receptacle shall be composed of a watertight metal, plastic or other
impervious material, have a tight-fitting cover and be so constructed as
to prevent spilling or leakage of its contents.
c. Each receptacle for use at a single residence shall have a capacity of
not more than thirty (30) gallons and be equipped with a pull handle or
handles.
d. Receptacles for refuse from multidwelling units or industrial premises
shall be cleaned as needed after emptying and replaced by the same
type of receptacle if removed for emptying.
§ 21-1.2 EDISON CODE § 21-1.7
AO:644
§ 21-1.7. Noncombustible Waste. [1999 Code § 8.88.070]
Noncombustible waste shall not be mixed with other refuse when prepared
for disposal by incineration.
§ 21-1.8. Paper. [1999 Code § 8.88.080]
Paper shall be secured and properly tied in bundles or other packages in a
manner to prevent any scattering while awaiting or during collection. The
bundles or packages shall be of a size and weight to permit ease of holding
by one (1) man.
§ 21-1.9. Household Wastes. [1999 Code § 8.88.090]
Household wastes shall be placed in receptacles separate from other
combustible waste and noncombustible material.
§ 21-1.10. Certain Waste to Be Bundled or Packaged. [1999 Code
§ 8.88.100]
Combustible or noncombustible waste of such a nature that it cannot be
deposited in a receptacle shall be securely and properly tied into bundles or
packages to prevent spilling or scattering. The bundles or packages shall be
of a size and weight to permit ease of handling by one (1) man.
§ 21-1.11. Preparation of Refuse for Collection. [1999 Code
§ 8.88.110]
Refuse prepared for collection should be packaged or otherwise assembled
in quantities weighing not more than seventy-five (75) pounds.
§ 21-1.12. Business or Industrial Waste. [1999 Code § 8.88.120]
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises whereon a
business or industry is conducted shall arrange for the removal of refuse
from such business or industry each day, unless sufficient and suitable
facilities are provided and used for the storage of such refuse until removal
of the refuse from the premises. Storage rooms shall be adequately
ventilated.
§ 21-1.13. Removal of Accumulations of Waste. [1999 Code
§ 8.88.130]
Accumulations of household ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish resulting
from the failure to take advantage of the regular collection service, if
provided, shall be removed at the expense of the person or the persons
concerned.
§ 21-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.14
AO:645
§ 21-1.14. Use of Litter Baskets. [1999 Code § 8.88.140]
No person shall use any open-mesh litter basket or enclosed litter
receptacle, placed on the street by the Division of Sanitation, for the deposit
of household or commercial refuse, rubbish, garbage or other waste
materials.
§ 21-2. RECYCLING.
§ 21-2.1. Declaration. [1999 Code § 8.36.010]
§ 21-2.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.36.020]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Means non-foil, food and beverage containers made
entirely of aluminum.
BIMETAL CANS — Means and includes all tin and steel cans used as a food
or beverage container.
BOARD — Means the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of
Middlesex, New Jersey.
a. On and after August 1, 1988, or other date promulgated by the County
of Middlesex for commencement of mandatory recycling, it shall be
mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and occupants of
residential property to separate leaves, glass bottles and jars,
aluminum cans, newspapers, bimetal cans and plastic beverage
containers from all other solid waste produced by such residence for
collection and ultimate recycling of said materials.
b. All owners, lessors, lessees, tenants, occupants and users of any real
property, living accommodations, commercial enterprises or other
facilities located within the Township including, but not limited to, all
residential dwelling owners, lessors, lessees and occupants of
residential dwellings, office buildings, retail stores, restaurants, diners,
taverns, catering facilities, beverage and food service establishments,
guest houses, inns, hotels, motels, motor lodges, residence inns,
cinemas, theaters, financial institutions, warehouses, junk yards,
salvage recovery sites, firms, business, companies, nonprofit
associations, organizations or institutions, educational institutions and
governmental institutions, shall be required to separate designated
recyclable items from all other solid waste produced.
c. On and after the adoption of this section and in accordance with
existing State regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, oil
retainers and motor vehicle reinspection stations with used oil holding
tanks shall accept up to five (5) gallons at a time of used motor oil from
individuals changing oil from cars, lawn mowers or motorcycles and
shall post a sign informing the public that they are a used oil collection
site.
§ 21-1.14 EDISON CODE § 21-2.2
AO:646
BRUSH — Means branches, woody plants and other like vegetative material
that do not exceed five (5) inches in diameter and Christmas trees.
COMMINGLED CONTAINERS — Means plastic containers to be used by the
residents to place plastic containers, glass containers, aluminum cans and
steel cans at the curb for collection.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Means boxes and packaging generally
made from wood pulp and consisting of two (2) smooth sides with a
corrugated inner layer. Brown paper grocery bags are included in this
category.
COUNTY — Means the County of Middlesex, New Jersey.
COUNTY PLAN — Means the Middlesex County District Solid Waste
Management Plan, adopted by the Board pursuant to the Solid Waste
Management Act which provides for the collection, disposal and/or
recycling of solid waste generated within the geographic boundaries of the
County, as the same may be amended from time to time.
DEP — Means the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or
any successor agency.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES — Means all recyclable materials that are
designated by the County in the County Plan as materials that must be
source separated from municipal solid waste at the point of generation. The
recyclables designated by the County in the County Plan are newspaper,
aluminum cans, glass containers, corrugated cardboard, steel cans, plastic
containers, mixed paper, textiles, leaves, motor oil and brush from
residential, commercial, industrial, government and office parks. The
County may add or delete certain recyclable materials to designated
recyclables from time to time pursuant to a duly adopted amendment to the
County Plan approved by the DEP.
DROP-OFF CENTER — Means the site owned and/or operated by the
municipality and located where designated recyclables are delivered by
the municipality or residents of the municipality for collection and/or
preparation for market.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Means bottles and jars in which food and
beverages are packaged. The same may be transparent (clear) or
translucent and/or tinted brown or green.
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — Includes white and/or off-white stationery,
photocopy and computer paper.
LEAVES — Means fallen leaves excluding brush and grass clippings.
LOCAL PUBLIC CONTRACTS LAW — Means N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
MIXED PAPER — Means glossy inserts, magazines, junk mail, colored paper,
computer paper, office paper and fine paper, telephone books, paperboard,
(chipboard and pressboard), no non-metallic wrapping paper, soft cover
books and hard cover books with covers removed.
§ 21-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.2
AO:647
MIXED PAPER CONTAINER — Means a covered container in which
residents will place mixed paper at the curb for collection by the contractor,
or such other container designated by the Township for such purpose.
MUNICIPALITY — Means the Township of Edison, a municipal corporation
of the State of New Jersey.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Means I.D. type 10 waste as defined by
statute.
NEWSPAPER — Means clean dry newsprint; generally a daily or weekly
edition along with any colored inserts such as comics or advertisements.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Means soda and other bottles made from PETE
(S.P.I. code 1) and milk, laundry product and other bottles made from HDPE
(S.P.L code 2).
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Means any materials required to be recycled
by this section.
RECYCLING SERVICES — Means all of the duties, obligations and services
to be provided by the municipality or its designee that are related to
the collection, transportation, separation, processing, storage, sale or
disposition, or any combination thereof, of designated recyclables and the
return of same to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RESIDENTS — Means private, commercial and institutional residents of the
municipality that are required to recycle designated recyclables pursuant to
this section.
RRIT FUNDS — Means moneys collected from the imposition of Resource
Recovery Investment Tax (or any other successor tax or fund created for
the same purpose) and allocated to the County in accordance with the
provisions of the McEnroe amendments to the Solid Waste Management
Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., and made available to the Township for this
purpose.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally produced
by the occupants of commercial, industrial and residential property and
disposed of by private or public pickup.
STEEL CANS — Means food and beverage containers made of steel and
either tin-plated or lacquer coated and including bimetal cans (ferrous cans
with an aluminum top).
TEXTILES — Means clean dry clothing or other fabric measuring at least
one foot by one (1 x 1) foot in size.
USED MOTOR OIL — Means discarded petroleum based or synthetic
lubricating oil from automobile and other engines.
§ 21-2.3. Recycling Director and Coordinator. [1999 Code
§ 8.36.030; Ord. No. O.1600-2007§ 1]
§ 21-2.2 EDISON CODE § 21-2.3
AO:648
§ 21-2.4. Placement at Curbside. [1999 Code § 8.36.040]
a. Duties of Director. The recycling program shall be overseen by the
Director of the Department of Public Works. The Director is authorized
to establish and promulgate regulations as to the manner, days and time
of such collections and the bundling, handling, location and time of
placement of all materials for collection by the Township or any of its
agents, servants, employees, or duly authorized recycling contractors.
The times, dates and manner of collection of recyclables shall be
published periodically in a newspaper circulated in the Township or by
posting notices in public places in the Township. The Director of the
Department of Public Works may designate such subcode officials as
deemed necessary and proper for the enforcement of these provisions.
b. Duties of Recycling Coordinator. There shall be a recycling coordinator
who shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of the
Department of Public Works. The recycling coordinator shall be
primarily responsible for the enforcement of the laws and regulations
with respect to recycling within the Township. The recycling
coordinator shall be primarily responsible for promoting the Township's
recycling laws and regulations. The recycling coordinator shall be
responsible for establishing and implementing public education and
public awareness programs which shall be consistent with laws and
regulations of the County of Middlesex concerning recycling.
Upon the adoption of the recycling regulations, the recycling
coordinator shall notify the residents, businesses, associates and
organizations of the Township of these procedures and regulations.
a. Glass bottles and jars, bimetal cans and plastic beverage containers and
aluminum beverage containers shall be placed at curbside in rigid
plastic or metal containers which, when filled, do not exceed thirty-five
(35) pounds. Plastic bags and cardboard boxes shall not be used.
b. Glass bottles and jars, bimetal cans and plastic beverage containers
should be rinsed clean, with plastic or metal caps, rings or collars
removed.
c. Each container shall contain only recyclable material, and that material
should be free of any dirt or foreign substance.
d. Containers and/or bound newspapers shall be placed at curbside no
sooner than 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to the scheduled pickup and
empty containers removed by 7:00 p.m. on the day of the scheduled
pickup.
e. Newspapers shall be bound with string or twine and not exceed twelve
(12) inches in height or thirty-five (35) pounds in weight and shall
contain newsprint and those printed materials contained in newspapers
only, not separately delivered or purchased magazines or flyers.
§ 21-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.4
AO:649
§ 21-2.4A. Additional Mandatory Source Separated Recyclables.
[Ord. No. O.1600-2007§ 2]
§ 21-2.5. Collection by Authorized Personnel. [1999 Code
§ 8.36.050]
f. Leaves shall be placed at curbside in sealed, clear plastic or
biodegradable bags and will be collected during the month of
November, based upon a schedule to be published.
g. No recyclable materials may be processed in a home trash compactor
and placed at curbside for pickup.
h. Recyclables not picked up due to improper preparation, snow or other
emergency shall be removed from curbside by 7:00 p.m. on the day of
the scheduled pickup.
a. For residential (including multifamily), commercial, industrial and
institutional, governments and office parks:
1. Masonry/Paving Material: asphalt, block, brick, cinder and
concrete.
2. Rechargeable Batteries: Nickel Cadmium (Ni-Cd), Nickel Metal
Hydride (Ni-MH), Lithium Ion (Li-ion) and Small Sealed Lead (Pb).
3. Tires: rubber-based scrap automotive, truck, and equipment tires.
4. White Goods: washers, dryers, ranges, refrigerators, air
conditioners. Note: All devices that contain CFC's must be properly
evacuated by licensed individuals and all CFC's recovered must be
sent to an EPA approved reclaimer.
b. For commercial, industrial and institutional, governments and office
parks:
1. Electronics: televisions, CPU's, monitors, laptops, and mercury
containing devices.
2. Fluorescent Bulbs: lamps that contain mercury.
3. Plastic Film: stretch/shrink wrap, plastic shopping bags—only for
warehouses, retail establishments and supermarkets with twentyfive
(25) or more employees.
4. Wood Scrap: unfinished lumber from new construction projects
including pallets. Unfinished shall mean nonchemically treated (not
pressure treated, impregnated with preservatives, insecticides,
fungicides, creosote, or other chemicals, and not painted, resincoated
or otherwise surface treated, and not laminated or bonded;
and not similarly altered its natural condition)—only for new
construction sites.
§ 21-2.4 EDISON CODE § 21-2.5
AO:650
§ 21-2.6. Unlawful Disposal of Designated Recyclables. [1999 Code
§ 8.36.060; Ord. No. O.1600-2007§ 3]
It is unlawful for any individual, firm, entity, association, organization,
business, corporation or company within the Township to place or cause
to be placed in any trash, rubbish and/or garbage receptacle for disposal
at a landfill, resource recovery site or other garbage disposal site, any
designated recyclables as defined in this section or in contravention of
any requirements as may be mandated by the laws or regulations of the
Township of Edison, County of Middlesex or State of New Jersey.
§ 21-2.7. Separation of Designated Recyclables. [1999 Code
§ 8.36.070]
All individuals, firms, entities, associations, organizations, businesses,
corporations or companies shall separate designated recyclables in an
appropriate receptacle and/or at an appropriate drop-off site as designated
by the Director of Public Works, and/or the recycling coordinator for
separate disposal by the Township, or if applicable, the Township's
designated recycling contractor.
§ 21-2.8. Residential, Business, Commercial and Industrial
Recycling. [1999 Code § 8.36.080; Ord. No. O.1600-2007§ 4]
a. The Municipal Council may use municipal personnel to collect
recyclable material set forth herein at curbside and/or form a drop-off
center and shall sell said recyclable material if a market exists therefor,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
b. The Municipal Council may elect to enter into agreements with any
person, partnership, corporation or municipality authorizing them to
collect recyclable material at curbside or from a drop-off center and to
sell the recyclable material.
a. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this section and the local sanitary code.
c. Once placed in the location identified by this subsection, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this subsection, no person, other
than those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect,
remove, or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
§ 21-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.8
AO:651
a. All multifamily dwellings including, but not limited to, apartment
complexes, condominiums, garden apartments, townhouses, guest
houses, hotels, motels, inns, residence inns and motor lodges, and all
business sites, industrial sites, manufacturing sites, office buildings,
retail stores, restaurants, taverns, cinemas, theaters, financial
institutions, junk yards and/or salvage recovery sites shall be required
to separate designated recyclables in separate receptacles for the
collection of designated recyclables consistent with the laws and
regulations of the Township, County of Middlesex and State of New
Jersey. There shall be separate receptacles for each item or group of
items as mandated by the Township unless written permission
authorizing an exemption of the requirement for the receptacle is
received from the Director of Public Works and/or the recycling
coordinator.
b. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be considered
presumptive evidence that a violation of this section has occurred if no
receptacle is provided for a designated recyclable or group of
designated recyclables. Upon evidence to show that no receptacle has
been provided for an item or grouping of items, the burden of proof
shall shift to the alleged violator to establish proof of compliance with
the mandatory recycling requirements of this section.
c. Any residential, nonprofit association or organization, business,
commercial and/or industrial establishment which contracts for
recycling with an approved hauler other than the Township effective
May 31, 2008, all existing exemptions shall be revoked and must be
reapplied for consistent with the following guidelines.
1. The mixed waste and recyclable taken from an eligible location may
only be taken to a licensed "Transfer Station/MRF." That facility
must have the ability to separate out for recycling all mandated
recyclables that were commingled with the garbage.
2. Exemptions are valid for a period of up to three (3) years which will
begin on the date of the issuance and expire on March 31 of the
third year.
3. No exemption renewal will be issued if the recycling tonnage
report is not received by March 1st of each year.
4. The generator must apply in writing for the exemption and receive
an official written notice that it has been granted from the Director
of Public Works and/or Recycling Coordinator authorized by the
ordinance to grant exemptions. The exemption request must be
accompanied by the following information.
(a) A letter from the specific hauler agreeing to have the
mandated materials separated, which must specifically list the
materials that must be separated.
§ 21-2.8 EDISON CODE § 21-2.8
AO:652
(b) A letter from the specified receiving facility including the valid
NJDEP permit number that states the mandated materials will
be separated.
(c) An explanation of why their particular operation, circumstance
or facility makes adhering to the source separation
requirements of the recycling plan impractical.
(d) A description of the nature of the business and the estimated
monthly and yearly tonnages of solid waste and designated
recyclables to be generated by their facility. The generator
must demonstrate that they have at least seventy-five (75%)
percent mandated recyclables in their waste stream to qualify
for the exemption.
(e) A list of mandated materials that the materials recovery facility
will be recycling for business.
(f) A description of how the generator disposed of their solid
waste pursuant to Middlesex County's waste flow strategy
(Plan Amendment 1997-3) and handled recyclables up to the
date of the application.
(g) A listing of any violation cited (and disposition thereof) for the
generator with reference to the solid waste or recyclables
generated from their facility.
(h) The application shall be certified under oath so that in the
event there is a deliberate misstatement, the applicant will be
subject to enforcement action.
5. If during the term of the exemption, the generator switches
haulers, or the hauler switches the receiving facility, the existing
exemption is no longer valid and must be reapplied for.
6. If the generator is granted the exemption, the company is required
to include signage in a prominent place that states that recyclable
material is being sorted out of the materials recovery facility.
7. The generator must be able to show the exemption approval and a
copy of his/her waste removal contract when the exemption is
claimed to the County Public Health Department Recycling
Inspector.
8. Any exemptions granted by the municipality will have to be
material specific, list the hauler name, and identify by street
address the exact location of the business that has been granted
the exemption. Business with more than one (1) location must apply
for exemptions for each location separately. A copy of each
exemption granted must be submitted by the municipality to the
Middlesex County DSWM.
§ 21-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.8A
AO:653
§ 21-2.8A. New Developments of Multifamily Residential Units or
Commercial, Institutional, or Industrial Properties. [Ord. No.
O.1600-2007§ 5]
§ 21-2.8B. Construction Permits. [Ord. No. O.1600-2007§ 6]
At the time of issuance of any construction permit, the Construction Official
will provide written instruction on proper disposal and recycling of
construction and demolition waste and furnish a Notification of
Construction/Demolition Activity Form that must be filled out by the
permittee and faxed to the Middlesex County Division of Solid Waste
Management (MCDSWM) within forty-eight (48) hours of the issuance of a
construction permit.
§ 21-2.9. Permission for Collection by Nonprofit Organizations.
[1999 Code § 8.36.090]
Any nonprofit association or organization which wishes to collect any
designated recyclable may request permission from the Director of Public
Works and/or recycling coordinator. A nonprofit association or organization
wishing to collect any recyclable item may request permission from the
Director of Public Works and/or recycling coordinator. A nonprofit
association or organization wishing permission to collect a recyclable item
must identify the organization on whose behalf the request is being made,
the proposed manner of collection (i.e., curbside, receptacle at a specific
a. Any application to the Planning Board of the Township of Edison, for
subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of multifamily
dwellings of three (3) or more units, single-family developments of fifty
(50) or more units or a commercial, institutional, or industrial
development for the utilization of one thousand (1,000) square feet or
more of land, must include recycling plan. This plan must contain, at
minimum, the following: (1) A detailed analysis of the expected
composition and amounts of solid waste and recyclables generated at
the proposed development and (2) Locations documented on the
application's site plan that provide for convenient recycling
opportunities for all owners, tenants, and occupants. The recycling area
shall be of sufficient size, convenient location and contain other
attributes (signage, lighting, fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the
municipal recycling coordinator.
b. Prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy by the Township of
Edison, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
c. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 21-2.8A EDISON CODE § 21-2.9
AO:654
location, etc.) and must designate an individual who may be contacted
by the recycling coordinator in the event further information is required.
The Director of Public Works and/or recycling coordinator may approve or
deny the nonprofit association or organization's request based upon the
consistency or inconsistency with the laws and regulations of the Township,
County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey. It shall be a precondition of
approval for any nonprofit association or organization, that the association
or organization shall agree to provide the recycling coordinator or
designated subcode official with data concerning the amount, quantity and/
or weight of the materials collected at least every three (3) months and
enter into an agreement with the Township to provide a clean and efficient
recycling program. Any nonprofit association or organization failing to
cooperate with the recycling coordinator may be subject to denial or
revocation of permission to collect recyclable items in the Township.
§ 21-2.10. Ownership of Recyclable Items. [1999 Code § 8.36.100]
From time of placement of a recyclable item in a designated drop-off
receptacle or at the curb by any resident for collection with the Township
or the Township's designated recycling contractor, such materials shall
become the property of the Township, and it shall be a violation of this
section for any person, firm, organization, association, business or
corporation, other than the Township, or any of its agents, servants,
employees or duly authorized recycling contractors to tamper with or to
take or remove or convert to its own use in any way such material. Each
such tampering, removal and/or conversion in violation hereof from one (1)
or more receptacles and/or residents during the period, shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 21-2.11. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [1999 Code
§ 8.36.110; Ord. No. O.1600-2007§ 7]
a. The recycling coordinator of the Township is appointed the
enforcement officer of this section. The recycling coordinator shall have
the authority to issue notice of warnings and notice of violations and
order to pay penalties pursuant to this section.
b. Any person, corporation, occupant or entity that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this section or any of the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars
nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars. Each day for which a
violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
c. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Subsidy
Fund. Monies in the Municipal Recycling Subsidy Fund shall be used for
the expenses of the municipal recycling program.
§ 21-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.12
AO:655
§ 21-2.12. Amendments. [1999 Code § 8.36.120]
This section may be amended from time to time by the Governing Body after
the appropriate referrals, notices, hearings and other requirements by law.
§ 21-3. DISPOSAL AREAS AND CENTERS.
§ 21-3.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 8.08.010]
This section is for regulatory and revenue-raising purposes.
§ 21-3.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.08.020]
As used in this section:
ASHES — Means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
COLLECTOR — Means any person engaged in the business of collecting or
depositing refuse in the Township.
GARBAGE — Means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
PERSON — Means individuals, partnerships, public or private corporations,
or associations of persons.
REFUSE — Means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes),
consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and
similar materials.
§ 21-3.3. Prohibited Disposal; Use of Materials for Fill; Litter. [1999
Code § 8.08.030]
a. No person shall dispose of, deposit or throw refuse or any other
materials upon or along any public or private highway, road or street or
upon private property within the Township. Certain types of materials
may be used for purposes of fill or to provide a base, provided the
material has first been inspected and approved by the Health Officer
and Director of Public Works and written authorization granted.
b. No person shall dispose of, deposit or throw refuse or any other
materials upon or in any river, lake, stream or body of water within the
Township.
§ 21-2.12 EDISON CODE § 21-3.4
AO:656
§ 21-3.4. Disposal Area Authorized; Inspection. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.040]
A municipal disposal area shall be maintained by the Department of Public
Works, Division of Sanitation, within the authorized disposal area of the
Township. It shall be the duty of the Health Officer or his or her
representative to inspect the municipal disposal area from time to time and
to report in writing to the Director of Public Works recommendations for
compliance with any applicable statutes or ordinances.
§ 21-3.5. Hours of Operation of Disposal Area. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.050]
The municipal disposal area shall be opened from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
on weekdays and Saturdays, prevailing time. The disposal area shall be
closed on Sundays and such holidays as designated by the Director of Public
Works. No unauthorized person shall enter the municipal disposal area for
any purpose at any time.
§ 21-3.6. Place of Origin of Materials Disposed of; Special License.
[1999 Code § 8.08.060]
No refuse or other materials originating outside the garbage district of the
Township shall be deposited in the municipal disposal area by any person
unless the person shall first have obtained a permit or license therefor and
paid the fees hereinafter set forth or the contractual sum as hereinafter
provided.
§ 21-3.7. Use of Disposal Area; Prohibited Items and Materials;
Special Permits. [1999 Code § 8.08.070]
a. No refuse or other materials shall be emptied or deposited in the
municipal disposal area except in the place directed by the person
supervising the operation of the disposal area or as may be directed by
printed signs.
b. It is unlawful for any person to disobey the direction of the person
supervising the disposal area or to disobey the direction of any sign or
to deface, destroy or remove any such sign.
c. Prohibited Disposal; Special Permits.
1. It is unlawful to empty or deposit at the municipal disposal area:
(a) Any explosive or other dangerous or poisonous substances,
noxious chemicals or other materials likely to cause injury to
persons employed in and about the operation of said disposal
area or authorized users thereof, or likely to cause damage to
the equipment used by the Township;
(b) Stumps of trees, logs of wood exceeding two (2) feet in length
and six (6) inches in diameter;
§ 21-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3.7
AO:657
§ 21-3.8. Use Fees. [1999 Code § 8.08.080]
Permits to use the municipal disposal area shall be issued by the Division of
Licenses. The fees for emptying, unloading, depositing or dumping refuse,
garbage, waste, including all materials for deposit at the landfill site, shall
be in accordance with the most recent tariff of permissible rates on file with
the Public Utilities Commission of the State of New Jersey, and in strict
compliance with the schedules therein filed and current.
§ 21-3.9. Contracts for Use of Disposal Area. [1999 Code § 8.08.090]
The Mayor of the Township is authorized to negotiate, for not more than five
(5) years, contracts for the use of the municipal disposal area with other
municipalities, and the proper officers of the Township are authorized to
execute such contracts on behalf of the Township upon the approval of same
by resolution of Council.
§ 21-3.10. Director of Public Works Authorized to Promulgate
Rules. [1999 Code § 8.08.100]
The Director of Public Works is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations governing the operation of the municipal disposal area.
§ 21-3.11. Compliance with State Sanitary Code. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.110]
All refuse collected within or without the Township and disposed of within
this municipality shall be disposed of by the sanitary landfill or incinerator
method in accordance with the standards for the design, operation and
maintenance of sanitary landfills and incinerators contained in the State
Sanitary Code and as the same may be amended or supplemented, and in
full accordance with standards established by and rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Department of Health.
§ 21-3.12. Permitted Types of Collection Vehicles. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.120]
No person shall collect, deposit or transport any garbage within the
Township except in compactor-type collection units. No person shall collect,
(c) Large stones, large pieces of broken concrete or metal or other
material, or other heavy noninflammable objects;
(d) Wrecked or discarded motor vehicles or parts thereof;
(e) Secondhand building materials or materials from buildings
demolished, changed through alterations, damaged by fire or
resulting from other building operations.
2. The items set out in subdivision (b), (c) and (e) of this section may
be emptied or deposited in the municipal disposal area by special
permission of the Director of Public Works.
§ 21-3.7 EDISON CODE § 21-3.12
AO:658
deposit or transport any other type of refuse within the Township except
in closed receptacles, closed truck bodies, or truck bodies covered with a
tarpaulin properly anchored. All vehicles used shall at all times be subject
to inspection and approval by the Health Officer or his or her designee and
shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good
working order.
§ 21-3.13. Spilled Refuse. [1999 Code § 8.08.130]
All refuse or other materials collected, deposited or transported within
the Township which shall spill or fall while being carried or conveyed to
a truck or other collection vehicle or container, or while being loaded
into or transported by any such truck, vehicle or other container, shall be
immediately removed and broom-cleaned so as to leave the premises or
street in a clean condition.
§ 21-3.14. Private Disposal Areas. [1999 Code § 8.08.140]
No person shall operate or maintain a private disposal area for the disposal
of refuse unless and until a license therefor shall have been obtained.
Application shall be made in writing to the Division of Licenses, and the
license shall not be issued unless approved by the Health Officer. The
application shall specify the area or part thereof sought to be licensed,
by adequate description or plat, and the extent of the acreage therein
indicated. The application shall contain the name and address of the
applicant or applicants and the name and address of the owner or owners
of the land if other than the applicant.
§ 21-3.15. Private Disposal Area License Fees. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.150]
Every application for a license to operate and maintain a private disposal
area shall be accompanied by the full license fee in cash or certified check.
The annual fee shall be one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for each five (5)
acres or less to be licensed and one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for each
acre or part thereof over five (5) acres. All licenses shall be valid from May
of each year through April 30 of the following year. Fees hereunder shall be
for the year set forth or part thereof, and the fees shall not be apportioned.
§ 21-3.16. Private Disposal Area Regulations. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.160]
All private disposal areas shall comply in all respects with all pertinent
provisions of this section and shall be open to inspection by the Health
Officer at all times. The Health Officer shall require, when necessary, that
the owner and operator thereof take proper measures to control vermin,
flies, insects and other matters which may affect the health and sanitation
of this Township.
§ 21-3.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3.17
AO:659
§ 21-3.17. Revocation of License for Private Disposal Area. [1999
Code § 8.08.170]
All licenses issued hereunder may be revoked by the Municipal Council for
good cause on complaint, after due notice thereof and a hearing thereon.
§ 21-3.18. Authorized Disposal Areas Designated. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.180]
The following described properties are designated as authorized disposal
areas:
a. Part of the area commonly known as the "meadowlands" bounded on
the south and west by the Raritan River, on the east by Edmunds Creek,
on the north by Walkers Creek and the Town Ditch (Big Ditch), all as
shown and designated on the Edison Township Tax Map.
b. Beginning at a point of intersection formed by the Town Ditch and the
easterly line of the United States Government Reservation (Camp
Raritan), said beginning point being the northeasterly corner of Lot 39
in Block 399 on the Official Tax Map of the Township of Edison and
running thence:
1. Southerly along the easterly side of Lot 39, 866 feet more or less to
a point and thence;
2. Easterly along the northerly side of Lot 42, 187 feet more or less to
a point and thence;
3. Southeasterly along the easterly side of Lot 58, 392 feet more or
less to a point and thence;
4. Southeasterly along the northeasterly line of Lot 57, 512 feet more
or less to a point and thence;
5. Southeasterly along the northeasterly line of Lot 53, 471 feet more
or less to a point and thence;
6. Easterly along the northerly line of Lot 55, 418 feet more or less to
a point and thence;
7. Southerly along the easterly line of Lot 55, 187 feet more or less to
a point in the northerly line of Raritan River and thence;
8. Westerly and southerly along the northerly line of the Raritan River,
1,850 feet more or less to a point and thence;
9. Northerly along the westerly line of Lot 50 and Lot 47; 975 feet
more or less to a point and thence;
10. Westerly along the southerly line of Lot 44, 280 feet more or less to
a point and thence;
§ 21-3.17 EDISON CODE § 21-3.18
AO:660
§ 21-3.19. Permitted Areas of Disposal; Prohibited Acts; Height of
Landfills Restricted. [1999 Code 8.08.190]
11. Northerly along the westerly line of Lot 44, 250 feet more or less to
a point and thence;
12. Westerly along the southerly line of Lot 40, 150 feet more or less to
a point and thence;
13. Northerly along the westerly line of Lot 40 and Lot 37, 1,070 feet
more or less to a point in the Town Ditch and thence;
14. Northeasterly along the center line of the Town Ditch and also
along the northerly line of Lots 37, 38 and 39, 930 feet more or less
to the point of beginning.
The above described parcel contains the following Lots in Block
399 as shown on the Tax Map 124, Official Tax Map of the Township
of Edison:
37 42 57 50 55
38 55 47 51-A
39 44 48 52
40 45 49 53
41 46 56 54
a. From and after the effective date of this section, it is unlawful to dump
or dispose of or accumulate any refuse, rubbish, garbage, ashes,
decaying or vegetable substance or other spoiled matter, debris or
other waste materials in any section or sections, area or areas, or
property or properties of this Township other than:
1. The area designated in subsection 21-3.18;
2. As may be hereafter by ordinance designated.
b. Such dumping, disposing or accumulation of any refuse, rubbish,
garbage, ashes, decaying or vegetable substance or other spoiled
matter, debris or other waste materials in any sections, areas or
properties in this Township other than as above designated is
prohibited. No person or corporation or agent or servant thereof shall
hereafter establish, maintain or permit any other dump or area for the
dumping, disposal or accumulation of refuse, rubbish, garbage, ashes,
decaying or vegetable substance or other spoiled matter, debris or
other waste materials of any nature, or dump, dispose of or accumulate
any refuse, rubbish, garbage, ashes, decaying or vegetable substance
or other spoiled matter, debris or other waste materials in any section,
areas or properties in this Township other than as above designated.
c. Maximum Height of Landfill.
§ 21-3.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3.19
AO:661
§ 21-3.20. Use of Undesignated Disposal Areas Prohibited. [1999
Code 8.08.210]
The use and maintenance of any area or areas for dumping, disposing of
or accumulating refuse, rubbish, garbage, ashes, decaying or vegetable
substance or other spoiled matter, debris or other waste materials, other
than as designated and permitted above, is deeded and declared a
detriment to the public health, a nuisance and unlawful.
§ 21-3.21. Violation; Penalties. [1999 Code 8.08.220]
Any violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by
the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. Each and every day may be
deemed a separate and distinct violation hereof.
§ 21-4. GARBAGE DISTRICT; ZONES CREATED.
§ 21-4.1. Creation. [1999 Code 8.08.230]
There is created a garbage district in the Township of Edison, Middlesex
County, New Jersey.
§ 21-4.2. Zone Boundaries. [1999 Code § 8.08.240]
The garbage district of the Township shall consist of sixteen (16) zones,
whose limits and boundaries shall be as described hereafter.
1. Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this or any other
ordinance, no dump or landfill shall exceed the height of eighty-five
(85) feet above the elevation of the Raritan River at its mean sea
level. Included in the maximum height limitation contained herein
is the cover material and/or garbage or refuse or any combination
of the two (2).
2. In addition to the violation and penalty set forth in subsection
21-3.21, the Director of Public Safety is authorized to close down
any dump or landfill in violation of this subsection, upon
certification from the Township Engineer that the maximum height
limitation has been exceeded. The Director of Public Safety is
expressly authorized to employ the Township police forces in
effectively shutting down the landfill operation until the height of
same has been reduced to lawful limits as set forth herein.
d. The sanitary landfill operation shall limit the hours of operation, within
the Township, so that they are open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday. All sanitary landfill
operations shall be closed on Sunday.
a. Zone No. 1.
1. Beginning at the intersection of the northerly bank of the Raritan
River with the easterly boundary of the Borough of Highland Park;
§ 21-3.19 EDISON CODE § 21-4.2
AO:662
thence running (1) northeasterly, northwesterly and northerly
along the boundary of the Borough of Highland Park to the
southerly line of lands of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company;
thence (2) easterly along said lands of the Pennsylvania Railroad
Company to Willow Avenue; thence (3) southerly along the center
line of Willow Avenue to the Lincoln Highway; thence (4) westerly
along the Lincoln Highway to Prospect Street; thence (5) southerly
along Prospect Street to Ovington Avenue; thence (6) westerly
along Ovington Avenue to Plainfield Avenue; thence (7) southerly
along Plainfield Avenue to the northerly line of property of Matthew
Simpson; thence (8) easterly along the northerly line of said
property of Matthew Simpson and northerly line of property known
as "Piscataway Park" to Stony Road; thence (9) northerly along
Stony Road to Cherry Street, thence (10) easterly along Cherry
Street to East Side Avenue; thence (11) northerly along East Side
Avenue to the northerly line of the property now or formerly of
William Borwegen; thence (12) easterly along the northerly line of
said property now or formerly of William Borwegen to the westerly
line of property of D. Manning Drake; thence (13) southerly along
the westerly line of lands of said D. Manning Drake to the Old Post
Road; thence (14) westerly along the Old Post Road to where the
same is intersected by a small stream just west of Wooding Avenue;
thence (15) southerly down said stream to a prolongation of the
property now or formerly of the Middlesex Realty and Mortgage
Company; thence (16) easterly along said line to the southeasterly
line of the right-of-way of the New Jersey Short Line; thence (17)
northeasterly along said last-mentioned line to the easterly line of
the property now or formerly of Mrs. Annie Chevelier; thence (18)
southerly along said last- mentioned lands crossing Woodbridge
Avenue and along the easterly line of the property formerly of
Julius Busch to the southeasterly corner thereof; thence (19)
northwesterly along the southerly line of said property formerly
of Julius Busch to the northwesterly line of the New Jersey Short
Line; thence (20) southwesterly along the northwesterly line of the
New Jersey Short Line to Meadow Road; thence (21) southwesterly
down a small brook and along the north bank of Silver Lake to
Lake View Boulevard; thence (22) northeasterly along Lake View
Boulevard to Cliff Street; thence (23) northwesterly along Cliff
Street to a bend in the same; thence (24) southwesterly along
the southeasterly line of lands known as "New Brunswick Home
Sites, Silver Lake Section;" thence (25) northwesterly along the
southwesterly line of said last-mentioned lands to Silver Lake
Avenue; thence (26) still northwesterly along Glendale Avenue to
a small brook; thence (27) southwesterly down said brook to the
Raritan River; thence (28) northwesterly up the Raritan River to
the Borough of Highland Park and place of beginning.
2. Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Cherry Street
with the centerline of Wooding Avenue; thence running (1)
northerly along the center line of Wooding Avenue to the center
§ 21-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.2
AO:663
line of Elm Street; thence (2) easterly along the centerline of Elm
Street to the centerline of Martin Avenue; thence (3) northerly
along the center line of Martin Avenue to the centerline of
Magnolia Street; thence (4) easterly along the centerline of
Magnolia Street to the centerline of East Side Avenue; thence
(5) northerly along the centerline of East Side Avenue and a
prolongation northerly thereof in a straight line to the centerline
of Prospect Street; thence (6) easterly and southeasterly along the
centerline of Prospect Street to the centerline of Old Post Road;
thence (7) southerly and westerly along the centerline of Old Post
Road to the line dividing property now or formerly of D. Manning
Drake and property now or formerly of William Borwegan; thence
(8) northerly along said division line to the northeasterly corner
of said land now or formerly of said William Borwegan; thence
(9) westerly along the northerly line of said land now or formerly
of William Borwegan and the southerly line of Post Haven Manor
to the center line of East Side Avenue; thence (10) along the
centerline of East Side Avenue to the center line of Cherry Street;
thence (11) westerly along the centerline of Cherry Street to the
centerline of Wooding Avenue and the place of beginning.
3. Beginning in the Old Post Road where the same is intersected by a
small stream just west of Wooding Avenue; thence running (1)
southerly down said stream to a prolongation of the property now
or formerly of the Middlesex Realty and Mortgage Company;
thence (2) easterly along said last-mentioned property to the
northwesterly line of the right-of-way formerly of the New Jersey
Short Line, now of the Public Service Electric and Gas Company;
thence (3) northeasterly along said last-mentioned lands to the
westerly line of the property of Elizabeth and Ella Ammon; thence
(4) northerly along said last-mentioned lands to the Old Post Road;
thence (5) westerly and southwesterly along the Old Post Road to
the place of beginning.
4. Beginning at the intersection of the line dividing the Township of
Raritan and the Borough of Highland Park with the southerly line of
lands of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company (United New Jersey
Railroad and Canal Company); thence running (1) northeasterly
along lands of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company to the westerly
boundary line of the Borough of Metuchen; thence (2) southerly,
southeasterly and northeasterly along the Borough of Metuchen to
the southerly line of lands of the Lehigh Valley Railroad Company
(Easton and Amboy Railroad Company); thence (3) easterly along
lands of the Lehigh Valley Railroad Company to the boundary line
between the Township of Raritan and the Township of Woodbridge.
5. All that certain tract of land bounded on the south by the
Pennsylvania Railroad, on the west by the borough of Highland
Park, on the north by Camp Kilmer and on the east by Suttons Lane.
§ 21-4.2 EDISON CODE § 21-4.2
AO:664
6. All that area bounded by the Pennsylvania Railroad on the
southeast, the municipal boundary line of the Borough of Highland
Park on the southwest, the Suttons Lane right-of-way on the
northeast and Mill Brook on the northwest.
b. Zone No. 2.
1. Beginning at the intersection of the southeasterly boundary line of
the Borough of Metuchen with the Lehigh Valley Railroad; thence
running (1) northeasterly along the Metuchen Borough line to
Woodbridge Avenue, thence (2) easterly along the Woodbridge
Avenue and Grandview Avenue, to Woodbridge Turnpike Road;
thence (3) northeasterly along Woodbridge Turnpike Road to
Woodbridge Township line; thence (4) southeasterly and
southwesterly along Woodbridge Township line to the Lehigh Valley
Railroad; thence (5) northwesterly along the Lehigh Valley Railroad
to the Borough of Metuchen and place of beginning.
2. All that certain tract of land bounded on the south by Woodbridge
Avenue, Grandview Avenue and Woodbridge Turnpike Road, on the
west by the Borough of Metuchen, on the north by the main line of
the Pennsylvania Railroad and on the east by Woodbridge Township
line.
c. Zone No. 3. Beginning in the northwesterly line of the Lincoln Highway
at a point therein distant one hundred fifty (150) feet northeasterly
from the northeasterly line of Cedar Street; thence running (1)
northwesterly parallel to the northeasterly line of Cedar Street to a
point distant fifty (50) feet northwesterly from the northwesterly line of
Union Avenue; thence (2) southwesterly parallel to the northwesterly
line of Union Avenue to the westerly line of the outline of the property
of the Menlo Park Homestead Association; thence (3) southerly along
the westerly line of said original outline to the northerly line of the
Edison property; thence (4) westerly along the northerly line of the
Edison property and the northerly line of Menlo Villas Park, Section 1,
to the northwesterly corner thereof, thence (5) southerly along the
westerly line of Menlo Villas Park, Section 1, to the northerly line of
Menlo Gardens, thence (6) westerly and southwesterly along Menlo
Gardens to the center of Wood Avenue; thence (7) southeasterly along
the center of Wood Avenue to a point one hundred (100) feet
northwesterly from the northwesterly line of Thomas Street; thence (8)
southwesterly parallel to the northwesterly line of Thomas Street to the
center of Elizabeth Avenue; thence (9) southeasterly along the center of
Elizabeth Avenue to the rear line of the lots fronting on the
northwesterly side of the Lincoln Highway; thence (10) southwesterly
along the rear line of the lots fronting on the Lincoln Highway to Mary
Avenue; thence (11) southeasterly along Mary Avenue to the Lincoln
Highway; thence (12) still southeasterly crossing the Lincoln Highway
and along the northeasterly line of Parsonage Road to the Pennsylvania
Railroad to the most southerly corner of the property of B.H. Lage, Inc.;
thence (13) northwesterly along the southwesterly line of said last-
§ 21-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.2
AO:665
mentioned lands, crossing the Lincoln Highway to the northwesterly
side thereof; thence (14) northeasterly along the northwesterly line of
the Lincoln Highway to the place of beginning.
d. Zone No. 4. All that area along Midwood Street, Charles Street, Charles
Court and Henry Street to Oak Tree Road, including both sides thereof,
the northerly side of Oak Tree Road from Henry Street to Wood Avenue
and the westerly side of Wood Avenue from Oak Tree Road to Livingston
Avenue.
e. Zone No. 5. All that area bounded by Plainfield Road, the southerly and
easterly line of Metuchen Golf and Country Club and the northerly line
of Lots 7-A-1 through 13-A in Block 604, Grove Avenue and the
municipal boundary of the Borough of Metuchen.
f. Zone No. 6. Beginning at the intersection of the southerly line of Old
Post Road with the northwesterly line of Woodbridge Avenue, thence
running (1) southwesterly along said northwesterly line of Woodbridge
Avenue to a point distant two hundred (200) feet westerly from the
prolongation of the westerly line of Beech Street measured at right
angles therefrom; thence (2) northerly parallel to the westerly line of
Beech Street three hundred thirty-nine and eighty-one hundredths
(339.81) feet; thence (3) easterly fifty (50) feet; thence (4) northerly
parallel to Beech Street one hundred seven and three-hundredths
(107.03) feet to the southeasterly line of Westervelt Avenue; thence (5)
northeasterly along said southeasterly line of Westervelt Avenue to the
westerly line of Beech Street; thence (6) northerly along said westerly
line of Beech Street and a prolongation thereof to the northerly line of
Old Post Road; thence (7) westerly along the northerly line of the Old
Post Road to the line dividing Lot Nos. 10 and 11 in Block 266 of the
Township Tax Map; thence (8) northwesterly along said division line
between lot Nos. 10 and 11 in Block 266 to the Mill Pond; thence (9)
northeasterly along the Mill Pond to a point distant four hundred (400)
feet northerly from the northerly line of the Old Post Road measured at
right angles therefrom; thence (10) easterly and parallel to the
northerly line of Old Post Road to the easterly line of Lot No. 16-A in
Block 266; thence (11) southerly along the easterly line of said Lot No.
16-A in Block 266 and beyond to the southerly line of Old Post Road;
thence (12) easterly along said southerly line of Old Post Road to the
place of beginning.
g. Zone No. 7. Beginning at the intersection of Oak Tree Road and Wood
Avenue and running westerly along the center line of Oak Tree Road
approximately four thousand (4,000) feet to the center line of
Coopermine Brook Culvert; thence running southerly along the center
line of Coopermine Brook approximately one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet to a point; and thence running westerly along a line three
hundred (300) feet north of Ten Eyck Place approximately one thousand
eight hundred fifty (1,850) feet to the center line of Grove Avenue; and
thence southerly along the center line of Grove Avenue approximately
four thousand eight hundred (4,800) feet to the Metuchen boundary
§ 21-4.2 EDISON CODE § 21-4.2
AO:666
line; and thence easterly along the northerly boundary line of the
Borough of Metuchen approximately two thousand eight hundred
(2,800) feet to the center line of the Lincoln Highway approximately
six hundred (600) feet to a boundary limit of Garbage Zone No. 3 to
a point in the center line of Wood Avenue; and thence northerly along
the center line of Wood Avenue approximately five hundred (500) linear
feet to the point and place of beginning.
h. Zone No. 8.
1. All that area bounded by the southerly line of the Port Reading
Railroad, the westerly line of the municipal boundary line of the
Borough of Metuchen, the southerly line of New Durham Road and
the easterly line of lands of the Township of Edison utilized for the
municipal garage, the northeasterly line of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 287, the southerly line of New Durham Road
and the easterly line of Talmadge Road and the southerly line of
Ethel Road and the municipal boundary line of Piscataway and
South Plainfield.
2. All that area bounded on the north by New Durham Road, on the
west by Rieder Road, on the south by Rieder Road and Connor
Avenue and on the east by Edison-Metuchen boundary line,
including all those properties within Edison Township fronting on
Connor Avenue, Edith Avenue and Genesi Court.
i. Zone No. 9. All that area bounded on the north by the southerly line of
New Dover Road, on the west by the easterly line of Library Place and
Grove Avenue and on the south by the center line of Oak Tree Road, on
the east by the westerly line of the public service right-of-way and
including both sides of Livingston Avenue to its easterly terminus and
Ellmeyer Road, that portion east of the public service right-of-way.
j. Zone No. 10. All that area bounded on the east by the westerly line of
Plainfield Road to the center line of Park Avenue and on the south and
west by the center line of Park Avenue and on the north by the northerly
boundary line of Stephenville, Sections 2-B and 2-C.
k. Zone No. 11. Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of
Nevsky Street and the centerline of Park Avenue, thence, westerly
along the centerline of Nevsky Street to the centerline intersection with
Fleet Avenue, thence, southwesterly along the centerline of Nevsky
Street to the centerline intersection of Million Street, thence, westerly
along the centerline of Million Street to a point in to the westerly
sideline on New York Boulevard, thence, northerly along the westerly
sideline of New York Boulevard to the common corner of Lot 1A1 and
Lot 10, in Block 591, thence westerly along the southerly line of Lot 10
to the South Plainfield-Edison Municipal Boundary, thence,
northeasterly along said boundary to its intersection with the centerline
of Park Avenue, thence southerly along the centerline of Park Avenue to
the point of beginning.
§ 21-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.2
AO:667
l. Zone No. 12. Beginning at the centerline intersection of Wood Avenue
and New Dover Road, and thence running (1) westerly along the center
line of New Dover Road, three thousand forty (3,040) feet; thence (2)
southerly across the half-width of New Dover Road, then along the
westerly block limit line of Blocks 1000, 1005 and 1008, as shown on
the Edison Township Tax Map No. 70-A, two thousand two hundred
seventy (2,270) feet; thence (3) easterly along the southerly property
line of Lot 2 in Block 1008, across Parker Road, along the southerly
property line of Lots 1 through 12 in Block 1007 to the southeast corner
of Lot 1 in Block 1007; thence (4) northerly along the easterly property
line of Lot 1 in Block 1007, across the half-width of Sherman Boulevard
to a point in the center line of Sherman Boulevard; thence (5) easterly
along the center line of Sherman Boulevard eight hundred (800) feet;
thence (6) southerly across the half-width of Sherman Boulevard, then
along the common property line of Lot 58 in Block 553 and Lots 45 and
48 in Block 553, three hundred forty (340) feet to the southwest corner
of Lot 58 in Block 553; thence (7) easterly along the block limit line of
Block 553, five hundred thirty-five (535) feet to the northwest corner of
Lot 14-C in Block 546-E; thence (8) southerly along the westerly
property line of Lot 14-C in Block 546-E, two hundred nine (209) feet;
thence (9) southerly along the right-of-way line of Sherwood Road, ten
(10) feet to the northwesterly corner of Lot 10 in Block 546-E; thence
(10) easterly along the common property line of Lot 14-C and Lot 10 in
Block 546-E, one hundred seventy (170) feet to the northwest corner of
Lot 12 in Block 546-E; thence (11) southerly along the common
property line of Lots 10 and 12, 9 and 11, 8 and 4, 7 and 3, 6 and 2, 5
and 1 in Block 546-E, then across the half-width of Livingston Avenue,
seven hundred sixty (760) feet to a point in the center line of Livingston
Avenue; thence (12) easterly along the center line of Livingston Avenue
one hundred fifty-seven (157) feet to the center line of Wood Avenue;
thence (13) northerly along the center line of Wood Avenue, three
thousand fifty (3,050) feet to New Dover Road, being the point and
place of beginning.
Beginning at a point where the northerly line of Inman Avenue is
intersected by the easterly line of Block 412, Lot 3-K, and running
thence:
1. Northerly, along the easterly and the northeasterly line of Block
412, Lot 3-K to a point in the common boundary line between
Edison Township and Clark Township; thence
2. Easterly, along the common municipal boundary of Edison
Township and Clark Township to a point being the most
northwesterly corner of the Township of Woodbridge; thence
3. Southerly, along the common municipal boundary of Edison
Township and the municipal boundary of Woodbridge Township, to
a point in the northerly line of Inman Avenue; thence
§ 21-4.2 EDISON CODE § 21-4.2
AO:668
4. Westerly, along the northerly line of Inman Avenue to the point and
place of beginning.
m. Zone No. 13.
1. Pumptown Area.
(a) Beginning at the intersection of the westerly side line of
Colonial Court and the southerly side line of Park Avenue; and
running thence (1) southerly along the westerly side line of
Colonial Court to its intersection with the common property
line of Lots 10-A and 27 in Block 593; and thence (2) southerly
along the common property line of Lots 10-A and 27 in Block
593 two hundred forty (240) feet plus or minus to its
intersection with the common property line of Lots 27 and 13-B
in Block 593; and thence (3) easterly along the common
property line of Lots 27 and 13-B in Block 593 and its
projection two hundred eleven and twenty-five hundredths
(211.25) feet to the southeasterly corner of Lot 26 in Block
593; and thence (4) northerly along the common property line
of Lots 26 and 13-B in Block 593 one hundred thirty-eight and
eight-tenths (138.08) feet to the southwesterly corner of Lot 28
in Block 593; and thence (5) easterly along the common
property line of Lots 28 and 13B in Block 593 and its projection
seven hundred fifteen (715) feet plus or minus to the
northwesterly corner of Lot 49 in Block 593; and thence (6)
southerly along the common property line of Lots 49 and 13-B
in Block 593 and its projection three hundred ninety-five (395)
plus or minus to the southwesterly corner of Lot 24 in Block
593-R; and thence (7) easterly along the block limit line of
Blocks 593-R and 593 and its projection seven hundred sixty
(760) feet plus or minus to the southeast corner of Lot 42 in
Block 593-B; and thence (8) northerly along the common
property line of Lot 19 and Lot 42 in Block 593-B two hundred
fifty-five (255) feet plus or minus to the northeast corner of Lot
19 in Block 593-A; and thence (9) easterly along the common
property line of Lots 22 and 17 in Block 593A and its projection
to its intersection with the westerly side line of Plainfield Road;
and thence (10) northerly along the westerly side line of
Plainfield Road and its projection to its intersection with the
southerly side line of Park Avenue and its projection; and
thence (11) westerly along the southerly side line of Park
Avenue and its projection two thousand one hundred forty
(2,140) feet plus or minus to the point of beginning.
(b) The above-described garbage district encompasses the
following streets:
§ 21-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.2
AO:669
Name of Street Location
Christopher Court In its entirety
Colonial Court Entire east and south sides
Elsie Street In its entirety
Mulberry Lane In its entirety
Park Avenue South side 2,140 feet plus or minus
west of Plainfield Road
Plainfield Road West side 700 feet plus or minus
south of Park Avenue
Robin Road In its entirety
2. Harding Avenue Area.
(a) Beginning at the intersection of the easterly side line of
Plainfield Road with the southerly side line of Oak Tree Road;
and running thence (1) westerly along the southerly side line of
Oak Tree Road to the intersection of said line with the
southerly side line of the Lehigh Valley Railroad right-of-way;
and thence (2) southwesterly along the southerly side line of
the Lehigh Valley Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with
the block limit line of Blocks 556-J and 556-E; and thence (3)
southerly along a projection of the block limit line of Blocks
556-J and 556-E two thousand fifty (2,050) feet plus or minus to
its intersection with the block limit line of Blocks 1025 and
556-J; and thence (4) easterly along the block limit line of
Blocks 556-J and 1025 one thousand ninety-five (1,095) feet
plus or minus; and thence (5) southerly along the block limit
line of Blocks 556-J and 1025 one hundred thirty-one (131) feet
plus or minus; and thence (6) easterly along the block limit line
of Blocks 556-J and 1025 and its projection one thousand three
hundred ninety-five (1,395) feet plus or minus to its
intersection with the westerly side line of Plainfield Road; and
thence (7) northerly along the westerly side line of Plainfield
Road two thousand thirty-five (2,035) feet plus or minus to the
point of beginning.
(b) The above-described garbage zone encompasses the following
streets:
Name of Street Location
Alpine Street In its entirety
Beverly Street In its entirety
Dellview Drive In its entirety
Doris Court In its entirety
Gogel Street In its entirety
§ 21-4.2 EDISON CODE § 21-4.2
AO:670
Name of Street Location
Harding Avenue 2,750 feet plus or minus south of Oak
Street Road
Helene Avenue In its entirety
Hillsdale Road In its entirety
Jean Place In its entirety
Lucinda Court In its entirety
Marion Street The entire portion west of Plainfield
Road
Maryland Avenue In its entirety
Oak Tree Road South side from Plainfield Road west
to the railroad
Plainfield Road West side, 2,035 feet plus or minus
south of Oak
Regal Road In its entirety
n. Zone No. 14. Beginning at a point where the centerline of Inman
Avenue is intersected by the easterly sideline of Rahway Road, and
running thence (1) westerly, along the centerline of Inman Avenue, to a
point to the projected rear boundary line of Block 410-H, Lot 40 and the
centerline of Inman Avenue; thence (2) northeasterly along the rear
boundary line of Block 410, Lots 40, 41, 42 and 43 to a point common to
the rear property line of Lot 27 in Block 410-H; thence (3) westerly
along the rear property lines common to Lots 27 and 28 in Block 410-H,
to a point common to the rear property line of Lot 28 in Block 410-H (4)
northerly along the rear property lines of Lots 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 49
in Block 410-H, to a point common to the northerly line of Lot 49 in
Block 410-H; thence (5) easterly along the northerly property line of
Lots 49, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 and 41 in Block 410-H, to a point
common to the rear property line of Lot 44 in Block 410-H; thence (6)
northerly along the rear property lines of Lots 44, 45, 46, 47 and 48 in
Block 410-H, to a point common to the municipal boundary between
Edison Township and Scotch Plains Township, thence (7) easterly along
the municipal boundary, to a point common to the rear property line of
Block 411, Lot 4-A; thence (8) southerly along the rear property line of
Lots 4-A in Block 411, running southerly and having a parallel distance
of 200 feet from the easterly sideline of Rahway Road to a point in the
centerline intersection of Inman Avenue and the point and place of
beginning.
o. Zone No. 15. Beginning at a point where the centerline of Plainfield
Road is intersected with the projected side property line of Lot 1-A in
Block 593-A, and running thence (1) southerly, along the centerline of
Plainfield Road, to a point marked by the intersection of said centerline
and the projection of the southerly sideline of Lot 48 in Block 593-F;
§ 21-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.2
AO:671
§ 21-4.3. Properties Removed from Garbage Districts. [1999 Code
§ 8.08.250]
thence (2) westerly along the sideline of Lots 48, 47, 46, 45, 44 and
43 in Block 593-F to a point common to the southwesterly corner of
Lot 43 in Block 593-F; thence (3) northerly along the rear property
lines of Lots 43 and 42 in Block 593-F, to a point common to the
rear property line of Lot 33 in Block 593-F; thence (4) westerly along
the rear property lines of Lots 33 and 32 in Block 593-F, to a point
common to the southwesterly corner of Lot 32 in Block 593-F; thence
(5) northerly along the sideline of Lot 32 in Block 593-F, to a point
common to the southerly sideline of Woodrow Wilson Drive; thence (6)
northwesterly along the sideline of Woodrow Wilson Drive, to a point
common to the southeasterly sideline of Lot 58 in Block 593-B; thence
(7) northerly along the rear property lines of Lots 59, 58, 57, 56, 55, 54,
53, 52 and 51 in Block 593-B, to a point common to the southwesterly
corner of Lot 24 in Block 593-R; thence (8) easterly along the rear
property lines of Lots 24, 23, 22, 21 and 42 in Block 593-B; thence (9)
northerly along the rear property lines of Lot 63 in Block 593-B and Lot
39 in Block 593-A, to a point common to the northwesterly corner of Lot
39 in Block 593-A; thence (10) easterly along the rear property lines
of Lots 38, 37, 36, 35 and 1A in Block 593-A, to a point marked by the
centerline of Plainfield Road and the point and place of beginning.
p. Zone No. 16.
1. Beginning at a point where the centerline of Talmadge Road is
intersected by the centerline of the Conrail Lehigh Valley Railroad,
Block 681, Lot 1, and running thence (1) easterly, along the
centerline of Talmadge Road, to a point common to the rear
property line of Lot 1 in Block 1234; thence (2) southerly along the
rear boundary line of Lots 1 and 6 in Block 1234 to a point common
to the northerly sideline of Lot 12 in Block 1234; thence (3) easterly
along the northerly sideline of Lot 12 in Block 1234 to a point
common to the rear property line of Lot 12 in Block 1234; thence
(4) southerly along the westerly sidelines of Lots 27, 13-B and 13-D
in Block 539.09 to a point common to the northerly municipal
boundary line of the township of Edison and the Borough of
Metuchen; thence (5) westerly along the municipal boundary line of
the Borough of Metuchen to a point in the centerline of the Conrail
Lehigh Valley Railroad; thence (6) northwesterly along the
centerline of said railroad, to a point at the intersection of said
railroad with the centerline of Talmadge Road and the point
beginning.
2. Said district to include all of neighborhood known as "Woodbrook
Corners" and is not to include any part of Block 593-08, Lot 4-A,
also known as "Pheasant Run."
a. The following properties are hereby removed from the Garbage
Districts:
§ 21-4.2 EDISON CODE § 21-4.3
AO:672
Block Lot Block Lot
56 9.A, 5, 7B, 7D, 8B, 8D 643.DD 15.P, 12.A1, 15.E, 15.M,
15.Q
56 15, 3.F1, 4.A2 643.DD 19.13, 19.14
69 23, 24-28 643.DD 20.F, 20.H2
82.B 3, 4-8 643.DD 20.G2
82.B 9, 10 643.DD 37
99.A 2.B 675 2, 3
101 2.C 676 3.C
101 15-16 676 4.A
104.C 3.G 677 1.F
104.D 1, 2, 3, 30 678 1.A
114 6, 7-16 686 8
122 8, 9-20, 28 689 2.B1
160.B 4, 5, 6 690 34
160.B 7, 8, 9 694.Q 43.A4
160.B 10, 11-15 709 1.L
160.B 27, 28-31 735.B 5.A, 6.A - 8.A
160.V 18 750 19, 20
160.V 19.B, 20.A 788 9.A1
182.A 7.S1, 11-14 819 17, 18 - 20
265.BB 64.S1 1131 27.B
265FF 11.E4 1143 27.B
266 47, 50
266 48
267.J 3.A2
302 3.A7
312 10
337 15.K, 15.L, 15.M
362 6
368 1, 2-7
368; 369 13, 14-25; 13A
371 18
372 35
372 7, 8-12A
§ 21-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.3
AO:673
Chapter 22
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 22-1. AIR POLLUTION CONTROL.
§ 22-1.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 8.56.010]
This section shall regulate and control air pollution in the Township.
§ 22-1.2. Findings and Declaration of Policy. [1999 Code § 8.56.020]
It is declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders, soot, fly
ash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants is a menace
to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents of Edison Township and
a cause of substantial damage to property. For the purpose of controlling,
and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is declared to be the policy of the
Township to minimize air pollution as herein defined and prohibit excessive
emission of the same, to establish standards governing the installation,
maintenance and operation of equipment and appurtenances relating to
combustion which are a source or potential source of air pollution, and, in
furtherance of this purpose, to cooperate and coordinate these efforts with
the State Department of Health, Air Pollution Control Program.
§ 22-1.3. Definitions. [1999 Code § 8.56.030]
As used in this section:
AIR POLLUTION — Means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one
(1) or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or
tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life
Block Lot Block Lot
375.A 20.D
375.C 8.A
375.FF 13.K
375.FF 13.X1
375.GG 13.L1
375.GG 13.P2
b. The properties identified in subsection 21-4.3a are all apartment
complexes. The intent and effect of this subsection is to remove those
properties from the Township's Garbage District and eliminate the
requirement for the payment of the Garbage District Tax.
c. The savings which results from the elimination of the Garbage District
Tax provided for in this subsection shall be distributed to the tenants of
the subject apartment complexes by a pro rata reduction in rent.
§ 21-4.3 EDISON CODE § 22-1.3
AO:674
or to property, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life
or property throughout the Township as shall be affected thereby, and
excludes all aspects of employer-employee relationship as to health and
safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Means those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Means any furnace, boiler, water heater,
device, mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or other
apparatus, or a group or collection of such units, in the process of fuel
burning for the generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment
shall be considered incinerators as herein defined and not as "fuel-burning
equipment" under this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively
for domestic cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Means any device, apparatus, equipment or structure
used for destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including, but not limited to, refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or scrap, or
facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — Means a property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING — Means any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney.
OPERATOR — Means any person who has care, custody or control of
a building or premises or a portion thereof, whether with or without
knowledge of the owner thereof.
OWNER — Means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care
or control of any premises or part thereof, including, but not limited to,
a dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a
fiduciary, including, but not limited to, executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver, guardian, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all
or any part of any premises, including, but not limited to, a dwelling or
dwelling unit, shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall
have joint responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion thereof
so leased or subleased.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies as well as individuals.
REFUSE — Means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except body
wastes), and shall include, but not be limited to, garbage, rubbish, yard
trimmings, leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Means Ringelmann's Scale for Grading
the Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
or any chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:675
density which is approved by the State Department of Health of the State of
New Jersey as the equivalent of Ringelmann's Scale.
RUBBISH — Means solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, and shall include, but not be limited to, rags, old clothes, leather,
rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard
trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar
materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Means any business, trade or industry engaged
in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material,
including, but not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or
drums.
SMOKE — Means small gasborne and airborne particles arising from a
process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — Means all solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, and shall include, but not be limited to, plastic products,
carton, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders
and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 22-1.4. Open Burning Restricted. [1999 Code § 8.56.040]
§ 22-1.5. Smoke Emission from Fuel-Burning Equipment. [1999
Code § 8.56.050]
§ 22-1.6. Incinerator Regulation. [1999 Code § 8.56.060]
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning, except as
provided in paragraph b. below.
b. The open burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other
known method of disposal can be used without hazard to health or
property and the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by
the Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of Health in
accordance with Chapter II, Section 1.4 of the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuelburning
equipment, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air.
b. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to smoke emitted
during the cleaning of a firebox or the building of a new fire, the shade
or appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, for a period or periods aggregating no more than three
(3) minutes in any fifteen (15) consecutive minutes.
a. Smoke Emissions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke
from any incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
§ 22-1.3 EDISON CODE § 22-1.6
AO:676
§ 22-1.7. Prohibition of Air Pollution. [1999 Code § 8.56.070]
No person or owner of property, and no person having possession or control
of property, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 22-1.8. Inspections and Right of Entry. [1999 Code § 8.56.080]
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air;
or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney, to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
b. New Fires. The provisions of paragraph a. shall not apply to smoke
emitted during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of
which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart (for a
period of no longer than three (3) consecutive minutes; or to emissions
of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney or, exclusive of water vapor,
of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney, to a degree which is not
greater than the emissions designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, for period no longer than three (3) consecutive minutes.
c. Visible Particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
emission of particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator
which are individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
d. Odors. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
e. Limitation on Time of Operation. No person shall operate, and no owner
or operator of any building in the Township shall permit the operation
of, an incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any days, and
all operation shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m., including
complete extinction of the fire and removal of material in a safe manner
from the firebox to a noncombustible container; provided, however, that
by special permit, the Health Officer may, because of exceptional
circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as he or she shall deem necessary for the health, safety and
welfare of the public or of persons in the vicinity.
a. All buildings and premises subject to this section are subject to
inspection from time to time by the Health Officer or his or her duly
authorized representatives. All rooms and areas in the building shall be
available and accessible for such inspection, which shall be made
during usual business hours if the premises are used for nonresidential
purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be made at other
times if:
§ 22-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.8
AO:677
§ 22-1.9. Search Warrant or Access Warrant. [1999 Code § 8.56.090]
§ 22-2. ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION ESCROW.
1. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection; or
2. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection
during other than the prescribed hours; or
3. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
b. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Health Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses
an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take
place only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance
of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by
the Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32. Where the Health Officer or his or her duly
authorized representatives are refused entry or access or are otherwise
impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from
conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation of this section.
a. The Health Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to any judge for a search
warrant, setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances
that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation
of the section may exist on the premises, including one (1) or more of
the following:
1. That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the Health Officer for periodic inspections of
premises of the type involved;
2. That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash,
soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that violations of this section exist;
3. Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
and/or system types of incinerator, particular use of premises or
other factors render systematic inspections of such building
necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
b. If the Judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he or
she shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access
to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or
violation may exist.
§ 22-1.8 EDISON CODE § 22-2.1
AO:678
§ 22-2.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 8.22.010]
The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for the Township
of Edison to independently monitor and analyze the environmental
remediation of redevelopment or rezoning sites within the Township of
Edison where on-going or prospective NJDEP or USEPA environmental
remediation is taking place or is about to take place.
§ 22-2.2. Posting of Environmental Remediation Escrow. [1999 Code
§ 8.22.020]
a. The following parties shall be responsible for the posting of an
Environmental Remediation Escrow (defined below) with the Edison
Township Department of Health and Human Services:
1. The owner of any property which has been designated by the
Township Council as an "area in need of redevelopment" under the
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1, et seq.,
which is the subject of an on-going or prospective NJDEP or
USSEPA environmental clean-up (hereinafter a "Redevelopment
Clean-Up Site"); or
2. The owner of any property seeking the rezoning of said property by
the Township Council which is the subject of an on-going or
prospective NJDEP or USEPA environmental clean-up (hereinafter
a "Rezoning Clean-Up Site").
b. The Township Council, as a condition precedent to 1. the adoption of
any ordinance adopting a redevelopment plan for a Redevelopment
Clean-Up Site, or 2. the adoption of any ordinance rezoning a Rezoning
Clean-Up Site, may require the owner thereof to post with the Edison
Township Department of Health and Human Services a twenty
thousand ($20,000) dollar escrow to allow the Township (by and
through its own personnel or through outside environmental
consultants) to independently monitor and analyze the on-going or
prospective NJDEP or USEPA clean-up of said Redevelopment Clean-Up
Site or Rezoning Clean-Up Site (hereinafter the "Environmental
Remediation Escrow").
c. A formal escrow agreement shall be prepared by the Township Attorney
memorializing the posting and use of the Environmental Remediation
Escrow. Said agreement shall authorize its execution by the Mayor and
Township Clerk by formal resolution of the Township Council.
d. Any unused escrow shall be refunded by the Township upon the
completion of the Township's independent environmental analysis and
monitoring.
e. The owner of any Redevelopment Clean-Up Site or Rezoning Clean-Up
Site shall have the right to copies of all reports and analyses generated
by the Township of its independent consultants.
§ 22-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2.3
AO:679
§ 22-2.3. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 8.22.030]
The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the
Department of Health and Human Services, and said Department is charged
with the duty to enforce this section and, to that end, to make and sign
complaints for violations in the Municipal Court of the Township.
§ 22-2.4. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 8.22.040]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. A separate
offense shall be committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 22-3. NOTIFICATION OF INVESTIGATION OR REMEDIATION OF
CONTAMINATED SITES.
§ 22-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
The purpose of this section is to provide enhanced public outreach by
those responsible for clean-up of contaminated sites under the jurisdiction
of the DEP, the USEPA and/or the USACE (as such terms are defined
below), to post signs and to distribute notification letters informing local
residents of work progress. Additionally, this section will provide notice
to the Township personnel identified herein of proposed remediation work
so that appropriate steps can be taken to safeguard the residents in this
community and the surrounding environment.
§ 22-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
AREA OF CONCERN — Means any location where contaminants are or
were known or suspected to have been discharged, generated,
manufactured, refined, transported, stored, handled, treated, or disposed,
or where contaminants have or may have migrated.
CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINANT — Means any discharged hazardous
substance as defined pursuant to section P.L. 1976, c. 141 (C. 58:10-23.11b),
hazardous waste as defined pursuant to section 1 of P.L. 1976, c. 99 (C.
13:1E-38), or pollutant as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L. 1977, c. 74
(C. 58:10A-3).
DEP — Means the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — Means the Director of the Township of Edison
Department of Health and Human Services.
DISCHARGE — Means any intentional or unintentional action or omission
resulting in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying or dumping of hazardous substances into the waters or onto the
lands of the State, or into waters outside the jurisdiction of the State when
damage may result to the lands, waters or natural resources within the
jurisdiction of the State.
§ 22-2.3 EDISON CODE § 22-3.2
AO:680
FIRE CHIEF — Means the Township of Edison Chief of the Division of Fire.
HASP — Means a health and safety plan prepared in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:26E-1.9, as supplemented and amended.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Means the "environmental hazardous
substances" on the environmental hazardous substance list adopted by
the DEP pursuant to section 4 of P.L. 1983, c. 315 (C. 34:5A-4); such
elements and compounds, including petroleum products, which are defined
as such by the DEP, after public hearing, and which shall be consistent
to the maximum extent possible with, and which shall include, the list of
hazardous substances adopted by the USEPA pursuant to section 311 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. 92-500, as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, Pub. L. 95-217 (33 U.S.C. s.1251
et seq.); the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the USEPA
pursuant to section 307 of that act; and the list of hazardous substances
adopted by the USEPA pursuant to section 101 of the "Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980," Pub.
L. 96-510 (42 U.S.C. s.9601 et seq.); provided, however that sewage and
sewage sludge shall not be considered as hazardous substances for the
purposes of P.L. 1976, c. 141 (C. 58:10-23 et seq.).
IMMEDIATE ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN — Means a condition at a
contaminated site where there is: (1) confirmed contamination in a well
used for potable purposes at concentrations at or above the groundwater
remediation standards; (2) confirmed contamination that has migrated into
an occupied or confined space producing a toxic or harmful atmosphere
resulting in an unacceptable human health exposure, or producing an
oxygen-deficient atmosphere, or resulting in demonstrated physical damage
to essential underground services; (3) confirmed contamination at the site
of a nature that either dermal contact, ingestion, or inhalation of
contamination could result in an acute human health exposure; or (4) any
other condition that poses an immediate threat to the environmental or to
the public health and safety.
LICENSED SITE REMEDIATION PROFESSIONAL — Means an individual
who is licensed by the board pursuant to section 7 of P.L. 2009, c. 60
(C. 58:10C-7) or the DEP pursuant to section 12 of P.L. 2009, c. 60 (C.
58:10C-12).
OEM COORDINATOR — Means the Coordinator of the Township of Edison
Office of Emergency Management.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING THE REMEDIATION —
Means (1) any person who executes or is otherwise subject to an oversight
document to remediate a contaminated site, (2) the owner or operator
of an industrial establishment subject to P.L. 1983, c. 330 (C. 13:1K-6 et
al.), for the remediation of a discharge, (3) the owner or operator of an
underground storage tank subject to P.L. 1986, e. 102 (C. 58:10A21 et seq.),
for the remediation of a discharge, (4) any other persons who discharge
a hazardous substance or is in any way responsible for a hazardous
substance, pursuant to section 8 of P.L. 1976, c. 141 (C. 58:10-23.11g),
§ 22-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-3.2
AO:681
that was discharged at a contaminated site, or (5) any other person who is
remediating a site.
POLICE CHIEF — Means the Township of Edison Chief of the Division of
Police.
REMEDIAL ACTION — Means those actions taken at a site or off site if a
contaminant has migrated or is migrating therefrom, as may be required
by the DEP or USEPA, including the removal, treatment, containment,
transportation, securing, or other engineering or treatment measures,
whether to an unrestricted use or otherwise, designed to ensure that any
discharged contaminant at the site or that has migrated or is migrating
from the site, is remediated in compliance with the applicable health risk or
environmental standards.
REMEDIAL ACTION WORK PLAN — Means a plan for the remedial action
to be undertaken at a site, or at any area to which a discharge originating
at a site is migrating or has migrated; a description of the remedial action
to be used to remediate a site; a time schedule and cost estimate of the
implementation of the remedial action; and any other information the DEP
or USEPA deems necessary.
REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION — Means a process to determine the nature
and extent of a discharge of a contaminant at a site or a discharge of
a contaminant that has migrated or is migrating from the site and the
problems presented by a discharge, and may include data collected, site
characterization, sampling, monitoring, and the gathering of any other
sufficient and relevant information necessary to determine the necessity
for remedial action and to support the evaluation of remedial actions if
necessary.
REMEDIATION or REMEDIATE — Means all necessary actions to
investigate and cleanup or respond to any known, suspected, or threatened
discharge of contaminants, including, as necessary, the preliminary
assessment, site investigation, remedial investigation, and remedial action;
provided, however, that "remediation" or "remediate" shall not include the
payment of compensation for damage to, or loss of, natural resources.
RESPONSE ACTION OUTCOME — Means a written determination by a
licensed site remediation professional that the contaminated site was
remediated in accordance with all applicable statutes and regulations, and
based upon an evaluation of the historical use of the site, or of any area of
concern at that site, as applicable, and any other investigation or action the
DEP deems necessary, there are no contaminants present at the site, or at
any area of concern, at any other site to which a discharge originating at the
site has migrated, or that any contaminants present at the site or that have
migrated from the site have been remediated in accordance with applicable
remediation regulations, and all applicable permits and authorizations have
been obtained.
SITE INVESTIGATION — Means the collection and evaluation of data
adequate to determine whether or not discharged contaminants exist at a
site or have migrated or are migrating from the site at levels in excess of the
§ 22-3.2 EDISON CODE § 22-3.2
AO:682
applicable remediation standards. A site investigation shall be developed
based upon the information collected pursuant to the preliminary
assessment.
USACE — Means the United States Army Corps of Engineers. For purposes
of this Section 22-3, the use of the term "USACE" herein shall refer only to
active or time critical United States Army Corps of Engineers remediation
sites.
USEPA — Means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
NOTE: All terms used but not defined herein shall have the same meaning ascribed
to them in the Site Remediation Reform Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10C-1 et seq.
§ 22-3.3. Notification Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
Except as exempted by N.J.A.C. 7:26E-1.4(e), any person responsible for
conducting the remediation of any contamination or contaminant within
the Township of Edison shall take the following notification actions not
later than thirty (30) days prior to either (i) the commencement of a site
investigation or remedial investigation of an area of concern, or (ii) the
initiation of remediation of a contaminated site:
a. Sign Placement.
1. The placement of a minimum of one (1) sign at every street
frontage a location clearly visible to the public, which sign shall be
in English and, as to the extent applicable, the prevalent language
within 200 feet of the site boundary if a "sensitive population" is
identified pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26E-1.4. Any such sign shall be at
least two (2) feet by three (3) feet in size and shall include the
following words in font that is of sufficient size to be readable from
the street or sidewalk:
(a) "Environmental Investigation Cleanup in Progress at this Site;"
(b) "For Further Information Contact...," followed by the telephone
number for the person responsible for conducting the
remediation and the telephone number for the DEP's, USEPA's
or USACE's Office of Community Relations;
(c) "Contaminants of concern are listed as..." stating, at a
minimum, the three (3) chemicals which pose the highest
health and/or environmental risk;
(d) The DEP's preferred ID, as provided in the most recent edition
of the "Department's Known Contaminated Sites in New
Jersey" report or the valid USEPA site identification number. If
neither number is available, the number provided by the DEP's
hotline may be substituted (1-877-WARNDEP or
1-877-927-6337); and
(e) "Posted on," followed by the date the sign was posted.
§ 22-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-3.3
AO:683
2. Within two (2) weeks after the sign is posted, the person
responsible for conducting the remediation shall submit the site
information required at paragraph b1(d) below, and a photograph
of the sign showing its location and content in both electronic/
digital format and in hard copy to:
(a) The assigned case manager. If a case manager for the site has
not been assigned, include a copy of the photograph as part of
the remedial investigation report or remedial action report
required by this chapter;
(b) The DEP's, USEPA's, or USACE's Office of Community
Relations;
(c) The Township Clerk;
(d) The Director of Health;
(e) The OEM Coordinator;
(f) The Police Chief;
(g) The Fire Chief;
(h) The Edison Township Environmental Commission; and
(i) Any other interested party as authorized by Resolution of the
Township Council to receive such information.
3. The person responsible for conducting the remediation shall
comply with all local laws and requirements relevant to the posting
of signs.
4. For sites where the remedial investigation or remediation was
initiated prior to September 2, 2008, the sign shall be posted no
later than November 1, 2009.
5. The sign shall remain posted and shall be maintained so that it is
legible at all times, until such time as the DEP or USEPA issues a
No Further Action Letter and Covenant Not to Sue (or its functional
equivalent) pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-C.
6. No sign shall be placed in such a manner as to impede or obstruct
the clear line of site of the traveling public. In this regard, the
Director of Health, or his or her designee, shall have the right to
direct the person responsible for conducting the remediation of any
contamination or contaminant to relocate said sign to a location on
the site which does not impede or obstruct the clean line of site of
the traveling public.
7. The sign requirements set forth herein shall supersede any
inconsistent or conflicting local sign regulations.
b. Notification by Mail.
§ 22-3.3 EDISON CODE § 22-3.3
AO:684
1. The person responsible for conducting the remediation shall
provide public notice by sending notification letters and, the
following shall apply:
(a) Notification letters shall be sent:
(1) No later than two (2) weeks prior to either initiating field
activities associated with a remedial investigation of a
multi-phase remediation or initiating a single phase
remediation; or
(2) For sites where the remedial investigation or remediating
was initiated prior to September 2, 2008, no later than
November 1, 2009.
(b) Additional notification letters that reflect the current condition
and progress of the remediation shall be sent every two (2)
years after the initiation of the remediation or the remedial
action until a No Further Action and Covenant Not to Sue letter
(or its functional equivalent) is issued by the DEP or USEPA
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26C, or on a schedule approved by the
DEP or USEPA.
(c) The notices prepared pursuant to paragraph b, 1(a) and (b)
above shall be sent to the following persons by certified mail or
by using the certificate of mailing service:
(1) Each owner of all real property, as shown on the current
Township tax duplicate, and tenants of those properties,
located within two hundred (200) feet of the site boundary;
and
(2) The administrator of each school and child care facility
identified in the sensitive population and resource
checklist required pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26E-1.4(f).
(d) The notice shall include the following site information:
(1) The name and address of the site;
(2) The tax block(s) and lot(s);
(3) The DEP's Preferred ID number as provided in the most
recent edition of the "Department's Known Contaminated
Sites in New Jersey" report or the valid USEPA site
identification number. If neither number is available, the
number provided by the DEP's hotline may be substituted
(1-877-WARNDEP or 1-877-927-6337);
(4) A statement that contamination has been identified;
§ 22-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-3.3
AO:685
§ 22-3.4. Notification to Mayor and Township Council. [Ord. No.
O.1720-2009§ I]
The Township Clerk shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after having
received the sign verification documentation and notice letters as set forth
in subsection 22-3.3, shall immediately notify the Mayor and Township
Council of same by providing a copy of said written materials.
§ 22-3.5. Health and Safety Plan. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
In addition to the requirements of this Section 22-3, any person conducting
remediation activities shall prepare a site-specific HASP in accordance with
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:26E-1.9. Such HASP shall be submitted to
(5) A brief description of the type of contamination in common
language, the affected environmental media and action(s)
being taken at the site;
(6) Contact information for the person responsible for
conducting the remediation and for the DEP's, USEPA's or
USACE's Office of Community Relations; and
(7) A statement that the person responsible for conducting the
remediation will provide a copy of all environmental
reports to the Director of Health.
(e) Each time notification letters are sent, the person responsible
for conducting the remediation shall submit an electronic copy
and a paper copy of one (1) notification letter and list of
recipients to the following:
(1) The assigned case manager. If a case manager for the site
has not been assigned, include a copy of the notification
letter and list of recipients as part of the remedial
investigation report or remedial action report required by
this section;
(2) The DEP's, USEPA's or USACE's Office of Community
Relations;
(3) The Township Clerk;
(4) The Director of Health;
(5) The OEM Coordinator;
(6) The Police Chief;
(7) The Fire Chief;
(8) The Edison Township Environmental Commission; and
(9) Any other interested party as authorized by resolution of
the Township Council to receive such information.
§ 22-3.3 EDISON CODE § 22-3.5
AO:686
the Director of Health and the OEM Coordinator at least forty-five (45) days
before initiating such remediation activities.
§ 22-3.6. Exemption. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
All residential oil tank removals shall be exempt from the requirements of
this Section 22-3.
§ 22-3.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the
Director of Health, and said Director of Health is charged with the duty
to enforce this section and, to that end, to make and sign complaints for
violations in the Municipal Court of the Township. If the Director of Health
and Human Services is unavailable to enforce this section, the provisions of
this section shall be administered and enforced by the Township Engineer.
§ 22-3.8. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. A separate
offense shall be committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 22-3.9. Conflict. [Ord. No. O.1720-2009§ I]
Nothing in this Section 22-3 shall be construed to abridge or limit the
powers of the DEP under the Site Remediation Reform Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10C-1 et seq. or the rules promulgated thereunder (N.J.A.C. 7:26E-1 et
seq.). In the event of a conflict between the Reform Act and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, the provisions of the Site Remediation Reform Act
and the regulations promulgated thereunder shall control.
§ 22-4. PROTECTION OF WATERWAYS.
§ 22-4.1. Declaration of Policy. [Ord. No. O.2025-2018]
It is hereby declared that pollution of the waters in and about the Township
of Edison presents serious problems of health and safety to the citizens of
the Township. For the purpose of controlling and reducing these health and
safety hazards, it is declared to be the policy of this Township to minimize
water pollution and, in furtherance of this policy, to coordinate these efforts
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
§ 22-4.2. Compliance with Rules and Regulations Required. [Ord.
No. O.2025-2018]
The streams, rivers and other bodies of water in and around the Township
are subject to the jurisdiction of the NJDEP and EPA. All persons placing any
§ 22-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-4.2
AO:687
substance or object in these waters shall comply with all applicable rules,
statutes and regulations.
§ 22-4.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. O.2025-2018]
The only exceptions to the prohibitions contained in this section shall
be actions for which the EPA, the NJDEP, or a formally delegated utility
authority, as authorized by NJDEP or other authorized agent, has issued a
permit for such activity pursuant applicable federal or New Jersey Law and
provided that all such activities are undertaken in conformance with the
provisions of said permit(s).
§ 22-4.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. O.2025-2018]
Chapter 23
ADOPT AN AREA PROGRAM
§ 23-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ADOPT AN AREA PROGRAM.
[Ord. No. O.1751-2010]
In the interest of public welfare and the sound quality of life of its residents,
Edison Township hereby establishes the Adopt an Area Program to provide
for the sufficient maintenance of, and landscaping to, its parks, open spaces,
vacant Township-owned properties and landscaped areas in order to
preserve and maintain them through the participation of landscaping
businesses as provided herein.
§ 23-2. APPROVAL. [Ord. No. O.1751-2010]
a. The Business Administrator, or her designee, shall appoint or designate
some suitable person or agency to administer this section on or before
its effective date.
b. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00)
dollars or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. Each
and every day in which a violation of any provision of this chapter exists
shall constitute a separate violation. This provision shall not preclude
the right of the Township to pursue or cooperate with any enforcement
action for violation of any applicable federal or state water pollution
control statute and or regulation.
c. Violations of any of the provisions of this section or any permit issued
under the authority of this section may result in the termination of any
permit issued, as referenced in subsection 22-4.3 above.
a. Any person interested in adopting an area to provide landscaping
maintenance services such as cutting of lawns, watering, fertilizing,
raking and removing leaves, trees and shrub trimming and/or removal,
§ 22-4.2 EDISON CODE § 23-2
AO:688
§ 23-3. PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. O.1751-2010]
removing litter, weeding, mulching, planting and light pruning at
regular times throughout the year.
b. Any person interested in adopting an area should submit a request to
the Township Clerk including:
1. The name and address of the person, firm, corporation or other
legal entity conducting the business;
2. In case of a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and
stockholders of the corporation;
3. In case of a limited liability company, the name and addresses of all
officers and members of the limited liability company;
4. The location of the Township park, open space, vacant Townshipowned
property and/or landscaped area they propose to maintain.
5. Proposed signage to be used at the area and proposed location for
such signage.
6. Proof of insurance for comprehensive general liability insurance
coverage having limits of liability of at least one million
($1,000,000.00) dollars for property damage, and for personal
injury, and proof of Workmen's Compensation coverage for all
employees as required by law.
c. Upon receiving such a request the Township Clerk shall forward the
request to the Director of Public Works who shall review the request in
consultation with the Director of Parks and Recreation and/or other
Directors as appropriate. Requests for adoption of areas shall be
processed on a first-come, first-serve basis. If more than one (1)
landscaping business simultaneously request the same location, a
lottery will be held by the Director of the Department of Public Works to
select which landscaping business will adopt that location. The Director
for the Department of Public Works will make the final determination,
subject to Township Council approval, as to whether a particular
landscaping business can participate and make final assignments as to
the area and forward his recommendations to the Township Council for
action.
d. A sign may be placed at each area by the landscaping business of a type
and in a location as approved by resolution. The sign may measure no
nor than two (2) feet high by three (3) feet wide and the total height of
the installed sign shall not exceed three (3) feet. The sign shall contain
the language: "Edison Township Adopt an Area Program. This Area
adopted by" and then may contain the name and telephone number of
the landscaping business and a company logo if so desired by the
landscaping business and as approved by resolution.
§ 23-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3
AO:689
Chapter 24
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 24-1. SUPERVISION; ENFORCEMENT.
§ 24-1.1. Director of Parks and Recreation. [1999 Code § 12.12.010;
New]
a. A minimum one (1) year commitment is required.
b. The landscaping business shall maintain the approved area in a
workman-like and professional manner. The activities of the landscape
business on the approved area shall at all times be subject to the
direction of the Director of Public Works.
c. Any tree and bush trimmings, leaves, cut grass that is not mulched into
the lawns, garbage collected and other debris shall be removed from
the approved area.
d. Any approved sign shall be maintained in good condition. Any sign
approved that is not maintained in good condition will be removed and
discarded by the Township. Any unapproved signs will be removed and
discarded by the Township.
e. Insurance as required by Section 23-2b6 shall be maintained at all
times and proof of renewal of same shall be promptly submitted to the
Township Clerk.
f. The landscaping business shall comply with all applicable laws, rules,
regulations and ordinances in addition to the terms of this program.
g. The approved sign shall only be placed at the approved location during
the time the landscape business is participating in this program, should
the business no longer be participating in this program or should the
approval be revoked for violating any of the terms of this program, the
sign shall be promptly removed and if not so removed it will be removed
and discarded by the Township.
h. Any approval of a landscaping business approved for any area may be
revoked by the Director of Public Works for failure to comply with any
of the terms of this program.
a. Supervision. All parks and recreational areas in the Township shall be
operated and maintained under the supervision of the Director of Parks
and Recreation and the Director of Public Works.
b. Employees. The Director of Public Works shall have supervision over all
employees concerned in the maintenance of such parks and
recreational areas, and they shall perform their duties under his or her
supervision.
§ 23-3 EDISON CODE § 24-1.1
AO:690
§ 24-2. GROUP ACTIVITIES; ASSEMBLIES.
§ 24-2.1. Permit Required. [1999 Code § 12.12.020, D]
Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use the park
facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or
entertainment performances, a representative of said group, association
or organization shall first obtain a permit from the Director of Parks and
Recreation for such purposes.
§ 24-2.2. Indemnity Bond. [1999 Code § 12.12.020, D]
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall grant the application if it appears
that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the
general use of the park or recreational area by the individual members
of the public and if the group, association or organization meets all other
conditions contained in the application. The application may contain a
requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the Township from any
liability of any kind or character and to protect the Township property from
damage and shall contain such a provision if the swimming pool is to be
utilized by the group.
§ 24-2.3. Possession of Permit Required During Event; Exceptions.
[1999 Code § 12.12.010, F]
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or organize any
assembly or group of people or make any speeches or conduct any musical
program or festivals in any park or recreational area unless a permit
has been obtained from the Director of Parks and Recreation, and unless
such permit is carried by the person heading or leading such activity;
provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to students'
work when constituting a part of their educational activities under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities, nor to
any governmental agency within the scope of its functions.
§ 24-2.4. Application; Use of Alcoholic Beverages. [1999 Code
§ 12.12.010, F]
Applications for a park permit shall be filed with the Director not less than
twenty (20) days nor more than one hundred eight (108) days before the
c. Enforcement of Ordinances. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall
see to the enforcement of all ordinances relating to the parks and
recreational areas. He or she shall enforce all rules relating to the use
of the park.
d. Compliance with Regulations Required. It is unlawful for any person to
violate any regulation governing conduct in the Township parks or
recreational areas which regulation has been approved by the Council
of the Township.
§ 24-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2.4
AO:691
date on which it is proposed to conduct any such activity. Such application
shall be sworn to and shall state:
§ 24-2.5. Issuance of Permit. [1999 Code § 12.12.010, F]
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall grant and issue such park permit
if:
a. The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such
activity;
b. If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible
head of such organization;
c. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
chairman of such activity and who will be responsible for its conduct;
d. The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
to whom the permit is desired to be issued;
e. The date when such activity is to be conducted;
f. The park, recreational area or portion thereof for which such permit is
desired;
g. An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
h. The hour when such activity will start and terminate;
i. Whether such activity will include the sale or distribution by a nonprofit
organization of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a valid special permit
from the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control. In the
event that such activity will include the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages by a nonprofit organization, the applicant for a picnic permit
shall pay (in addition to any other fees required to be paid) a
nonrefundable fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars which shall be paid
simultaneously with the picnic permit application. No alcoholic
beverages shall be permitted unless the applicant shall first provide
evidence that a valid special permit has been obtained from the New
Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Notwithstanding the
above, the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to
the confines of the following three (3) parks (excluding buildings
situated thereon):
1. Papaianni Park (formerly Central Avenue Park);
2. Yelencsics Park (formerly Raritan Park);
3. Elder Park.
§ 24-2.4 EDISON CODE § 24-2.5
AO:692
§ 24-2.6. Time for Action on Application; Content of Permit. [1999
Code § 12.12.010, F]
§ 24-3. USE REGULATIONS.
§ 24-3.1. Clean Up of Site; Fires to Be Extinguished. [1999 Code
§ 12.12.020, A]
Each person, firm or corporation using the public parks, recreational areas
and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires
are permitted and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a
neat and sanitary condition.
a. The proposed activity or use of the park or recreational area will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the park;
b. The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation;
c. The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day
and hour required in the application;
d. The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of traffic;
e. The conduct of such activity will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Township to properly police such
activity and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the Township;
f. The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property or incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
g. Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
a. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall act upon the application for
a park permit within five (5) days after the filing of the same.
b. Each park or recreational area permit shall state the following:
1. Date of such activity;
2. Park or recreational area or portion thereof to be used;
3. Hour when such activity will start and terminate.
§ 24-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.2
AO:693
§ 24-3.2. Prohibited Acts. [1999 Code §§ 12.12.010, E,F; 12.12.020,
B]
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using such parks or
recreational areas to either perform or permit to be performed any of the
following acts:
a. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities, or parts
or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary
markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal;
b. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed, in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or recreational area or in any tributary, stream,
storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or
thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of these
waters;
c. Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other
trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park or recreational area or left anywhere on the
grounds provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park or recreational
area by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere;
d. Disturb the peace or use any profane, obscene or blasphemous
language;
e. Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act;
f. Commit any assault or battery or engage in fighting;
g. Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic liquor in any park or recreational
area, other than in those three (3) parks identified in subsection 24-2.4
and only for nonprofit organizations who have obtained a special permit
from the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control and have
also obtained a picnic permit from the Director of Parks and Recreation
pursuant to subsection 24-2.4;
h. Violate any rule for the use of the park or recreational area, or any of its
facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this section and
the rules applicable to such use;
i. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park or recreational area, except in such waters and at such places as
§ 24-3.2 EDISON CODE § 24-3.2
AO:694
are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are
herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted;
j. Appear in bathing costume at any place in the parks, except within the
limits of designated bathing places or areas, and all bathing costumes
shall conform to commonly accepted standards;
k. Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place,
except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that
purpose;
l. It is unlawful for any person to engage in ballplaying or the use of a
frisbee or an activity of like kind which may endanger the safety of
others, from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. from May 15 to September 30 of
each year, in any of the locations to be determined from time to time by
the Director of Parks and Recreation. Signs shall be posted at each such
location as follows: "No ball or frisbee playing from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. from May 15 to September 30;"
m. Amusement for Gain. No amusement for gain or for which a charge is
made can be conducted in a park or recreational area without the
consent of the Governing Body of the park or recreational area, and
such amusement must be conducted in accordance with any ordinance
pertaining thereto.
n. It is unlawful to engage in special activities, including flying model
airplanes, golf practice, ice skating, games and picnics, except at
locations specifically designated for such activities by the park
commissioners. Areas for such activities may be reserved by groups for
use at specified times.
o. Automobiles and Other Vehicles.
1. It is unlawful to drive or park any automobile or motorcycle on a
street, driveway or parking lot in any park or recreation area or to
park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one
established for public parking.
2. It is unlawful to ride, drive or use a minibike or moped except on a
street, driveway or path in any park or recreation area, except
where otherwise designated.
p. Animals.
1. It is unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park or
recreation area, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in
any park or recreation area unless such dog is on a leash not more
than six (6) feet long.
2. It is unlawful to ride a horse except on designated bridle trails
where permitted. Horses shall be thoroughly broken and ridden
with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended,
nor shall horses be hitched to any rack, tree or shrub.
§ 24-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.2
AO:695
§ 24-3.3. Hours of Operation. [1999 Code § 12.12.020, C; New]
§ 24-3.4. Ice Skating. [1999 Code § 12.12.020, F; New]
The Director of Parks and Recreation may conduct or permit a winter ice
skating program. In such event, the Director of Parks and Recreation may
permit the park or recreation area to be open during reasonable hours.
§ 24-3.5. Picnicking; Use of Picnic Areas. [1999 Code § 12.12.020,
E]
q. Sales. It is unlawful for any person, other than employees and officials
of this park district acting on behalf of this district, to vend, sell, peddle
or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park or recreation
area.
r. Alcoholic Beverages. It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her
possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind
whatsoever.
s. Signs. It is unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post
any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any
person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public
lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park or recreation area,
provided that these provisions shall not apply to any properly
authorized government official.
a. The park or recreational area shall be opened daily to the public during
the hours of sunrise to sunset, except for those facilities and/or
activities which require artificial lighting after sunset. Notwithstanding
the hours of operation aforesaid, the playing of basketball shall be
prohibited in any park or outdoor recreation facility prior to 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays. It is unlawful for any person
or persons, other than Township personnel conducting Township
business therein, to occupy or to be present in said park or recreation
area during any hours in which the park is not open to the public.
b. Any section or part of the park or recreational area may be declared
closed to the public by the Parks and Recreation Director or Public
Works Director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
a. No person in park or recreation area shall picnic or lunch in a place
other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the
authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to
prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and
convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to
achieve this end.
b. No person in a park or recreation area shall use any portion of the
picnic area or any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose
§ 24-3.2 EDISON CODE § 24-3.5
AO:696
§ 24-3.6. Use by Board of Education. [1999 Code § 12.12.020, H]
The Township reserves the right, with respect to any or all of the public
park and recreation areas and any facilities located therein, to enter into
any agreement with the Board of Education of the Township concerning
the control and use thereof and, anything contained in this section to the
contrary notwithstanding, any use of the premises or facilities by the Board
of Education pursuant to any agreement with the Township Council or the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 24-3.7. Skate Park. [1999 Code § 12.12.020, I]
In addition to the other provisions of this section the following use
regulations shall apply specifically to the Skate Park:
§ 24-3.8. Helmets Required for Roller Skates, Skateboards,
Scooters and Razor Scooters. [1999 Code § 12.12.020, B]
of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any
person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the
facilities are crowded.
a. The park is to open to skateboards, in-line skates and BMX bicycles
only.
b. No skating, rollerblading or bike racing will be permitted when
equipment is wet and/or icy.
c. The following safety equipment is required when using the facility:
Helmets, Knee Pads, Elbow Pads — approved by national standards,
must be worn at all times. Failure to wear such equipment shall be
cause for immediate eviction from the facility.
d. Only equipment installed by the Township of Edison may be used within
the facility.
e. Rules and regulations shall be posted at the entrance to the facility.
f. Additional rules and regulations may be promulgated by the Business
Administrator as deemed necessary to ensure the safe and appropriate
use of the facility.
a. No person shall operate any roller skates, skateboard, scooter or razor
scooter on any property open to the public or used by the public for
roller skating, skateboarding or riding a scooter or in any public park,
playground or recreational area unless that person is wearing a
properly fitted and fastened helmet which meets the standards of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z90 4 bicycle helmet
standard), the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990 Standard for
Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling, the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard or other such standard, as
appropriate.
§ 24-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.8
AO:697
§ 24-4. PARK AND RECREATION FEES.
§ 24-4.1. Fee Schedule. [1999 Code § 12.12.030; Ord. No.
O.1569-2007; New; Ord. No. O.1623-2008§ 1; Ord. No.
O.1669-2008§ I; Ord. No. O.1719-2009§ I; Ord. No. O.1797-2012;
Res. R.212-032016; Res. R.134-022018]
The fees for the usage of Township parks, recreation areas and facilities
and programs offered therein or by the Township shall be set by
resolution.
Fee Schedule
(Subsection 24-4)
Program Fee Payment Due
Pre-School
Registration $25.00 With Application
3 Yr. Olds $121.00 Monthly (9)
4 Yr. Olds $155.00 Monthly (9)
Fee for additional
child(ren) from the
same household will be
1/2 of the customary
fee.
After Before School Child Care Programs
Registration $25.00 — Non
Refundable
With Application
A.B.C. — Elementary School
Morning Session $130.00 Monthly (10)
Afternoon Session $190.00 Monthly (10)
b. A person who violates the provisions of paragraph a. above by failing to
wear an approved helmet shall be warned of the violation by the
enforcing official and directed to leave the public property. Any person
who violates the provision of this section after having been warned may
be fined a maximum of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for the first offense
and a maximum of one hundred ($100.00) dollars for a subsequent
offense.
c. There shall be posted within each public park, playground or
recreational area a sign which reads as follows:
"Roller skating, skateboarding, or riding a scooter or razor scooter
without helmet on this property is a violation of State law and the Code
of the Township of Edison. Violators are subject to a maximum fine of
$100.00 dollars."
§ 24-3.8 EDISON CODE § 24-4.1
AO:698
Program Fee Payment Due
Both Sessions $320.00 Monthly (10)
Registration $25.00 — Non
Refundable
With Application
Y.A.P. — Middle School
Afternoon Session
Only
$190.00 Monthly (10)
Fee for additional
child(ren) from the
same household for
both programs will be
1/2 of the customary
fee.
$5.00 — Late Pick-Up
Fee for every 5 minutes
or part thereof that a
parent is late in picking
up a child.
Upon Pick-Up of Child
$2.50 — Late Pick-Up
Fee for every 5 minutes
or part thereof that a
parent is late in picking
up an additional child.
Upon Pick-Up of Child
$10.00 — Late Payment
Fee for payments made
after the fifth of the
month that the
payment is due.
With Monthly Payment
No Refunds except
when a duplicate
payment has been
made.
ADULT SPORTS
Adult Volleyball $150.00 Per Team
(Includes $50.00
Refundable Bond)
With Team Application
Adult Basketball $300.00 Per Team
(Includes $100.00
Refundable Bond)
With Team Application
Adult Softball $400.00 Per Team
(Includes $150.00
Refundable Bond)
With Team Application
§ 24-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-4.1
AO:699
Program Fee Payment Due
Adult Co-Ed Softball $200.00 Per Team
(Includes $ 75.00
Refundable Bond)
With Team Application
Adult Co-Ed Volleyball $150.00 Per Team
(Includes $50.00
Refundable Bond)
With Team Application
Community Center Use Fees
Weekdays/Evenings $50.00 Per Hour Per
Room — 2 Hour
Minimum
With Application
Weekend/Holiday $50.00 Per Hour Per
Room — 2 Hour
Minimum
With Application
§ 24-4.1 EDISON CODE § 24-4.1
AO:700
Program Fee Payment Due
In the event the
Township sponsors a
class/program offered
by an outside
professional, the
professional will be
required to pay to the
Township ten (10%) of
any and all fees they
have collected from
running a class/
program with a
maximum length of 8
weeks per session or
$200.00, whichever is
greater. The minimum
$200.00 is due prior to
the first class and the
balance due, if any,
must be paid no later
than two (2) weeks
from the last class of
the session. This fee
shall be in lieu of the
fees set forth above for
non-Township
sponsored events. In
the event the
professional fails to pay
to the Township the
money owed, the
professional will be
precluded from
performing such
services for the
Township in the future.
Picnic/Park Fees
Weekdays/Evenings
Edison Residents $150.00 For the First 2
Hours — 2 Hour
Minimum
Payment For All Hours
Reserved Is Due One
(1)Week Prior To Use.
Applicants must show
proof of residency.
$25.00 Each Additional
Hour
§ 24-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-4.1
AO:701
Program Fee Payment Due
*The Edison Police
Auxiliary, Edison Police
Explorers, Edison
Volunteer Fire
Companies and the
Edison Volunteer EMT
Squads shall be exempt
from said picnic fees.
Any individual applying
on behalf of the
foregoing entities shall
certify in writing that
he/she is submitting
the application for and
on behalf of said entity.
Does not apply for
personal use.
Non-Resident $150.00 For the First 2
Hours — 2 Hour
Minimum
Same As Above
Weekends/Holidays $50.00 Each Additional
Hour
Same As Above
Edison Residents $200.00 For the First 2
Hours — 2 Hour
Minimum
Same As Above
$50.00 Each Additional
Hour
Non-Resident $200.00 For the First 2
Hours — 2 Hour
Minimum
Same As Above
$75.00 Each Additional
Hour
Athletic Facilities $50.00 Application
Processing Fee
With Application
Weight Exercise Room Resident Sr. Citizens,
65 Years of Age or
Older — No Charge —
Both Community
Centers
Must Show Edison
Township Issued Sr.
Citizen Card.
Edison Resident $10.00 Monthly
$50.00 Every 6 Months
$100.00 Yearly
§ 24-4.1 EDISON CODE § 24-4.1
AO:702
Program Fee Payment Due
Non-Resident $30.00 Monthly
$150.00 Every 6 Months
$300.00 Yearly
Program Fee Payment Due
PROGRAMS
Adult Classes
Edison Residents $20.00 Per Class With Application
Non-Resident $30.00 Per Class With Application
Aerobics
Edison Residents $40.00 Per Person Quarterly
Non-Resident $80.00 Per Person Quarterly
Community Center Membership
Adult Edison
Residents
$20.00 Per Person Yearly — Year Begins 7/
01
Adult Non-Residents $40.00 Per Person Yearly — Year Begins 7/
01
Teen Residents Only $10.00 Per Person Yearly — Year Begins 7/
01
Teen Non-Residents $20.00 Per Person Yearly — Year Begins 7/
01
Karate
Resident $30.00 Per Person Quarterly
Non-Resident $40.00 Per Person Quarterly
Kids' Fun Clubs $10.00 Per Class/Per
Session
With Application
New Developed
Programs
$10.00 Per Person With Application
Special Population
Program $10.00 Per Person/Per
Program
With Application
Dance $5.00 Per Person/Per
Dance
With Application
Summer Playground
Program
$30.00 Per Person Yearly
Twirling/Cheerleading $25.00 Per Person Yearly
§ 24-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-4.1
AO:703
Program Fee Payment Due
Various Trips Established by Trip
Location +
Transportation Fee
With Application
Yoga
Edison Residents $40.00 Per Person Quarterly
Non-Residents $80.00 Per Person Quarterly
SPECIAL EVENTS
Easter Fun Day $5.00 Per Person With Application
Edison/Metuchen Bike
Tour
$10.00 Per Person With Application
Festivals
Craft Vendors $75.00 Per Space With Application
Food Vendors $75.00 Per Space With Application
Fishing Derby $10.00 Per Person With Application
Lil Darlins' Dance $30.00 Per Couple With Application
§ 24-5. (RESERVED)
§ 24-6. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. [1999 Code § 12.12.040]
Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 24-1 through 24-5 or
any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the replacement, repair or restoration of any damaged park or
recreation area property and shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
I, Section 1-5, and a period of community service as follows:
§ 24-7. MUNICIPAL BOAT BASIN.
§ 24-7.1. Fees. [1999 Code §§ 12.24.010 through 12.24.030; Ord. No.
O.1569-2007]
Fees for use of the Municipal Boat Basin may be found in Section 24-4, Park
and Recreation Fee Schedule.
§ 24-7.2. Payment of Fees; Issuance and Attachment of Tags. [1999
Code § 12.24.040]
Fees are payable to the Supervisor of Licenses and Permits of the Township.
Residents must show satisfactory proof of residence to the Supervisor of
a. First offense: thirty-five (35) hours.
b. Second offense: forty-five (45) hours.
c. Third offense: fifty-five (55) hours.
§ 24-4.1 EDISON CODE § 24-7.2
AO:704
Licenses and Permits before the issuance of a resident municipal boat basin
tag. The Supervisor of Licenses and Permits, upon receipt of the proper fee,
shall issue an Edison boat basin tag which shall be firmly attached to the
passenger side front of the boat trailer.
§ 24-7.3. Contracts with Concessionaires Authorized. [1999 Code
§ 12.24.050]
In the further interest of providing adequate recreational facilities at the
municipal boat basin, the Township may lease, rent or enter into contracts
with private concessionaires for the selling of goods or services, all as may
be permitted by law.
§ 24-7.4. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 12.24.060]
Any person who violates the provisions of this section and any boat user or
private concessionaire who makes use of the Edison municipal boat basin
without first complying with the rules and regulations as established by
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 24-8. through § 24-10. (RESERVED)
§ 24-11. DOG PARKS.
§ 24-11.1. Whitman Avenue Park Off-Leash Dog Area. [Ord. No.
O.1928-2016]
The Township, the Borough of Metuchen and Middlesex County together
created an off-leash dog area for use by local residents at the existing
Whitman Avenue Park located at 125 Whitman Avenue (Block 199.A, Lot
31.B1) in Edison (the "Dog Park").
In connection with the public's use and enjoyment of the Dog Park, the
Township desires to adopt and implement a set of rules and regulations (the
"Rules and Regulations"), which may be amended from time to time, and
which will govern the use of the Dog Park.
Chapter 25
TREES
§ 25-1. PURPOSE. [1999 Code § 12.16.010; Ord. No.
O.1659-2008§ 1]
a. It is the intent of this chapter to promote the general welfare of the
people of the Township by providing for the protection, regulation and
planting and cutting of trees in such a way as to protect and preserve
the environment by conserving to the maximum extent possible the tree
life in the Township. The Mayor and the Township Council find that the
§ 24-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-1
AO:705
§ 25-2. FINDINGS. [1999 Code § 12.16.020]
§ 25-3. DEFINITIONS. [1999 Code § 12.16.030; Ord. No.
O.1507-2006§ 1; Ord. No. O.1659-2008§ 1]
As used in this chapter:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Means the Township Engineer.
AVERAGE WOODED ACRE — Shall be determined as follows:
indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excessive destruction, removal, and
cutting of trees upon lots and tracts of land within the Township has
caused increased drainage control costs, increased soil erosion,
increased buildup of atmospheric carbon and increased dust, tending
to decrease the quality of life and to diminish property values in the
Township.
b. The adverse effects of uncontrolled tree removal affects the general
health, safety, welfare, and well being of the residents of the Township
as well as the integrity of the natural environment and processes upon
which the residents of the Township depend.
c. Therefore, it is in the public interest that an ordinance establishing
conditions, standards and procedures for the removal and replacement
of trees, and for the preservation of mature vegetation be enacted by
the Township.
a. With an ever growing population in the Township, it is absolutely
essential to our citizens to remove pollution from our air. It takes
approximately twenty (20) mature trees to clean the air of gases
produced from vehicular traffic consuming five (5) gallons of gasoline.
Healthy trees greatly assist in the battle against air pollution since
moist tree foliage traps dust and soot particles until the rain washes
them away. Trees also consume carbon dioxide, a by-product of the
combustion of organic fuel materials.
b. Properly planted and nurtured trees are also needed to create sound
barriers to help in the reduction of the noise level made by vehicular
traffic, trains and ultimately the noise which will be created by the air
traffic.
A selective inventory by size and species, of all trees having a D.B.H. of
four (4) inches or greater, shall be conducted using a minimum of twotenths
(0.2) acre plots which shall be staked or visibly marked to allow
for Township inspection.
a.
The location of the inventory plots shall be determined by the applicant
subject to Township approval, by using a grid overlay drawn to the same
scale as the site plan submitted with the application.
b.
A representative five (5%) percent of the wooded acres proposed to
be cleared shall be inventoried. The representative five (5%) percent
c.
§ 25-1 EDISON CODE § 25-3
AO:706
CLEAR CUTTING — Means the removal of all standing trees on a lot or
portion of a lot.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (D.B.H.) — Means diameter of tree
measured at breast height, approximately four and one-half (4.5) feet from
the ground.
DRIP LINE — Means a limiting line established by a series of perpendicular
drop points marking the maximum radius of the crown of an existing tree
but not less than eight (8) feet from the trunk, whichever is greater.
PERSON — Means any individual, firm, copartnership, association,
corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership or
developer, other than the Township.
PROFESSIONAL FORESTER — Means one who has a minimum of a
Bachelor's of Science degree in forestry from a four-year college accredited
by the Society of American Foresters.
RECOMMENDED TREE SPECIES — Means the species of trees acceptable
for use in planting in the Township. A list of recommended trees species
shall be maintained by the Township Engineer and shall be reviewed and
approved annually by the Planning Board. Species not shown on the list of
comparable attributes may be approved for use as equivalent substitutes.
Native tree species are preferred over non-native tree species for
equivalent substitutes.
RECOMMENDED TREE SPECIES LIST — Means a list recommended trees
species maintained by the Township Engineer, and reviewed and approved
annually by the Planning Board.
REPLACEMENT TREE — Means a nursery grown certified tree, properly
balled and burlapped and marked with a durable label indicating genus,
species and variety, having a minimum caliper of two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches measured at D.B.H. A replacement tree shall be selected from the
recommended tree species list.
SILVICULTURE — Means the management of any forested tract of land
to ensure its continued survival and welfare whether for commercial or
noncommercial purposes pursuant to a plan approved by the New Jersey
Bureau of Forestry.
SINGLE-FAMILY LOT — Means a lot upon which a dwelling unit exists, or
an individual conforming, undeveloped single-family residential lot which
has the potential to be developed as a single-family dwelling and is not part
of a subdivision and which lot may not be further subdivided pursuant to
municipal land use law and the Township land use regulations.
SLASH — Means the forest debris remaining after a tree removal operation.
shall be determined by agreement between the applicant, the agencies
with jurisdiction including the Planning or Zoning Board, the Township
planner and the administrative officer. Where two (2) acres or less are
proposed to be cleared, a minimum of one-tenth (1/10) acre shall be
inventoried.
§ 25-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-3
AO:707
SPECIMEN TREE — Means any tree with a D.B.H. of sixteen (16) inches or
greater.
SUBDIVISION — Means any tract of land which is hereafter subdivided
into two (2) or more parcels along an existing or proposed street, highway,
easement or right-of-way, for sale or for rent as residential lots or residential
building plots regardless of whether or not the lots or plots to be sold or
offered for sale or leased for any period of time are described by metes and
bounds or by reference to a map or survey of the property or by any other
method of description.
TREE — Means any deciduous or coniferous species which reaches a typical
mature height of ten (10) feet or more. An individual tree for the purpose
of this chapter has a D.B.H. of four (4) inches or greater. A specimen with
multiple trunks will be considered an individual tree with a D.B.H. of onehalf
(1/2) of the sum of the diameters of the trunks.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — Means a permit to remove trees issued by the
administrative officer after review and approval of application for removal
and replacement of trees by those parties with jurisdiction.
TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN — Means a plan for replacement of removed
trees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
WOODED AREA — Means any natural cluster or clusters of trees and
vegetative undergrowth. Street trees, parking lot landscaping trees, and
landscaping surrounding a building or structure that were planted in
connection with prior development shall not constitute a wooded area.
§ 25-4. PROTECTION OF TREES.
§ 25-4.1. Damage from Electrical Wires. [1999 Code § 12.16.040;
Ord. No. O.1507-2006§ 2]
Any person, firm or corporation having control over any wire for
transmission of electrical current along a public highway shall at all times
guard all trees through which or near which such wires pass against any
injury from wires or from electrical current carried by them. The device or
means used shall in every case be subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer.
§ 25-4.2. Contact of Trees with Injurious Chemicals. [1999 Code
§ 12.16.050]
No person, firm or corporation shall permit any brine, gas or injurious
chemical to come into contact with the stem or roots of any tree or shrub
upon a public highway, street or road or upon Township property.
§ 25-3 EDISON CODE § 25-4.3
AO:708
§ 25-4.3. Interference with Lawful Work Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 12.16.060; Ord. No. O.1507-2006§ 2]
No person, firm or corporation shall prevent, delay or interfere with any
lawful work undertaken hereunder by the Township Engineer or other
employees of the Township.
§ 25-4.4. Hitching of Animals; Injury by Animals. [1999 Code
§ 12.16.070]
No person, firm or corporation shall hitch or fasten an animal to any tree
or shrub on a public highway or to any guard or support provided for same,
nor permit an animal to bite or to otherwise injure any such tree or shrub.
§ 25-5. REMOVAL OF TREES.24
§ 25-5.1. Township Engineer Authorized to Remove Certain Trees.
[1999 Code § 12.16.080; Ord. No. O.1507-2006§ 2]
The Township Engineer shall have the power to:
§ 25-5.2. Permission Required for Certain Acts. [1999 Code
§ 12.16.090; Ord. No. O.1507-2006§ 2]
a. Require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to public
safety at the expense of the owner of such tree;
b. Remove any tree or part thereof dangerous to public safety at the
request and expense of the owner of such tree;
c. The Township Engineer shall have the power to contract with the owner
of any real estate in the municipality to supply him or her with material
and labor for the purpose of removing trees in accordance with this
section, and to charge the actual cost thereof to such owner. If after
such material or labor is supplied, and payment is not made on demand,
the Township Engineer may certify the actual cost thereof to the
Collector of Taxes, whereupon the sum so certified shall be collected by
the Collector as other taxes on real property are collected in the
Township.
a. No person shall do or cause to be done upon trees, in any right-of-way,
public street, road or highway within the Township without first
obtaining written permission from the Township Engineer, any of the
following acts:
1. Cut, trim break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots or otherwise
intentionally injure, misuse or spray with harmful chemicals or
remove any living tree five (5) inches or more D.B.H. or remove any
device installed to support or protect such trees;
24.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 32, Soil.
§ 25-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-5.2
AO:709
§ 25-5.3. Trees on Public Highways. [1999 Code § 12.16.100; Ord.
No. O.1507-2006§ 2]
Where a person desires to control the growth of trees on a public highway,
street or road or right-of-way by removing them or pruning the trees, then
the person shall apply for approval to the Township Engineer and shall
outline the work to be performed. If the applicant fails to comply with
the order of the Township Engineer, the applicant shall be subject to the
penalties as hereinafter provided.
§ 25-5.4. Destruction of Trees. [1999 Code § 12.16.110]
No person shall cut, remove or destroy, or cause to destroy, any tree
growing in the Township without having first obtained a permit as provided
in this chapter.
§ 25-5.5. Clear-Cutting. [1999 Code § 12.16.120]
§ 25-6. EXEMPTIONS.
2. Plant any tree;
3. Fasten any rope, wire, electrical equipment, sign or other device to
a tree or any guard about such a tree or shrub;
4. Close or obstruct any open space provided at the base of a tree
which open space is necessary to permit the access of air, water or
fertilizer to the roots of such tree;
5. Pile, heap or store any building material, soil, debris or any other
matter or make any mortar or cement within a distance of six (6)
feet of a tree.
b. During the period of construction or repair of any building or structure
or in the construction or repair of a street, road, and highway not yet
dedicated to the Town, the owner thereof or the contractor shall take
every precaution to place guards around all nearby trees on Township
land or within public rights-of-way so as to effectively prevent injury to
such trees. The owner and/or contractor shall each be responsible for
the placement of such guards or guardrails and failure to make
adequate provision for the protection of the trees shall subject the
owner and builder to a penalty as hereinafter provided.
a. There shall be no clear-cutting permitted on slopes of ten (10%) percent
or greater in grade; however, selective removal in accordance with a
tree replacement plan may be permitted.
b. There shall be no clear-cutting permitted within major or minor
subdivisions.
§ 25-5.2 EDISON CODE § 25-6.1
AO:710
§ 25-6.1. Exemptions from Tree Replacement. [1999 Code
§ 12.16.130; Ord. No. O.1659-2008§ 2]
The following activities are exempt from the tree replacement element of
this chapter:
§ 25-7. SILVICULTURE AND HARVEST OF TIMBER PERMITS.
§ 25-7.1. Application. [1999 Code § 12.16.140]
Notwithstanding any exemption to the replacement requirements of this
chapter, an application for the harvest of timber and/or silviculture, shall
be based upon and in accordance with the standards and recommendations
a. Commercial nurseries and fruit orchard, garden centers and Christmas
tree plantations, in current operation. Such enterprises which
commence after the effective date of the chapter shall be exempt from
the requirements of this chapter after five (5) years of operation;
b. Properties used for the practice of silviculture where a plan approved
by the New Jersey Bureau of Forestry is on file with the administrative
officer;
c. Cutting, pruning and removal of trees in public or utility rights-of-way
and easements by utility companies and agencies having jurisdictions
over the respective utility;
d. Removal of trees which are dead, dying or diseased or trees which have
suffered severe damage. Any tree whose angle of growth makes it a
hazard to structure or human life;
e. Any tree on a single-family lot as previously defined, provided, however,
that this exemption shall not apply to any tree removal in conjunction
with the construction of a new single home or a substantial addition
(more than fifty (50%) percent increase in size) to an existing singlefamily
home; it being understood, however, that under no
circumstances may more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the existing
tree cover be removed without compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
f. Approved game management practice, as recommended by the State of
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Fish,
Game and Wildlife.
g. Any trees removed pursuant to either a New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection ("NJDEP") or Environmental Protection
Agency ("EPA") approved environmental clean-up or an NJDEP
approved woodlands management plan.
h. Where no trees are being removed, no application need be submitted. A
signed and sealed letter from applicant's engineer certifying that no
trees are being removed shall suffice.
§ 25-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-7.1
AO:711
of the New Jersey State Bureau of Forestry pertaining to the type of tree
removal project proposed.
§ 25-8. TREE REMOVAL PERMIT.
§ 25-8.1. Procedure for Obtaining a Tree Removal Permit When
Approval from Zoning or Planning Board Is Not Required. [1999
Code § 12.16.150, A; Ord. No. O.1659-2008§ 3]
a. For the removal of trees (i) not in conjunction with an application for
development of property involving minor or major subdivision or site
plan, (ii) where the approval of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment is not required, or (iii) on any single-family lot not meeting
the exemption criteria under subsection 25-6.1e above, an application
for obtaining a tree removal permit in a form to be established shall be
submitted in duplicate to the administrative officer providing the
following information:
1. Street address of property with block and lot;
2. Name of owner of property, name of occupant of premises;
3. Size of the tract;
4. List identifying the number of trees by species with a D.B.H.
greater than four (4) inches to be removed. For lots one (1) acre or
greater the number of trees to be removed as a percentage of total
trees on the tract;
5. Name of person or company to do removal or replacement;
6. Reason for the removal;
7. Plot plan at any scale between: one (1) inch equals one (1) foot
through one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet; showing the
location of all trees and the trees to be removed;
8. Replacement plan in accordance with subsection 25-8.2a1(l)
including the location on plot plan where trees will be replaced;
9. Indicate whether the subject property has been part of a
development application submitted to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment. If it has, indicate the decision of the
respective board and provide a copy of the resolution and plans.
b. The administrative officer shall review the submitted information and
determine what effect the proposed tree removal will have on the
subject property. The administrative officer shall forward a copy of the
application for obtaining a tree removal permit to the Department of
Planning and Engineering who shall certify that the information
contained in the application is accurate. If the proposed removal does
not violate the below listed criteria, a tree removal permit, in a form to
be established, shall be issued by the administrative officer. If the
§ 25-7.1 EDISON CODE § 25-8.1
AO:712
§ 25-8.2. Procedure for Obtaining Tree Removal Permit When
Approval from Zoning or Planning Board Is Required. [1999 Code
§ 12.16.150, B; Ord. No. O.1659-2008§ 4]
proposed tree removal does violate one of the below listed criteria, the
matter shall be referred to the review board which had or would have
jurisdiction in accordance with subsection 25-8.2.
c. The administrative officer shall have forty-five (45) days to deem an
application for tree removal permit complete. Once the application is
deemed complete, the administrative officer shall have forty-five (45)
days to render a decision of approval or denial, as otherwise set forth in
the Municipal Land Use Law.
d. A tree removal permit issued by the administrative officer under this
subsection shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. It
shall be displayed or available for inspection at the site where tree
removal and replacements are to take place. Any person may examine
an application for tree removal permit on file with the administrative
officer upon request made in writing or in person to that officer.
e. Tree Removal Criteria.
1. The tree removed is not located within a buffer area as required by
the zoning ordinance for the zoning district in which the property in
question is located;
2. The tree to be removed is not located within a tree save area or
buffer area as delineated and/or specified on a previously approved
site plan or subdivision plan for the property in question;
3. The tree to be removed was not required to be planted by a
previously approved application and/or landscape plan to provide
screening or buffering for a building or structure located on the
property in question or on an adjacent parcel of land.
a. For the removal of trees in conjunction with an application for
development of property as either a minor or major subdivision or site
plan, or in any other form of development where the approval of the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment will be required, the applicant
shall submit to the Board simultaneously with the application for
approval of such development in a form and manner which complies
with the Township Land Use Regulations, Chapter XXXVIII;
1. A tree replacement plan consisting of a map having a scale of one
(1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or less showing the location of existing
wooded areas and clearly marked boundaries of the plots used to
determine the average wooded acre for the site. The map shall be
prepared by a professional licensed in the State of New Jersey and
authorized pursuant to law to submit such plans. The map or site
plan shall also show:
§ 25-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-8.2
AO:713
(a) Location of streams and watercourses;
(b) Locations of slopes greater than ten (10%) percent where any
tree removal is proposed;
(c) Total acreage of the tract;
(d) Locations on the tract where tree removal is to take place;
(e) The location of each 0.1 acre plot used to determine the
average wooded acre as defined above;
(f) For each plot inventoried to determine the average wooded
acre, the application shall provide a list identifying the species
of tree, the number of trees of each species and the side of
each individual tree in that plot;
(g) The total number by species of existing trees with a D.B.H. of
four (4) inches or greater on the tract;
(h) The total number by species of trees with a D.B.H. of four (4)
inches or greater, which are to be removed;
(i) For tracts greater than two (2) acres, the applicant may make
an estimate of the total quantity of trees by species, based
upon the inventory of one-tenth (0.1) acre plots. For tracts less
than two (2) acres or where less than two (2) acres are
proposed to be cleared, the number and species of trees to be
removed shall be based on actual count;
(j) All trees with a D.B.H. of sixteen (16) inches or greater shall be
specifically identified by location on the map and listed on a
separate schedule showing species and common name and
size. All efforts shall be made to preserve such trees, including,
if necessary, relocation of infrastructure, roadways and
buildings.
(k) A specific replacement plan for the replanting of removed trees
in accordance with Section 25-9;
(l) Where individual lots are to be created by the application,
individual plot plans shall be prepared showing the location of
trees to be removed and replaced.
b. The Planning Board or the Zoning Board shall forward the proposed
tree removal plan to the Department of Planning and Engineering for
review and comment. The Department of Planning and Engineering
shall certify that the plan is accurate and so advise the Planning Board
or Zoning Board. The tree removal and replacement plan shall also be
submitted to the Environmental Commission for its comments and
recommendations.
§ 25-8.2 EDISON CODE § 25-8.2
AO:714
§ 25-9. REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
§ 25-9.1. Replacement Formulas. [1999 Code § 12.16.160; Ord. No.
O.1659-2008§ 5; Ord. No. O.1878-2014]
For all replacement requirements, the following formulas shall apply:
c. A copy of the signed resolution of approval and a copy of the fully
executed site plan or subdivision indicating all conditions of approval
have been met shall be submitted to the administrative officer before a
tree removal permit shall be issued.
d. The tree removal permit issued by the administrative officer shall be
valid so long as the approved application is valid. The removal or
damage to trees not approved for removal shall be considered a
violation of this chapter.
e. Any substantial change in a tree removal and replacement plan shall
necessitate the submission of a revised plan to the appropriate board
for review.
f. The tree removal permit issued by the administrative officer shall be
displayed or be available for inspection at the site where tree removal
and replacement is to take place. Failure to display or make available
the tree removal permit at the site of removal shall be a violation of this
chapter. Any person may examine the application for tree removal
permit on file with the administrative officer upon request made in
writing or in person to that office. Copies of the application submission
shall be made available at the usual charge.
g. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the Construction Official,
the developer shall designate on all relevant lots, the trees to be
retained which designation shall be based upon the tree removal
permit.
h. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Construction
Official shall receive a release from the administrative officer or his or
her designee that all trees to be retained and all trees to be replaced
under the tree removal permit are in fact in existence and that all debris
(slash) generated as a result of these activities has been removed.
a. For trees with a D.B.H. equal to or greater than four (4) inches and less
than sixteen (16) inches, replacement shall be based upon the
percentage of the trees removed as set forth below:
Percentage of Trees Removed
from Entire Development
Percentage of Trees to Be
Replaced with Trees of Min.
Size 2.5" Caliper
80 to 100 80
60 to 79 60
§ 25-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-9.1
AO:715
Percentage of Trees Removed
from Entire Development
Percentage of Trees to Be
Replaced with Trees of Min.
Size 2.5" Caliper
40 to 59 40
20 to 39 20
Less than 20 10
b. For trees with a D.B.H. equal to or greater than sixteen (16) inches, the
removed tree shall be replaced:
Existing Tree to Be Removed
Number of Replacement Trees
(min. size 2.5" caliper)
Less than 18 3
Less than 21 4
Less than 24 5
Less than 27 6
Less than 29 7
Less than 31 8
Less than 33 9
Less than 35 10
Less than 37 11
Less than 39 12
Less than 40 13
Less than 41 14
41 inches or greater 15
c. The species or type of replacement tree and the mix of replacement tree
types (deciduous, coniferous) shall be selected from the species
removed from the tract under consideration or from the recommended
tree species list.
d. On parcels to be developed where less than ten (10%) percent of the
site is wooded area, in addition to any trees that must be replaced or
provided under this chapter, there shall be required the addition of one
(1) tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of new or
reconstructed impervious coverage. Trees incorporated in a
landscaping plan or required for rights-of-way may not be credited
toward this requirement. The following tree replacement schedule shall
apply to all development with new or reconstructed impervious
coverage exceeding two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
§ 25-9.1 EDISON CODE § 25-9.1
AO:716
§ 25-10. SHADE TREE REQUIREMENTS.
§ 25-10.1. Street and Parking Area Trees (Shade Trees). [1999 Code
§ 12.16.170]
Project Size
(s.f. of impervious coverage) Number of Trees
Up to 200,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 1,000 s.f.
Up to 500,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 2,000 s.f.
Up to 600,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 2,500 s.f.
Up to 700,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 3,000 s.f.
Up to 800,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 3,500 s.f.
Up to 900,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 7,500 s.f.
Up to 1,000,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 10,000 s.f.
Over 1,000,000 s.f. One (1) tree per 15,000 s.f.
e. The applicant may provide replacement trees of a caliper size larger
than two and a half (2.5) inches and receive tree replacement credit on
a tree replacement plan as set forth below:
Size of Tree Value Replacement Value
Minimum 2.5" caliper 1.00
Minimum 3.0" caliper 1.25
Minimum 3.5" caliper 2.00
Minimum 4.0" caliper 3.00
For example, if twelve (12) 2.5" replacement trees are required, the
applicant may provide any one of the following combinations of trees:
Twelve (12) trees of minimum 2.5"
caliper:
[12 trees x 1.00 (replacement
value) = 12 trees]
Ten (10) trees of minimum 3.0"
caliper:
[10 trees x 1.25 (replacement
value) = 12.5 trees]
Six (6) trees of minimum 3.5"
caliper:
[6 trees x 2.0 (replacement value)
= 12 trees]
Four (4) trees of minimum 4.0"
caliper:
[4 trees x 3.00 (replacement
value) = 12 trees]
Further, the applicant may provide coniferous evergreen replacement
trees of a height between six feet to ten (6 to 10) feet and/or dark
arborvitae replacement trees of a height between eight to twelve (8 to
12) feet and receive a one (1) for one (1) tree replacement credit on a
tree replacement plan.
§ 25-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-10.1
AO:717
§ 25-11. ON-SITE REPLACEMENT WAIVERS.
§ 25-11.1. Waivers. [1999 Code § 12.16.180; Ord. No.
O.1507-2006§ 3; Ord. No. O.1659-2008§ 6]
§ 25-12. BONDING FOR REPLACEMENT TREES.
a. In addition to the trees required to be replaced by this chapter, there
shall be planted one (1) shade tree for every fifty (50) feet of frontage on
proposed right-of-way.
b. Where development includes the construction of off-street parking for
ten (10) vehicles or more, shade trees shall be planted around the
perimeter of the parking space in accordance with the standard in
paragraph a. above.
c. The types and locations of shade trees to be planted shall be shown in
the plans submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment in conjunction with the application for development.
a. All required replacement trees shall be planted on the site from which
trees were removed. A waiver from any portion or all of the required-onsite
replacement shall be granted by the review board having
jurisdiction, if the applicant has adequately demonstrated to the review
board that practical physical difficulties associated with the subject
property that were not caused by the applicant and/or undue hardship
related to the unique conditions of the site from which trees are to be
removed preclude strict compliance with this chapter. The comments
and recommendations of the review board's professional planner and/or
engineer shall be solicited in determining whether the requested
waiver is appropriate.
b. In lieu of replanting trees on the removal site, the applicant shall have
the option of planting replacement trees of type(s) selected by the
administrative officer from the recommended tree species list at an offsite
location chosen by the board having jurisdiction in consultation
with the Environmental Commission. Such off-site locations shall be
public property and rights-of-way, including, but not limited to public
parks, public schools and public buildings.
c. For those excess trees that cannot be planted on the site, the applicant
may make a contribution to be deposited in the Township's tree fund
escrow as established by this chapter. The contribution, in lieu of
planting of trees, shall be five hundred ($500.00) dollars per tree.
Applicants shall demonstrate their ability to plant as many trees on the
site as reasonably practicable as determined by the review board's
professional planner and/or engineer. After a showing that the applicant
can place no additional plantings on the site, the remainder shall be
available for contribution in lieu of such plantings, subject to the
recommendation of the review board's professional planner and/or
engineer.
§ 25-10.1 EDISON CODE § 25-12.1
AO:718
§ 25-12.1. Bond Requirements. [1999 Code § 12.16.190; Ord. No.
O.1659-2008§ 7]
The applicant shall post a bond covering fifteen (15%) percent of the cost
of the tree replacement plan, including all labor costs, prior to the final
engineering approval for the release of the performance guarantees, if any.
The bond shall be held for two (2) growing seasons after the cessation
of construction or land disturbance on the site. Funds shall be used to
replace trees which die or are damaged during this two (2)-year growing
season period in the event that the applicant fails in his, her or its duty
to replace trees. If the Township replaces trees under this provision, all
administrative fees to cover the Township's costs including the cost of
replacement trees, labor, and materials shall be deducted from any amount
of funds to be returned to the applicant. Any unused funds shall be returned
to the applicant at the end of the two (2)-year period.
§ 25-13. TREE FUND. [1999 Code § 12.16.200; Ord. No.
O.1507-2006; Ord. No. O.1659-2008§ 8]
a. There shall be established by this chapter a Township Tree Fund for the
purposes set forth in this chapter.
b. All funds collected as contribution in lieu of replanting trees shall be
made out to the "Edison Tree Fund" and deposited into an escrow
account clearly designated as the "Edison Tree Fund." Funds so
deposited shall be used solely for the following purposes:
1. Park improvements, including landscape improvements, retaining
walls, landscape irrigation systems, park benches, bollards,
landscape lighting, site lighting (excluding sport event lighting)
pathways and playground equipment; provided, however, that at no
time shall more than thirty (30%) percent of the outstanding
account balance on an annual basis be utilized for such park
improvements; and
2. The planting of trees or other landscaping in public parks, property
surrounding public buildings and rights-of-way.
c. The Edison Tree Fund shall be administered by the Director of Finance.
The Director of Finance shall report (listing by date for the report
period) to the Township Council, the Planning Board, and the
Environmental Commission, on a quarterly basis, the amount in the
Fund as of the end of each quarter, the amount deposited by each
development application or other contribution, and all amounts
dedicated from the Fund for use for the purposes described in Section
25-13b for that period. Such reports for any period shall be filed with
the Township Clerk and made available as a public record to residents
who request them in writing pursuant to the Open Public Records Act.
d. Any and all appropriations from the Edison Tree Fund shall be made by
the Township Council of the Township of Edison, upon recommendation
§ 25-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-13
AO:719
§ 25-14. TREE PLANTING AND PRESERVATION STANDARDS.
§ 25-14.1. Standards Established. [1999 Code § 12.16.210; Ord. No.
O.1659-2008§ 9]
and report from the Environmental Commission as to the inventory of
locations needing remediation based upon the removal of trees at those
locations nearest the site which had generated the funds. The planting
of more than ten (10) trees at any one location shall be reviewed and
commented upon by the Environmental Commission.
a. No soil shall be deposited or removed within the drip line or within
eight (8) feet, whichever is greater, of any existing tree trunk. No
machinery or materials shall be sorted, deposited, cleaned or operated
within the drip line or within eight (8) feet, whichever is greater of any
existing trunk.
b. Drip lines of specimen trees and isolated groupings of trees which are
to remain on site shall be clearly protected by snow fencing.
c. The grade of the land located along the drip line shall not be raised or
lowered more than six (6) inches unless compensated for by welling or
retaining methods and in no event shall the welling or retaining wall
methods be less than eight (8) feet from the trunk of the tree.
d. All debris created during tree removal and replacement shall be
removed from the site for disposal before any certificate of occupancy
shall be issued.
e. Where clearing and construction on the site results in accidental
removal or severe damage, which will eventually result in earth and
removal, of any tree delineated in the replacement plan as remaining on
the site, such removed or damaged tree shall be replaced on a one for
one basis by trees two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper if the damaged
tree is between two and one-half (2.5) and sixteen (16) inches D.B.H. If
the damaged tree is greater than sixteen (16) inches D.B.H.,
replacement shall be as set forth in subsection 25-9.1b.
f. Planting.
1. In general, excavation for planting shall be large enough to
accommodate the natural spread of the root system and at least six
(6) inches deeper and two (2) feet wider than the ball of earth
supplied with the tree. The pit shall be rock free and refilled with
seven (7) parts topsoil and one (1) part humus and the parent soil
disposed of properly. Hardpan shall be loosened an additional
twelve (12) inches from the bottom and side of the pit. Trees shall
be adequately fertilized and watered at the time of planting and
mulched with three (3) inches of approved mulch immediately after
planting.
§ 25-13 EDISON CODE § 25-14.1
AO:720
§ 25-15. FEES. [1999 Code § 12.16.220]
§ 25-16. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. [1999 Code § 12.16.230]
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
Chapter 27
DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND SEWER
§ 27-1. DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND SEWER. [1999 Code
§§ 13.04.010 - 13.04.300; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
O.2047-2019; 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. O.2049-2019]
2. Trees shall be staked and guyed immediately after planting. A
minimum of two (2) stakes shall be driven outside of the excavation
of the root ball. Stakes shall be of cedar or oak, eight (8) feet long,
no less than two (2) inches in diameter. Trees shall be guyed to the
stakes using No. 10 wire covered with rubber hose or equal. The
wire shall be attached to the stake in such a manner that it will not
slip or come into contact with the tree trunk. The trunk of the tree
shall be protected with tree wrap.
a. There shall be a twenty-five ($25.00) dollar fee for applications under
subsection 25-8.1.
b. Where the applicant is seeking a tree removal permit and replacement
plan approval under subsection 25-8.2, the application fee shall be two
hundred ($200.00) dollars in addition to all other fees required by
Chapter XXXVIII, Land Use.
a. Each tree cut, damaged or destroyed in violation of this chapter shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. Any person convicted of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
b. In addition, the Township may institute and maintain a civil suit in
chancery for injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The Township may also require the replacement of illegally removed
trees with trees of similar species or appropriate contribution for same
as set forth in other sections of this chapter.
c. The Township Council through the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township may revoke a tree removal permit where there has been a
false or misleading application or there is noncompliance with the
approved tree removal and replacement plan.
§ 25-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-1.1
AO:721
§ 27-1.1. Department of Water and Sewer Established.
There shall be created and established in and for the Township a
municipally owned public utility for water and sewer, to be known as
the "Edison Department of Water and Sewer," hereinafter referred to as
the "Water and Sewer Utility." The authorized operations of the Water
and Sewer Utility shall consist of the operation, management, control and
maintenance of the water and sewer systems and all extensions and
improvements hereafter made thereto, together with all services relating
to such purposes, including the billing and collection of user fees and
connection fees.
§ 27-1.2. Water Supply Control and Supervision.
Water used for the usual domestic and manufacturing purposes and
supplied by the Township to the inhabitants thereof shall be under the
supervision of the Department.
§ 27-1.3. Director: Appointment, Compensation and Vacancy.
§ 27-2. WATER USE REGULATIONS. [1999 Code §§ 13.04.010 -
13.04.300; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. O.2047-2019; 9-9-2019
by Ord. No. O.2049-2019]
§ 27-2.1. Regulations to Be Part of Contracts.
The following regulations shall be considered a part of the contract with
every person who uses water, and the fact of using water shall be
considered as expressing assent on the part of the user to be bound thereby.
a. There shall be appointed by the Mayor a Director of the Department of
Water, who shall receive such compensation as may be fixed annually by
ordinance of the Municipal Council. The term of the Director shall be
for four years. If any vacancy occurs in the office of the Director, his or
her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired time only. Additional
help may also be employed from time to time as may be required.
b. The Director will report directly to the Business Administrator. The
Director is responsible for organizing, directing, and coordinating the
employees of the Department. The Director has overall responsibility
for determining major departmental policies, planning long- and shortrange
programs, budget preparation, personnel management and
professional growth of staff, and deals with major technical and
administrative matters with other departments, the Mayor, Business
Administrator, City Council, various commissions, outside agencies, and
the public at large. The Director shall have five years of experience
involving managing water distribution and sewer collection systems in
New Jersey.
§ 27-1.1 EDISON CODE § 27-2.2
AO:722
§ 27-2.2. Application for Use of Water.
All applications for the use of water must be made at the office of the
Director of the Department of Water and Sewer and in the form prescribed
and must state fully and truly the various uses to which the water is to be
applied; should it subsequently be required for other purposes, notice must
be given before the desired change is made.
§ 27-2.3. Installation and Furnishing of Water Service Lines.
The Township will furnish and install all water service lines between the
water mains and the curblines upon the proper application therefor by the
property owner or his or her agent and the receipt of payment therefor.
§ 27-2.4. Service Line Specifications.
Copper pipe shall be used for all service lines ranging in sizes from 3/4 inch
to two inches inclusive, and cast-iron pipe shall be used for all service lines
and fire lines ranging in sizes from three inches to eight inches inclusive.
Taps shall be made of the following sizes: 3/4 inch, one inch, 1 1/2 inches,
two inches, three inches, four inches, six inches and eight inches.
§ 27-2.5. Costs of Furnishing and Installing Service Lines.
The applicant shall pay Edison Division of Water Supply for the cost of
furnishing and installing the water service line between the water main and
the curbline based upon the tapping fee schedule in effect at the time of the
application.
§ 27-2.6. Maintenance and Costs of Portions of Service Lines.
All water service lines between the water main and the curb cock shall be
maintained by the Department of Water and Sewer, at the expense of the
property owner.
§ 27-2.7. Opening and Closing of Curb Cocks.
The curb cock shall be opened and closed only by the Director of the
Department of Water and Sewer, or his or her assistant, or by special permit
granted in writing by the Director. Any person or persons turning on the
water after it has been turned off at the curb shall be fined the sum of $25.
The Township shall not be liable for any damage resulting from failure to
observe this regulation.
§ 27-2.8. Special Permit Required to Leave Water Running.
The water in no case shall be left running without a special permit from the
Director of the Department of Water and Sewer.
§ 27-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-2.9
AO:723
§ 27-2.9. Multiple Service from Single Service Pipes;
Discontinuance of Service.
If written permission should be granted by the Director of the Department
of Water and Sewer for two or more parties to take water through one
service pipe, the provision in regard to the cutting off of the supply pipe
shall be applicable to all the parties although one or more of them shall be
innocent of any cause of offense.
§ 27-2.10. Owners Responsible for Water Bills of Tenants.
Owners of premises will be held responsible for the water bills of their
tenants.
§ 27-2.11. Water Supply by Consumers to Others Restricted.
No consumer shall supply water to other persons not entitled to its use
except upon written permission from the Supervisor, under penalty of a fine
of $25 for each and every offense.
§ 27-2.12. Nonliability of Township for Interruptions in Service.
Consumers shall not be entitled to damages, nor will any part of a payment
be refunded, for any stoppage of supply occasioned by an accident to any
portion of the works, nor for stoppage for the purpose of additions or
repairs. The Director shall have the right to shut off the water to make
extensions, alterations or repairs.
§ 27-2.13. Accessibility for Inspections.
All apparatus and places supplied with water must be accessible and open
to the inspection of the Director or his or her agents at all times, and all
pipes and fixtures shall be subject to rejection by the Director if considered
unsuitable for the purpose.
§ 27-2.14. Use of Fire Hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be used only by members of the Fire Department or
other authorized officials, except upon written permission having been
secured from the Director of the Department of Water and Sewer.
§ 27-2.15. Service Connections to be Metered.
a. All service connections shall be metered except for construction
purposes, when temporary service may be allowed by permission of the
Supervisor. All water meters, except for new construction, shall be
furnished and set by the Department of Water and Sewer. All meters
remain the property of the Township. Meters may be required to be set
either within the lines of the building to be supplied or in a specially
constructed box at the curb, as may be directed by the Director.
§ 27-2.9 EDISON CODE § 27-2.15
AO:724
§ 27-2.16. Repair and Protection of Water Pipes and Fixtures;
Tampering with or Damaging Meter.
All persons using water shall keep their water pipes and fixtures within
their properties and to the curb cock in good repair and protect the same
from frost at their own expense. They shall be held liable for all damage
and loss which may result from their failure to do so. All water which passes
through a meter will be charged for, whether used or wasted. Any person
who tampers with a meter seal or the meter itself or causes any damage
thereto shall liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
§ 1-5.
§ 27-2.17. Notification of Defect in Service Pipe; Failure to Remedy.
Whenever it shall be found that the service pipe between the meter and the
curb cock is not in serviceable condition, the owner or consumer shall be
notified at once; and should he, she or they fail to remedy the defect within
a reasonable time, the water will be shut off and not turned on until the
necessary repairs have been made and a charge for shutting off and turning
on the water has been paid.
§ 27-2.18. Protection of Meters.
Consumers shall take all proper precaution to protect the meter from any
injury, including, but not limited to, injury from frost, hot water or steam.
The owners of the premises will be held liable for all damage or loss to the
Township for failure to properly care for and protect the meters.
§ 27-2.19. Defective Meters; Testing of Meters.
In case of damage to a meter or the failure to register properly, the
consumer or owner shall notify the Director of the Department of Water and
Sewer at once in order that the meter may be repaired or replaced by an
accurate one. The charges for water during such period will be on the basis
of ordinary use under similar conditions before the meter became defective.
The consumer or owner shall cooperate with the Department of Water
and Sewer in granting access to the meter for replacement. The failure to
cooperate or preventing the replacement of a damaged meter will result in
water service being shut off until such meter is replaced. The Department of
Water and Sewer will inspect and test any meter owned by the Department
b. Before water shall be turned on for construction purposes, an advance
payment of $8 shall be made for a one-family frame house for each
service and $12 for a one-family house constructed more than 50% of
any other material. In case of larger buildings or apartments, the
charge shall be determined by the Director. After the completion of the
construction, the water shall be turned off at the curb and not turned on
again until application is received for a meter. Owners shall be liable for
the minimum charge per quarter or any fraction thereof that the water
is left turned on prior to installation of a meter.
§ 27-2.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-2.19
AO:725
of Water and Sewer when requested to do so by the property owner or
consumer. If such inspection and test proves the accuracy of the meter,
there shall be a charge to the person requesting the test as follows:
Type Charge
3/4" x 5/8" disc $15
Straight 5/8" disc $15
Straight 3/4" disc $15
1" disc $20
1 1/2" disc $35
2" disc $35
2" turbine $35
3" disc $150
3" turbine $150
3" compound $175
4" turbine $175
4" compound $175
6" turbine $175
6" compound $200
8" turbine $175
8" compound $175
10" turbine $175
10" compound $175
§ 27-2.20. Vacant Buildings; Owners to Notify Director.
Owners of vacant buildings must give notice, in writing, of such vacancy to
the Director of the Department of Water and Sewer so that the water may
be turned off.
§ 27-2.21. Notice to Discontinue Service.
Any consumer wishing to discontinue water from the Township water supply
system must give notice thereof, in writing, to the Director of the
Department of Water and Sewer. He or she will be charged for the use of
water until such notice is given, when the water will be shut off.
§ 27-2.22. Responsibility for Water Service Charges.
All charges in connection with the water supply are made against the owner
of the premises where the water is used, and all bills will be so made out.
All water rents or other fees and expenses incurred by the installation of
service, or fines imposed, are a lien on the property, and owners are made
§ 27-2.19 EDISON CODE § 27-2.22
AO:726
responsible for any delinquency in the matter of payments by tenants or
others.
§ 27-2.23. Rates.
The following schedule of rates shall apply for the use of water:
a. A minimum charge for general metered service shall be charged
quarterly and shall be based on the size of the meter in service with the
amount of water allowance within the minimum charge.
Size of Meter
(inches)
Water Allowance
per Quarter
(cubic feet) Charge per Quarter
5/8 to 3/4 950 $18.66
1 3,000 $84.22
1 1/2 5,000 $140.37
2 8,000 $224.58
3 18,000 $467.55
4 30,000 $747.79
6 57,000 $1,378.34
8 90,000 $2,148.99
10 120,000 $2,849.58
12 170,000 $4,017.24
b. Water delivered shall be charged at the following rates:
Rate
$23.15 per thousand cubic feet
c. For fire protection, the Department of Water and Sewer shall be paid an
annual charge of $424.37 per fire hydrant on private property.
d. Fire line service.
1. There shall be a charge for metered fire line service based on the
size of the meter and unmetered fire line service based on the size
of the service, without hose or hydrant connected to them,
according to the following table:
Size of Service
(inches) Charge per Quarter
2 $129.64
4 $467.45
§ 27-2.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-2.23
AO:727
§ 27-2.24. Time for Payment.
All water rents are due and payable at the office of the Department of
Water and Sewer quarterly, on the first day of each quarter, for users
with consumption under 200,000 cubic feet per quarter. For all users with
normal or estimated use in excess of 200,000 cubic feet per quarter, such
bills shall be due and payable monthly. The Township does not guarantee
the delivery of water bills. The owner is required to call at the office of the
Department of Water and Sewer and pay or tender the amount due, whether
the bill is received or not.
Size of Service
(inches) Charge per Quarter
6 $839.58
8 $1,261.20
10 $1,680.99
12 $2,100.77
2. There shall be a quarterly charge for metered fire line service
based on the size of the meter and unmetered fire line service
based on the size of the service, with hose or hydrant connected to
them, according to the following table:
Size of Service
(inches) Charge per Quarter
4 $630.60
6 $1,050.39
8 $1,680.99
10 $2,284.09
12 $2,740.54
e. For installation of meter with remote read-out register (residential), the
charge shall be $42.
f. The rates charged to any resident of the Township, who shall have
attained the age of 65 years old, on their primary residence in
accordance with Subsections a and b above shall be those rates in effect
for calendar year 1996. In order to be eligible for the senior citizen rate
for any year, the resident must have obtained the age of 65 as of
January 1 of that year. The resident must notify the Edison Division of
Water Supply prior to January 1 to be eligible for the billing year
beginning July 1.
§ 27-2.23 EDISON CODE § 27-2.25
AO:728
§ 27-2.25. Penalties for Delinquent Payments.
A penalty of 8% will be added to all bills not paid within 30 days. The water
will be shut off if bills remain unpaid 60 days after they become due, after
five days' notice has been previously given, and will not be turned on again
until all charges, including $15 for shutting off and turning on the water,
are paid.
§ 27-2.36. Water Emergencies.
In case of emergency occasioned by drought or other shortage or stoppage
of water supply, the Department of Water and Sewer may adopt necessary
temporary measures or restriction and conservation. After public notice
has been given and until the restrictions have been lifted, any person or
corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be subject, upon
conviction for violation thereof, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
Continuing violations will subject the person or corporation committing
the same to a discontinuance of water supply during the period of the
emergency.
§ 27-2.27. Backflow Protective Devices Required in Cases of Cross-
Connections.
When a cross-connection exists between the public water supply and an
unapproved water supply, a backflow protective device with double check
valve must be installed to prevent unapproved water from mixing with the
public water supply.
§ 27-3. through § 27-5. (RESERVED)
§ 27-6. SEWER REGULATIONS.
§ 27-6.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 13.08.010]
As used in this section:
BUILDING (HOUSE) DRAIN — Means that part of the lowest piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
(house) sewer beginning five (5) feet outside the building wall.
BUILDING (HOUSE) SEWER — Means that part of the horizontal piping of
a drainage system which extends from the end of the building (house) drain
and which receives the discharge of the building (house) drain and conveys
it to a sanitary sewer.
HOUSE — Means any building.
§ 27-6.2. Connections to Available Sewers Required. [1999 Code
§ 13.08.020]
§ 27-2.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-6.2
AO:729
§ 27-6.3. Failure to Make Connection. [1999 Code § 13.08.030]
Any owner of property who fails to make such connection to an available
sanitary sewer within thirty (30) days after due notification by the Township
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in subsection
27-6.8, and each and every day after the thirty (30) days in which he or she
shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section and of the notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 27-6.4. Material Specifications. [1999 Code § 13.08.040]
All materials used in the installation of building (house) sewers in the
Township shall conform to one (1) of the following specifications:
a. All owners of property along the line of any sewers constructed for the
purpose of carrying off sewage matter in any of the streets of the
Township shall connect their houses and other buildings with the sewer
in the street adjoining the property.
b. Where sanitary sewers are not available, septic tanks may be used
subject to the issuance by the Plumbing Inspector of a permit therefor,
pursuant to the terms of the Uniform Construction Code.
c. As soon as sanitary sewers are available for connection, septic tanks or
other existing structures or pits shall be abandoned, emptied, cleaned
and disinfected and filled or covered with fresh earth.
a. Cast-iron sewer pipe and fittings, ASTM designation A74-1942, extra
heavy weight;
b. Vitrified clay sewer pipe and fittings:
1. Standard strength conforming to ASTM designation C13-49T for up
to ten (10) feet in depth,
2. Extra strength conforming to ASTM designation C20044T in depths
over ten (10) feet;
c. Asbestos cement sewer pipe, not more than seven (7) feet in length, and
fittings:
1. Federal Specifications SS-P-351 (1940) except for such
substitutions approved by the National Plumbing Code,
2. Fittings. Changes in direction in the piping shall be made by the
appropriate use of forty-five degree Y's, long sweep, quarter bends,
sixth, eighth or sixteenth bends or by a combination of these or
equivalent fittings. No fitting having a hub in the direction opposite
to flow, nor a T-branch, shall be used.
§ 27-6.2 EDISON CODE § 27-6.5
AO:730
§ 27-6.5. Joints. [1999 Code § 13.08.050]
The joints in any or all of the above types shall be watertight and rootproof
and shall be made of lead or an approved sulphur compound for cast-iron
pipe and of bituminous joint material (hot-poured) for vitrified clay pipe;
sleeve couplings shall be of standard manufacture as furnished with the
asbestos cement pipe.
§ 27-6.6. Minimum Size of Sewers. [1999 Code § 13.08.060]
The minimum size of a building (house) sewer shall be four (4) inches in
internal diameter, except that the sizes in all cases shall conform with the
schedule in the Uniform Construction Code where pipes of larger sizes are
required.
§ 27-6.7. Laying of Sewers. [1999 Code § 13.08.070]
a. Building (house) sewers must be run in as direct a line as possible to the
Y-connection in the main sewer.
b. Building (house) sewers shall be laid not less than three (3) feet from
the surface of the ground, and no line shall be laid within three (3) feet
of the wall of any building or party line. Building (house) sewers may be
placed in the same trench with the water service pipe, provided that the
bottom of the water service pipe at all points shall be at least twelve
(12) inches above the top of the sewer line at its highest point and that
the water service pipe is placed on a solid shelf excavated at one (1)
side of the common trench. Building (house) sewers, when laid in
unstable soil conditions, shall be of extra-heavy cast-iron pipe.
c. Building (house) sewers shall be laid with a fall of not less than oneeighth
(1/8) inch per foot, or, if pipe with a larger diameter than the
minimum is required, the grade shall be such as to provide a velocity of
not less than two (2) feet per second. Each length of sewer pipe shall
have a solid bearing, and grooves shall be cut in the bottom of the
trench to receive the bells or sleeves.
d. Old house sewers may be used in connection with a new building or
new plumbing only when they conform to the requirements governing
new sewers.
e. No building (house) sewer shall be covered over or backfilled until it
shall have been inspected and approved by the superintendent of
sewers or other authorized Township official.
f. The plumbing of every building shall be separately and independently
connected with the sanitary sewer when such is accessible, except that
in the case of a building in the rear of a lot, in front of which there is
another building, or in the case of a building which does not have
access to a sewer over its own premises, the plumbing may be
connected to the building (house) sewer which serves another building.
§ 27-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-6.8
AO:731
§ 27-6.8. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 13.08.080; New]
Any person who fails to comply with or who violates or who offends against
any provision of this section or any section thereof shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 and each
day during which a violation of this article is allowed to exist shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 27-7. SEWER USE REGULATIONS.
§ 27-7.1. Applicability; Right of Appeal. [1999 Code § 13.08.090]
§ 27-7.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 13.08.100; Ord. No.
O.1905-2015§ 4]
As used in this section:
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance
discharged, permitted to flow or escaping in the course of any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
normal sewage.
MAIN — Means Township-owned or -leased piping and appurtenances in
or along public rights-of-way or easements owned by the Township for the
collection of sewage and transmission of sewage to treatment facilities.
MCSA — Means Middlesex County Sewerage Authority.
NJDEP — Means New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Means sewage with a maximum:
a. These regulations govern the use of the Township sanitary sewer
system (hereinafter referred to as the "sewer system") and are
applicable to all existing and future users of the sewer system. These
regulations cover the use of the sewer system and charges for sanitary
sewer services provided by the Township. All new users of the sewer
system must also comply with regulations for connection to the sewer
system and charges therefor.
b. Any user or potential user of the sewer system shall have the right to
appeal any provision of these regulations to the Municipal Council of
the Township or an appeals board that it may designate.
Five-day biochemical oxygen demand of two hundred (200) milligrams
per liter;
a.
Suspended solids content of two hundred forty (240) milligrams per
liter;
b.
c. Chlorine demand of fifteen (15) milligrams per liter.
§ 27-6.8 EDISON CODE § 27-7.2
AO:732
SEWAGE — Means the combination of water-carried wastes from
residences, businesses, industries and other buildings, institutions and
factories.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER, or SIU — Means all users who
discharge sewage of particular characteristics or flow in excess of one (1)
or more of the following threshold amounts:
1. Total sewage flow (flow). Flow of sewage in excess of twenty-five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day.
2. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) present in sewage. BOD in excess of
fifty-three pounds per day; or,
3. Suspended solids (SS) present in sewage. SS in excess of forty-two (42)
pounds per day.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR LIQUIDS — Means any water or liquid
containing none of the following:
USEPA — Means United States Environmental Protection Agency.
USER — Means the person applying for use of or continuing to use the
sewer system, whether owner or tenant, and who enters into an agreement
therefor.
§ 27-7.3. Prohibition of Inflow Sources. [1999 Code § 13.08.110]
No roof drainage, cellar drainage, unpolluted industrial process water,
surface water, waste from hydrants or groundwater from underground
drainage fields shall be admitted or be permitted to drain into the sewer
system. The sewer system is intended to convey sanitary sewage and
acceptable industrial wastes only.
§ 27-7.4. Construction Requirements. [1999 Code § 13.08.120]
a. Emulsified grease or oil;
b. Substance that may impart taste, odor or color;
c. Odorous or otherwise obnoxious gases;
Total dissolved solids in excess of one thousand (1,000) milligrams per
liter;
d.
e. Suspended solids in excess of five (5) milligrams per liter;
A biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of five (5) milligrams per
liter;
f.
g. A pH below six point zero (6.0) or greater than nine point zero (9.0);
Any substance prohibited by Federal or State law or regulations from
being discharged directly into any stream or other body of water,
including but not limited to any substance classified as being toxic.
h.
§ 27-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-7.4
AO:733
§ 27-7.5. Industrial Wastes; Approval Required. [1999 Code
§ 13.08.130, A]
Admission of Industrial Wastes into the Sewer System.
a. Owners or their agents, employees or independent contractors may do
excavation, ditch preparation and plumbing work involved in the
construction of a building sewer and the connection of a building sewer
to a service lateral or sewer main upon receipt of the connection permit
and subject to compliance with Township standards, applicable codes
and inspection requirements.
b. All contractors, before performing any work involving the construction
of a building sewer or the connection of a building sewer to a service
lateral or sewer main shall register with the Township's authorized
agent, giving his or her name, business and home address, telephone
numbers and the amount of and nature of his or her experience.
a. Approval Required for Industrial Wastes. The discharge into the
sanitary sewer system of industrial wastes having any of the following
characteristics shall be subject to prior review by and approval of the
Township:
1. A five-day BOD greater than two hundred (200) milligrams per
liter;
2. A suspended solids content greater than two hundred forty (240)
milligrams per liter;
3. A chlorine demand greater than fifteen (15) milligrams per liter;
4. Any quantity of substance possessing characteristics described as
prohibited wastes.
b. Preliminary Treatment and Handling of Industrial Wastes. Whenever
necessary in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the owner of
improved property shall, prior to discharge of industrial wastes into the
sewer system, provide, at his or her expense, such facilities for
preliminary treatment and handling of industrial wastes as may be
necessary to:
1. Remove any toxic substance as designated by the USEPA or any
substances which cannot be properly treated by the MCSA;
2. Reduce BOD to two hundred (200) milligrams per liter, suspended
solids to two hundred forty (240) milligrams per liter, and chlorine
demand to fifteen (15) milligrams per liter, by weight;
3. Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to come
within the maximum limits permitted in this section;
4. Control the quantities and rates of discharge over a twenty-four
(24) hour day and a seven-day week.
§ 27-7.4 EDISON CODE § 27-7.5
AO:734
§ 27-7.6. Prohibited Wastes. [1999 Code § 13.08.130, B]
c. Requirements for Industrial Facilities.
1. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of
industrial wastes shall be submitted for approval of the Township,
and no construction of any such facility shall be commenced until
approval thereof first shall have been obtained, in writing, from the
Township, and until approval thereof first shall have been obtained
from any governmental regulatory body having jurisdiction.
2. Whenever facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of
industrial wastes shall have been provided by the owner of such
improved property, such facilities shall be maintained continuously,
at the expenses of the owner, in satisfactory operating condition
and the Township shall have access to such facilities at reasonable
times for purposes of inspection and testing.
a. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial or unpolluted commercial process water
into any sewer.
b. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any of the following described wastes or
waters into the sanitary sewer system:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F);
2. Any water or waste containing more than one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter of fats, oils or greases;
3. Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas which, by reason of its nature or
quality, may cause fire or explosion or which, in any other way, may
be injurious to persons or the sanitary sewer system or the sewage
treatment facilities;
4. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, whether singly
or by interaction with other wastes, shall be capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into any
sewer or the sewage treatment plant for maintenance and repair;
5. Any garbage, except properly shredded or ground garbage;
6. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
bones, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, butchers offal
or any other solid or viscous substance which shall be capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in any sewer or other interference
§ 27-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-7.6
AO:735
with the proper operation of the sanitary sewer system or the
sewage treatment facilities;
7. Any water or waste having a pH lower than six point zero (6.0) or
higher than nine point zero (9.0) or having any corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures or equipment of
the sanitary sewer system or the sewage treatment facilities or to
personnel engaged in operation and maintenance thereof;
8. Any water or waste containing any toxic substance in quantity
sufficient to:
(a) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
(b) Interfere with the biochemical processes of the MCSA sewage
treatment facilities, or
(c) Exceed State, Federal or other validly existing requirements
for the receiving stream;
9. Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such character
that unusual attention or expense shall be required to handle such
water or waste at the MCSA sewage treatment facilities;
10. Any radioactive isotopes, except by special permission by the
Township;
11. Any drainage from building construction.
c. Oil and Grease Interceptors.
1. Gas stations and garages are required to provide oil interceptors,
of the types Series GA, GX, GNC, GRC, of Josam Manufacturing
Company, Michigan City, Indiana, or equivalent, in an approved
location, where the dangerous liquids are to be intercepted.
2. Restaurants or other commercial establishments, when directed,
shall be required to provide grease interceptors, of the type Series
J, of the Josam Manufacturing Company or equivalent.
(a) Grease traps shall be provided when the Director of Public
Works or designee determines that they are necessary for
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients except that such grease trap shall not be required
for private dwellings. All of the traps shall be located so that
they are readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. The grease traps shall be continuously maintained
in order to provide satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner, at the owner's expense. There shall be no bypass of the
grease trap facilities which would allow the entry of untreated
or partially treated wastes to the public sewer system.
§ 27-7.6 EDISON CODE § 27-7.6
AO:736
§ 27-7.7. Requirements for Discharge of Industrial Waste. [1999
Code § 13.08.140]
(b) All retail food establishments, commercial food processors,
meat processors or similar food preparers shall be required to
pre-treat their discharge with an approved bacteriological
product to control and eliminate the introduction of grease into
the sewer system.
(c) The bacteriological product must be free of wetting agents,
additives and reducing agents, enzymes, solvents or chemical
de-greasers and must be approved by the Director of Public
Works for use by the Director of Public Works or designee prior
to application and/or installation of equipment. The bacteria
shall be introduced into the system after closing or during the
period of time that there is the least amount of business
activity, once during every twenty-four hour period, or as
directed by the Director of Public Works or his designee.
d. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement between the Township and any person whereby
industrial wastes of unusual strength or character may be admitted into
the sewer system by the Township, either before or after preliminary
treatment.
a. Required Survey Data. All sewer system users presently discharging
industrial wastes into the sewer system or any person desiring to make
a connection to the sanitary sewer system through which industrial
wastes shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system shall file with
the Township an industrial wastes questionnaire, to be furnished by the
Township, which shall supply pertinent data, including estimated
quantity of flow, to the Township with respect to industrial wastes
proposed to be discharged into the sewer system.
b. Control Moles.
1. Any person who is or shall in the future discharge industrial wastes
into the sanitary sewer system, when required by the Township,
shall construct in accordance with Township requirements and
thereafter shall properly maintain, at his or her expense, a suitable
control manhole or other device acceptable to the Township to
facilitate observation, measurement and sampling by the Township.
2. Any such control manhole or device, when required by the
Township, shall be constructed at an accessible, safe, suitable and
satisfactory location in accordance with plans approved by the
Township prior to commencement of construction.
c. Sewage Sampling.
1. Industrial wastes being discharged into the sewer system shall be
subject to periodic sampling, inspection and determination of
§ 27-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-7.7
AO:737
§ 27-7.8. Maximum Permitted Rates of Sewage Discharge. [1999
Code § 13.08.150]
character and concentration. Such sampling, inspection and
determination shall be made by the Township as frequently as may
be deemed necessary. Representative samples for a full working
day shall be obtained by taking hourly samples and compositing
them in accordance with the flow at the time of sampling. Sewage
sampling facilities shall be accessible to the Township at all times.
Due care shall be exercised in the collection of all samples to
ensure preservation thereof in as nearly the natural state as
possible, including refrigeration of all samples which are intended
for analysis by biochemical methods.
2. A grab sample (once per day) may be taken in lieu of the above if, in
the opinion of the Township Engineer, it will be representative of
the user's daily flow.
d. Analysis.
1. The Township shall be responsible for analysis of samples of
industrial wastes.
2. Laboratory methods used in the analysis of samples of industrial
wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, as published by
the American Public Health Association, and/or any method
required by USEPA, NJDEP and MCSA, provided, however, that
alternate methods for the analysis of industrial wastes may be
used, subject to mutual agreement between the Township and the
owner discharging such industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer
system.
e. Changes in Type of Wastes. Any owner of an improved property who is
discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system and who
contemplates a change in the method of operation which will alter the
type of industrial wastes at the time being discharged into the sanitary
sewer system shall notify the Township, in writing, at least ten (10) days
prior to consummation of such change.
f. All users whose discharge to the sewer system must be sampled and
analyzed because of its composition shall pay the Township for all costs
incurred in obtaining and analyzing the samples. Payment for such
costs must be made within thirty (30) days after receipt of the bill by the
user. Late payment will be subject to a five (5%) percent late charge and
interest at the rate of one (1%) percent per month or part thereof.
a. All properties classified industrial shall be limited to the maximum peak
discharge rates prescribed herein for any discharge into the sewer
system:
§ 27-7.7 EDISON CODE § 27-7.8
AO:738
§ 27-7.9. Sampling. [Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
The Township will regularly sample and test the sewage emanating from
all significant industrial users, or rely on available equivalent records of
sampling and testing for such users. The Township may impose a sampling
fee not to exceed seventy-five ($75.00) dollars per sample. The samples
must be drawn from a Township prescribed sampling point. The purpose of
such sampling is to provide for equitable charges to significant industrial
users, consistent with the rates set forth in the Code, based upon quantity
and strength of wastewater discharge in compliance with Federal
Regulation 18 CFR 601.34, dated July 2, 1970 as amended and
supplemented from time to time.
§ 27-7.10. Discharges Regulated. [Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
Property Classification
Maximum Permitted Peak
Discharge
(gallons per minute)
Commercial 3.00 per acre
Restricted industrial 3.00 per acre
Light industrial 3.00 per acre
Heavy industrial 10.00 per acre
b. All properties not classified industrial shall be limited to a maximum
peak discharge rate of forty-hundredths (0.40) gallon per minute at any
time.
c. When directed by the Township to prevent discharge rates into the
sewer system in excess of the maximum permitted rates set forth
herein, the owner shall provide and maintain, at his own expense, an
approved flow control facility having a capacity of at least fifty (50%)
percent of the mean daily volume of sewage discharge from the owner's
property. In addition, the outlet to the sewer system shall be equipped,
at the owner's expense, with a discharge rate controller or other
approved device, the regulation of which shall be directed by the
Township. In addition, any flow control facility required herein shall be
subject to approved means for odor control at the owner's expense.
a. Acceptable Wastes. In addition to any other requirements of the Code,
no industrial liquid waste shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system of the Township, unless it is amenable to secondary or biological
treatment processes. No toxic materials or wastes containing explosive
or flammable substances which would be detrimental to the collection
system, including pumping stations and all treatment plant facilities
and equipment or treatment processes, shall be permitted to be
discharged into the collection system. The subsections of this Chapter
XXVII set forth, in further detail, requirements concerning limitations
on the quality of industrial waste characteristics.
§ 27-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-7.10
AO:739
b. Chemical Analyses Submitted. Every industry proposing to connect
with the Township sewer system and to discharge industrial waste into
same shall submit a complete chemical analysis of the waste, including
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD),
suspended solids, chlorine demand, phosphates, nitrates and other
waste characteristics required by the regulatory agencies and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
c. Charges. Every industrial user, including SIUs, connected to the
Township system and discharging industrial wastes, shall pay to the
Township those rates for the processing of such waste as are set forth in
subsection 27-8.1c, or as are otherwise set by ordinance from time to
time. The Township reserves the right to include additional charges for
industrial waste characteristics as may be imposed by the Township or
its sewer utility, or to modify the rates based upon actual cost to the
Township.
d. Sampling and Testing. The Township shall undertake periodic sampling
and testing of the waste to determine both volume and strength or
waste characteristics. The owner or SIU shall reimburse the Township
for all costs of sampling and testing.
e. Determination of Volume. The volume of sewage and/or industrial waste
from each industrial establishment or SIU may be determined by
meters paid for and installed and maintained by the owner or such user,
actual water meter records and/or private well meter records combined
with Township water records, or from estimates or measurements made
by the Township Consulting Engineer, as the case may be.
f. Determination of Waste Characteristics. The characteristics of the
industrial waste shall be determined from actual samplings or other
approved means, and shall be based upon analyses made in accordance
with the procedures outlined in the latest edition of Standard Methods
of Analysis of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public
Health Association. The Township may require the installation of
automatic samplers at the cost of the owner to obtain representative
samples during a calendar quarter or as may be required.
g. Additional Determinations. Additional classifications of waste
characteristics or modifications of the rate schedule may be established
by the Township from time to time as deemed necessary.
h. Agreement to Accept Wastes. The Township will accept industrial
wastes into the sanitary sewerage system upon execution of a formal,
written agreement, and under and subject to the provisions appearing
in the agreement and the rules, regulations and rates stated herein. The
agreement will set out in detail as necessary the characteristics of the
wastes, the flow conditions which shall govern and the conditions with
respect to the physical connection or connections. It will be the policy of
the Township to consider each application on its own merits, and to
establish specific conditions applicable to the particular situation for
§ 27-7.10 EDISON CODE § 27-7.10
AO:740
§ 27-7.11. Preliminary Treatment. [Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
each agreement. No connection shall be made prior to execution of the
agreement.
i. Applicant to Submit Data. Prior to approving an application for a
connection involving the acceptance of industrial liquid wastes or any
SIU, the applicant shall submit complete data with respect to the
following:
1. Average, maximum and minimum rates of flow to be expected daily
and seasonally.
2. Flow diagram, showing points of applications of chemicals, type
and quantity of each chemical used per day, and per shift, a
schedule of operations, expected chemical characteristics of the
untreated wastes and the point or points of connection to the
sewerage system. The normal situation will require the separation
of and separate points of connection for domestic sewage and
industrial wastes from each industrial establishment or SIU.
3. Chemical analyses and waste characteristics of liquid industrial
waste to be discharged into the system.
a. The Township reserves the right to require preliminary treatment
where the chemical characteristics of the proposed industrial wastes of
any SIU, in the opinion of the Township or in the opinion of the State
Department of Environmental Protection or the local health officials,
make such preliminary treatment desirable or mandatory. Some of the
characteristics which may dictate preliminary treatment are listed
below:
1. Five (5) day BOD in excess of three hundred fifty (350) milligrams
per liter.
2. Suspended solids in excess of three hundred fifty (350) milligrams
per liter.
3. Presence of arsenic, barium, cadmium, chloride, copper, cyanide,
fluoride, iron, lead, magnesium, manganese, nickel, nitrate,
selenium, sulfate, zinc or pH values outside the acceptable limits.
4. pH below or above the allowable limits.
5. A chlorine demand in excess of thirty (30) mg/1.
b. In such instances where it is agreed that the industrial waste will be
received following preliminary treatment, drawings and specifications
shall be submitted for approval, showing all pertinent details of the
construction proposed to accomplish the preliminary treatment, to
include details of the indicator-record-register type of fluid meter and
the housing to be used to meter the flow of industrial wastes, as the
case may be, and also details of the control manhole to be constructed
§ 27-7.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-7.11
AO:741
§ 27-7.12. Control Manholes and Meters. [Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
Industries and SIUs permitted to connect to Township sewers, even though
not initially required to provide preliminary treatment, may be required to
provide a control manhole and/or meter, as described herein.
§ 27-7.13. Flow Meters; Inspections. [Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
on the industrial wastes connection within the sidewalk area. The
control manhole shall be provided with adequate access manhole
covers of approved type, through which access shall be possible to
the Township personnel at all times. Drawings, specifications, reports,
etc., shall be submitted in quadruplicate and shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer.
c. Where preliminary treatment facilities are required, they shall be
provided and continuously maintained in an effectively operating
condition at all times, at the expense of the owner or SIU.
d. Each owner or SIU connected shall be responsible for maintaining a
quality of effluent from their premises which conforms to the provisions
established in their agreement with the Township. Sampling and
analysis shall be done to conform with accepted practice, and in
accordance with the current edition of "Standard Methods for
Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes" published by the
American Public Health Association.
e. The cost of preparing and submitting this data for consideration by the
Township shall be borne by the industrial owner or SIU; likewise, the
cost of sampling and analysis to determine compliance with the terms
of the agreement shall be borne by the owner or the SIU, although
conducted by the Township or its duly authorized representative.
a. Where the owner or SIU provides its own water supply, entirely
separate from that supplied by the Township, or provides from its own
sources a portion of the water consumed on the premises, which
eventually finds its way into the sewerage system of the Township, all
aforementioned provisions will apply. This does not relieve the owner or
SIU from the requirements to furnish, install and maintain a meter of
the indicator-register-record type to measure the discharge of
industrial wastes, as the case may be, all, as provided in this chapter. All
costs of furnishing, installing and maintaining any industrial waste flow
meter will be borne by the owner.
b. The Township representative shall have access at reasonable times to
industrial establishments, and to any meters used to determine waste
volumes discharged into the sewer system or excluded from the sewer
system.
§ 27-7.11 EDISON CODE § 27-7.14
AO:742
§ 27-7.14. Prohibited Connections; Penalties for Illegal
Connections. [Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
Under no circumstances will any of the following be connected to the
sanitary sewers, directly or indirectly:
§ 27-7.15. Domestic Sewage to Be Separate from Industrial Waste.
[Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
A separate connection shall be provided for domestic sewage, and the waste
shall not be commingled with the industrial waste within the plant or by any
SIU. The Township shall determine the equivalent household connections
from the discharge of domestic sewage from each industrial plant, owner
or SIU. This shall be determined by dividing the average daily domestic
sewage flow by three hundred (300) gallons per day; the latter representing
the average household domestic sewage discharge. The annual rate for
discharge of domestic sewage into the Township sewer system shall be
computed by multiplying the number of equivalent units, as determined
by the formula above, times the annual sewer charge applied to each
household or residential unit.
§ 27-7.16. Payments as a Lien. [Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 6]
In supplementation of any other provision of this Code, the charges and
rents provided for under Chapter XXVII shall draw interest and be a lien
upon the premises until paid, and the Township shall have and exercise
the remedies for the collection thereof with interest, costs and penalties
a. Floor drain, area drain or yard drain.
b. Rain conductor or downspout.
c. Grease pit.
d. Air-conditioning equipment.
e. Stormwater inlets or catch basins.
f. Drains from pieces of equipment or manufacturing process, except
when specifically authorized under the provisions of these rules and
regulations.
g. No cesspool, privy vault, subsoil or cellar drains, rainwater or surface
drains. Only the sewerage system of the premises shall be so
connected.
Any residential user found to have any illegal connection to the sanitary
sewer system shall be fined $1,000.00. Any commercial user or any SIU
found to have any illegal connection to the sanitary sewer system shall
be fined $5,000.00. Such fines and penalties shall be enforceable by the
Township in any court of competent jurisdiction, and shall be collected
as provided by this Code or applicable law.
§ 27-7.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-7.16
AO:743
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:63-8 and as it has by law for the collection of taxes
upon real estate.
§ 27-8. SEWER SYSTEM USER CHARGES.
§ 27-8.1. Sewer System Fees and Rates. [1999 Code § 13.08.160;
Ord. No. O.1630-2008; Ord. No. O.1862-2014; Ord. No. O.1904-2015;
Ord. No. O.1905-2015§ 5; Ord. No. O.1925-2016; Ord. No.
O.1966-2017; Ord. No. O.2008-2018; 6-26-2019 by Ord. No.
O.2044-2019]
a. All residential users of the Township sanitary sewer system discharging
normal domestic sewage, as herein described in the sanitary sewer use
regulations, shall be charged at a rate of $0.004221 per gallon of water
consumed, provided that the users are using metered water. This rate
shall be effective as of January 1, 2019, and shall remain unchanged in
all subsequent calendar years unless modified by ordinance. All users of
the aforesaid sanitary sewer system whose discharged water originated
from a well or nonmetered source shall, except as provided in
paragraph h below, be charged as follows:
$261.45 in 2019.
This amount shall remain unchanged in all subsequent calendar years
unless modified by ordinance.
b. All nonresidential users of the Township sanitary sewer system shall be
classified as follows:
1. Class I: Retail and commercial.
Examples include:
Bus charter
Cemeteries
Convenience stores
Home furnishings
Hotels and motels without restaurant or food service
Landscaping
Liquor stores
Locksmiths
Pet supply
Pool supply
Retail "dry goods" stores
Tanning salon
Trucking without vehicle cleaning
Video Rental
§ 27-7.16 EDISON CODE § 27-8.1
AO:744
Warehousing and distribution
2. Class II: Malls, shopping centers and commercial establishments
with food service incidental to use and commercial establishments
with cleaning services and/or processes.
Examples include:
Barber shops and beauty salons
Bars and taverns
Cleaners and laundromats
Country clubs and golf courses
Day care
Dental
Food markets
Funeral
General construction
Hotels and motels with restaurant or food service
Ice cream shops
Kennels
Movie theaters
Nursing and retirement homes
Professional offices
Schools
Service stations
Supermarkets
Train stations
Trucking with vehicle cleaning
3. Class III: Retail food service.
Examples include:
Bagel shops
Bakeries
Bars and grills
Butcher shops
Coffee and donut shops
Delis and sandwich shops
Diners
Luncheonettes
Restaurants
§ 27-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-8.1
AO:745
Shopping centers
Shopping malls
4. Class IV: Fast food establishments.
5. Significant Industrial Users as defined in the Code.
6. Uses not specifically referenced in the above descriptions will be
assigned class designations by the Township Engineer.
c. Nonresidential users shall be charged per gallon of water consumed, as
follows:
2019*
Class I 0.006649
Class II 0.009207
Class III 0.010467
Class IV 0.012439
*The sewer rates for 2019 established above shall be effective as
of January 1, 2019, and shall remain unchanged in all subsequent
calendar years unless modified by ordinance.
The volume of sewage and/or industrial waste from each industrial
establishment or SIU may be determined by meters paid for and
installed and maintained by the owner or such user, actual water meter
records and/or private well meter records combined with Township
water records, or from estimates or measurements made by the
Township Consulting Engineer, as the case may be. The user fee of
SIUs shall be calculated using one of the aforementioned methods of
measuring SIU usage and volume, and shall be charged as follows:
2019*
No. 1 Flow** $855.37 per million gallons
No. 2 BOD (Bio-Oxygen Demand) $1,088.18 per ton
No. 3 SS (Suspended Solids) $1,213.93 per ton
No. 4 CD (Chlorine Demand) $272.39 per cwt
*The user fees of SIUs for 2019 established above shall be effective as
of January 1, 2019, and shall remain unchanged in all subsequent
calendar years unless modified by ordinance.
d. The base rate for non-classified commercial and nonresidential users
shall be the Class I rate. In addition, these users shall be charged for
pollutant loading in excess of the levels established for normal
sewerage and for the treatment of pollutants not contained in normal
sewerage. The surcharge rates shall be the identical rates as charged
by the Middlesex County Utilities Authority and in effect at such times
§ 27-8.1 EDISON CODE § 27-8.1
AO:746
as the pollutant loading surcharge billings are prepared by the
Township. An additional charge of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars
per sampled user shall be charged for the sampling and laboratory
analysis.
e. Any user of the system who discharges normal domestic sewage and is
a not-for-profit entity and a recognized charity or fraternal organization
pursuant to either 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) or (8) of the Internal Revenue
Code shall be exempted from the payment of sewer charges under this
section.
f. Residential customers of the Edison Township sanitary sewer system
whose sewer user charges are determined based upon potable water
consumption from a public water system shall be entitled to a fifteen
(15%) percent discount from the calculated charges on their user bill.
g. The Department of Engineering may establish regulations which would
permit adjustment of user charges for other classes of customers upon
showing that significant quantities of potable water are not generating
resultant sewage flows to the Edison Township sewer system.
h. Senior Citizen Sewer Rates.
1. Metered Water. Those residents who have attained the age of sixtyfive
(65) in their primary residence as of December 31, 2005 shall
be billed at the rate in effect for calendar year 1996 ($0.00176) per
gallon until said primary residence has been transferred by deed.
Those residents who have attained the age of sixty-five (65) after
January 1, 2006 shall be billed at the then current rate established
in paragraph a set forth above until said primary residence has
been transferred by deed.
2. Well or non-metered water:
(a) Those residents who have attained the age of sixty-five (65) in
their primary residence as of December 31, 2007 shall be
billed at the following rates based upon the number of
occupants residing in said residence:
One (1) person: $38.50
Two (2) persons: $77.00
Three (3) or more
persons:
$115.00
(b) Those residents who have attained the age of sixty-five (65) in
their primary residence on or after January 1, 2008 shall be
billed at the then current rate set forth in paragraph a set forth
above until said primary residence has been transferred by
deed.
3. Proof of Age Requirement. In order to qualify for the senior citizen
rate for either metered water or non-metered water or well water
§ 27-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-8.1
AO:747
§ 27-9. CONNECTION CHARGES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 27-9.1. Connection Charges Established. [1999 Code § 13.08.170;
Ord. No. O.2035-2018]
A sanitary sewer system connection charge is established in order that the
aforementioned purposes and objectives are implemented.
§ 27-9.2. Regulations for Sanitary Sewer System Connection
Charge; Charges. [1999 Code § 13.08.180; Ord. No. O.2035-2018]
for the current calendar year, the resident must provide proof of
age to the Department of Finance by no later than March 1 of the
calendar year. Acceptable proof(s) of age shall include but not be
limited to a Township identification card, valid drivers license, birth
certificate, passport or County identification card, as determined
by the Director of Finance.
i. Irrigation Line. Any resident who installs a metered irrigation line shall
be exempt from the rates outlined in paragraph a provided they can
provide the Township with a certification from the water company as to
"irrigation only" status.
j. Discharges.
1. Any user proposing to discharge into the Edison Township sanitary
sewerage system groundwater generated as a result of a mandated
or voluntary remediation activity or process, or any other
temporary, non-domestic discharge shall first receive a temporary
discharge approval from the Township Engineer.
2. Discharge approval requests shall be applied for on forms obtained
from the Township Engineer.
3. Prior approval by the Middlesex County Utilities Authority for a
temporary discharge approval or regular non-domestic wastewater
discharge permit shall be required prior to application to the
Township.
4. The application fee for a Township permit to discharge remediated
groundwater into the Township sanitary sewerage collection
system shall be two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars, paid upon
submission of the application.
5. Charges based upon the quantity of the discharge shall be at the
Class I rate.
a. General.
1. The sanitary sewer system connection charge shall consist of a
trunk system connection charge and a collector system connection
charge determined as follows:
§ 27-8.1 EDISON CODE § 27-9.2
AO:748
(a) The trunk system connection charge shall be based on the cost
of providing trunk sewer facilities, including secondary trunks,
pump stations and force mains, to areas of the Township
requiring new or expanded sanitary sewer facilities as
determined by the Township Engineer. Allocation of the total
cost of providing trunk sewer facilities among individual users
connecting to the system will be based on the ratio of the
individual user's peak discharge rate to the peak design
capacity of the trunk system. Peak flow rates and design
capacities will be based on the Township Division of
Engineering sanitary sewer design criteria.
(b) The collector system connection charge will be based on the
estimated cost of providing collector sewers to an average
residential dwelling unit as determined by the Township
Engineer. The collector system connection charge for
nonresidential users will be based on the front footage of the
applicant's property, except in cases where the Township
Engineer determines that the use of front footage is not
reasonable. In such cases, the Township Engineer shall
determine the proper connection charge; provided, however,
that in no case shall a collector system connection charge be
less than the minimum stipulated in paragraph c. Any user
connecting to a combined trunk-collector sewer facility as
defined hereinafter shall be liable for both the trunk and
collector sewer connection charges.
2. Definitions. As used in this section:
COLLECTOR SEWER SYSTEM — Means gravity sewers, within
a specific area, used to collect sewage from service laterals of
individual users and transport said sewerage to trunk sewer
facilities.
COMBINED TRUNK-COLLECTOR SEWER FACILITIES — Means
any sewer facility that is utilized for both trunk system purposes
and collector system purposes, that is, any facility that both
collects sewage from individual service laterals and also transports
sewage from other definable collector systems to treatment
facilities.
TRUNK SEWER SYSTEM — Means gravity sewers, pumping
stations and force mains used for the transportation of sewerage
from collection systems, as defined herein, to treatment facilities.
3. Trunk system and collector system connection charges will be
payable on the following basis:
(a) Any property which has been assessed for sanitary sewer in the
past will be exempt from the connection charges.
(b) Applicants for connection to the sanitary sewer system for
residential dwelling units and commercial/industrial buildings
§ 27-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-9.2
AO:749
in existence on the date the connection charges are established
are exempted from the trunk system connection charge on
the basis that their owners have been contributing to the cost
of the sewer system through taxes on an improved property
without having the benefit of using the sanitary sewer system.
(c) Applicants for connection to the sanitary sewer system for
residential dwelling units, commercial/industrial buildings or
other nonresidential structures where the Township constructs
or has constructed collector sewers shall pay trunk system and
collector system connection charges.
(d) Applicants for connection to the sanitary sewer system who
have applied for a construction permit or land subdivision
before the effective date of these regulations are exempt from
the connection charges.
(e) Applicants for connection to the sanitary sewer system who are
required to pay the trunk system connection charge and who
construct, at their own expense, a portion of the trunk system
shall receive a reduction in their trunk system connection
charge equal to the value of the facilities they construct,
provided that the facilities are generally in accordance with
the Township's overall sanitary sewer plan in effect on the date
connection application is made. Determination of whether such
facilities are in accordance with the Township's overall
sanitary sewer plan and the value of such facilities shall be
made by the Township Engineer. If, in the event that the value
of the trunk system facilities constructed by the applicant
exceeds the total trunk system connection charge for which the
applicant would be liable, no trunk system charge will be
payable. However, in such a case, the Township will not pay the
applicant the cost of constructing trunk system facilities in
excess of the trunk system connection charge that would have
been payable. Any trunk system facilities constructed under
this section shall be constructed in accordance with Township
standards and requirements, and the facilities shall become
the property of the Township upon final acceptance by the
Township. The applicant shall be responsible for the proper
operation and maintenance of the facilities until final
acceptance is granted.
4. Construction of trunk sewer facilities by the Township or by private
individuals under the authority of the Township as described above
in paragraph a3(e) shall be at the sole discretion of the Township.
The Township shall not be obligated to construct or allow
construction of trunk sewer facilities when it is not deemed to be in
the best interest of the Township.
b. Application Procedures.
§ 27-9.2 EDISON CODE § 27-9.2
AO:750
1. No connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be made unless
proper application has been made on the prescribed application
forms and the application has been approved and the required fees
paid. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to comply with the
detailed application procedures contained on the application form.
2. The Township shall have the right to deny any application for
connection to the sewer system that is not deemed to be in the best
interests of the Township.
c. Sanitary Sewer System Connection Charges.
1. Trunk System Connection Charges.
(a) Residential dwelling units, including single-family detached
units, multiple-family units, townhouses, condominiums and
other permanent residential dwelling units: eight hundred
forty ($840.00) dollars per individual unit.
(b) All commercial, light or restricted industrial properties: three
thousand seven hundred twenty ($3,720.00) dollars per gross
acre.
(c) All other nonresidential buildings, structures or facilities:
estimated peak discharge rate, in gallons per minute (GPM), as
determined by the Township Engineer, times one thousand
three hundred eighty ($1,380.00) dollars per GPM.
(d) Minimum trunk system connection charge: eight hundred forty
($840.00) dollars.
(e) The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Municipal
Council may reduce by fifty (50%) percent the fee to be
imposed by this section for the connection to the sewer system
of any commercial or industrial building or structure which is
located within a designated "area in need of rehabilitation and
development" in accordance with this Code and which is
subject to a tax abatement agreement with the Township and
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. "The Five Year Exemption and
Abatement Law."
2. Collection System Connection Charges.
(a) Residential dwelling units, including single-family detached
units, multiple-family units, townhouses, condominiums and
other permanent residential dwelling units: two thousand one
hundred ($2,100.00) dollars per individual unit.
(b) All nonresidential buildings, structures or facilities: twenty-one
($21.00) dollars per front footage of the applicant's property,
except as provided for in paragraph a1.
§ 27-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-9.2
AO:751
Chapter 28
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 28-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 1]
For the purpose of this Ordinance the terms defined shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Means that statute of the State of
New Jersey relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Means Cablevision's application for Renewal of Municipal
Consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this Ordinance.
BOARD — Means the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or
its successor agency.
COMPANY — Means CSC TKR, LLC d/b/a Cablevision of Raritan Valley
("Cablevision") the grantee of rights under this Ordinance.
FCC — Means the Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — Means that Federal statute relating to cable
communications commonly known as the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of
1996, or as those statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Means those Federal regulations relating to
cable television services, 47 C.F.R. Section 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent
applicable, any other Federal rules and regulations relating to cable
television, including but not limited to, those described in 47 C.F.R. Section
76.3), or as such regulations may be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — Means the installation of drop cable to a
customer's premises where the distance from the point of entry into the
(c) Minimum collection system connection charge: two thousand
one hundred ($2,100.00) dollars.
d. Applicability. These regulations only pertain to sanitary sewer system
connection charges. Any applicant for connection to the Township
sanitary sewer system must also comply with all other ordinances and
regulations pertaining to the sanitary sewer system, including but not
limited to sewer use, user charges, prohibited wastes, industrial
pretreatment, applicable design and construction codes and any
applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations.25
25.Editor's Note: Former § 27-10, Sewer Utility, as amended, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. O.2049-2019.
§ 27-9.2 EDISON CODE § 28-1
AO:752
building being served is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
active cable television system plant.
STATE — Means the State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Means those regulations of the State of New
Jersey Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television. N.J.A.C.
14:17-1.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be
amended.
TOWNSHIP — Means the Governing Body of the Township of Edison in the
County of Middlesex, and the State of New Jersey.
§ 28-2. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 2]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 28-3. GRANT OF AUTHORITY. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 3]
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its non-exclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Township of a cable television system, and for the provision of any
communication service over the such system as may be authorized by
Federal or State regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant
to said consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public
Utilities.
§ 28-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 4]
This consent granted herein shall be non-exclusive and shall be for a term
of fifteen (15) years from the date of issuance of a Certificate of Approval by
the Board.
§ 28-5. EXPIRATION AND SUBSEQUENT RENEWAL. [Ord. No.
O.1883-2014§ 5]
If Cablevision seeks a renewal of the consent provided herein, it shall,
prior to the expiration of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and
Certificate of Approval in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16, and applicable
State and Federal rules and regulations. The Company shall also petition
the Board for approval authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein, and until such a time
§ 28-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-5
AO:753
that a decision is made by the Township and the Board relative to the
renewal of said consent.
§ 28-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 6]
The consent granted under this Ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 28-7. SERVICE AREA. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 7]
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of the
Franchise territory, as described in the Application for Municipal Consent,
at Cablevision's schedule of rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ 28-8. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 8]
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right-of-way outside its
primary service to those residences within the franchise territory which
are located in areas that have a residential density of twenty-five (25)
homes per mile or greater, or areas with less than twenty-five (25) homes
per mile where residents agree to share the costs of such extension in
accordance with the line extension formula as provided by the Company in
its Application for Municipal Consent.
§ 28-9. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 9]
Cablevision shall pay to the Township, an annual franchise fee, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30, provided, however, that nothing herein
shall be construed to permit the Township to require payment of a franchise
fee by Cablevision that is higher than the fee paid by all other cable
television service providers offering service in the Township.
§ 28-10. FREE SERVICE. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 10]
Cablevision shall, upon request, provide free of charge, one (1) standard
installation and monthly cable television reception service to all State or
locally accredited public elementary and secondary schools and all
municipal public libraries, as well as municipal buildings located within the
Township.
Upon written request from the Township, the Company shall provide to
State and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Township, without charge, the following:
(1) one standard installation per school or library; (2) one cable modem
per installation; and, (3) basic cable modem service for the term of this
Ordinance for each installation. This offer shall be subject to the terms,
conditions and use policies of the Company, as those policies may exist from
time to time.
§ 28-5 EDISON CODE § 28-10
AO:754
Upon written request from the Township, the Company shall provide to
Edison Town Hall, without charge, the following: (1) one standard
installation; (2) one cable modem; and (3) basic cable modem service for the
term of this Ordinance. This offer shall be subject to the terms, conditions
and use policies of the Company as those policies may exist from time to
time.
§ 28-11. CONSTRUCTION/SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No.
O.1883-2014§ 11]
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable State and Federal law. The Company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Township:
§ 28-12. TECHNICAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS. [Ord.
No. O.1883-2014§ 12]
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable Federal and State laws,
rules and regulations.
a. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the Company
shall at its sole cost and expense restore and replace such disturbances
in as good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said
work, as determined by the Township's Engineer under the Township's
generally applicable laws, rules and regulations.
b. If at any time during the period of this consent, the Township shall alter
or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
Company, upon reasonable notice by the Township shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
c. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Township, the Company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
Company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
Company shall be given not less than fourteen (14) days prior written
notice in order to arrange for the changes required.
d. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township, at its sole
cost and expense, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with the wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the
Company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to
maintain proper clearance for the Company's facilities.
§ 28-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-13
AO:755
§ 28-13. LOCAL OFFICE OR AGENT. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 13]
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ 28-14. DESIGNATION OF COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No.
O.1883-2014§ 14]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ 28-15. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 15]
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost
and expense, at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in
the minimum amounts of five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars for
bodily injury or death to one person, and one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars
for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident or occurrence
stemming from or arising out of the Company's exercise of its rights
hereunder.
§ 28-16. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 16]
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this Ordinance, a bond in form acceptable to the Township
in the amount of twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollars. Such bond shall
be to insure the faithful performance of its obligations as provided in this
franchise.
§ 28-17. RATES. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 17]
a. The rates of the Company for cable television services shall be subject
to regulation to the extent permitted by Federal and State law.
b. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
ten (10%) percent off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of
cable television reception service to any person sixty-two (62) years of
age or older who subscribes to the Company's cable television service,
subject to the following:
1. Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than sixty-two (62) years of age; and,
§ 28-13 EDISON CODE § 28-17
AO:756
§ 28-18. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 18]
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Township pursuant to State and Federal requirements.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the State-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ 28-19. EQUITABLE TERMS. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 19]
In the event that the service of another multi-channel video program
provider not subject to the Township's regulatory authority within the
Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the Company shall have the right to request from the Township lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of the burdens which create the
unfair competitive situation. Should the Company seek such amendments
to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good-faith appropriate
changes to its franchise in order to relieve the Company of such competitive
disadvantages. If the parties can reach an agreement on such terms, the
Township agrees to support the Company's petition to the Board for
2. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to Aged and
Disabled (PAAD) program in the State pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:4D-21; and
3. The senior citizen discount herein relates only to the broadcast
basic level of cable television service, and shall not apply to any
subscribers receiving service under a bulk arrangement, or to any
additional service, feature, or equipment offered by the Company,
including premium channel services and pay-per-view services; and
4. Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or per
channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
c. The Company shall have no further obligation to provide the senior
discount herein in the event that (a) the Company converts the
municipal consent granted herein to a system-wide franchise in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1; upon Board approval of a
certification that another cable television service provider offering
services to residents of the Township files, in accordance to N.J.S.A.
48:5A-30(d), that it is capable of serving sixty (60%) percent or more of
the households within the Township. In the event that the Company
does cease providing the senior discount pursuant to this provision, it
shall comply with all notice requirements and applicable law.
§ 28-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-19
AO:757
modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate amendments
to this franchise, the Township acknowledges that the Company shall have
the right to petition the Board directly for such amendments in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7; provided, however, the
Township shall be under no obligation to support Cablevision's request for
such relief from the Board.
In any subsequent municipal consent, the Township shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of multichannel
video programming subject to the Township's regulatory authority
as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such subsequent
consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as the instant
consent, Township agrees to support the Company's petition to the Board
for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the Company of competitive disadvantages
identified in the Company's petition.
§ 28-20. REMOVAL OF FACILITIES. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 20]
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this Ordinance, Cablevision at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six (6) months after such expiration, termination
or revocation obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other Federal or State certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ 28-21. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
[Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 21]
a. Cablevision shall continue to make available two (2) non-commercial
public, educational and governmental (PEG) access channels as
described in the Application for Municipal Consent. All Cablevision
support for PEG access shall be for the exclusive benefit of
Cablevision's subscribers.
b. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the Company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and the Company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Township's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
§ 28-19 EDISON CODE § 28-21
AO:758
§ 28-22. INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION. [Ord. No.
O.1883-2014§ 22]
All of the commitments contained in the Application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the Company except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The Application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this Ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as
specifically modified, changed, limited, or altered by this Ordinance, or to
the extent that they conflict with State or Federal law.
c. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and method
of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in this
Section 28-21.
d. Cablevision shall continue to provide and maintain one (1) fiber access
return line each at the Township Building, 100 Municipal Boulevard
and, the Education Center, 312 Pierson Avenue for use by the Township
in the production of non-commercial educational and governmental
access programming on the cable system. Cablevision shall have
discretion to determine the format and method of transmission of the
PEG access programming provided for in this Section 28-21.
e. In consideration for the rights granted in this Ordinance, the Company
shall provide the Township with an initial grant in the amount of forty
thousand ($40,000.00) dollars (the "Initial Grant"). The Initial Grant
shall be paid within ninety (90) days following the grant of the
Certificate of Approval from the Board. In addition, beginning in the
second year of this municipal consent and annually thereafter through
the fifteen (15) year term of this franchise, Cablevision shall, upon
annual written request, pay a grant to the Township in the amount of
ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars per year (the "Annual Grant"). The
total amount of all grants under this Section 28-21e shall not to exceed
one hundred eighty thousand ($180,000) dollars over the term of this
franchise. Cablevision shall not be obligated to make any additional
payments beyond year fifteen (15) of this franchise. The Annual Grant
shall be payable to the Township within sixty (60) days from receipt of
the Township's written request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, should
Cablevision apply for a system-wide certification or otherwise convert
its municipal consent to a system-wide certification in accordance with
applicable law, it shall be relieved of any payments due and owing after
the date of such conversion or award of a system-wide franchise.
f. The Township agrees that the Initial Grant and the Annual Grant
provided pursuant to paragraph e, shall be used for any cable and/or
other telecommunications related capital purpose and/or for the
exclusive support of PEG access programming, such as the purchase
and/or rental of PEG access equipment and facilities. On request, the
Township shall provide Cablevision with a certification of compliance
with this Section 28-21e.
§ 28-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-23
AO:759
§ 28-23. CONSISTENCY WITH APPLICABLE LAWS. [Ord. No.
O.1883-2014§ 23]
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
Federal, State and local laws; as such laws, rules and regulations may be
amended from time to time.
§ 28-24. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 24]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ 28-25. NOTICE. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 25]
Notices required under this Ordinance shall in writing and shall be mailed,
first class, postage prepaid, to the addresses below. Either party may
change the place where notice is to be given by providing such change
in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the time such change becomes
effective. The time to respond to notices under this Ordinance shall run
from receipt of such written notice.
Notices to the Company shall be mailed to:
Cablevision Systems Corporation
111 Stewart Avenue
Bethpage, NY 11714
Attention: Vice President for Government/Public Affairs, New Jersey
With a copy to:
CSC TKR, LLC, d/b/a Cablevision of Raritan Valley
1111 Stewart Avenue
Bethpage, NY 11714
Attention: Legal Department
Notices to the Township shall be mailed to:
Township of Edison
100 Municipal Boulevard
Edison, New Jersey 08817
Attention: Township Administrator
§ 28-23 EDISON CODE § 28-26
AO:760
§ 28-26. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. O.1883-2014§ 26]
This Ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a Certificate of Approval
as issued by the Board of Public Utilities that incorporates the material
terms of this Ordinance. Nothing herein shall alter the right of the Company
to seek modification of this Ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47
and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, the terms
of this Ordinance will no longer be in effect upon Cablevision converting
the municipal consent (and any certificate of approval) into a system-wide
franchise.
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: 2007 Code §§ 30-1—30-8.3;
Ordinance Nos. O.1517-2006, O.1561-2007, O.1579-2007,
O.1877-2014. Chapter XXX was repealed and replaced in its entirety
by Ordinance No. O.1942-2016.
§ 28-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-26
AO:761

ARTICLE I
Affordable Housing Affordability Controls
§ 30-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 1]
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACT — Means the Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Means constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Means the entity designated by the Township
to administer affordable units in accordance with this Ordinance, N.J.A.C.
5:93, and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — Means a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — Means the average percentage of median
income at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — Means, a sales price or rent level that is within the
means of a low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.4, and, in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be
amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent
for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as
may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Means a development
included in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan or otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation,
and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100 percent affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Means any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — Means a housing unit proposed or created pursuant
to the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through
an affordable housing trust fund.
AGENCY — Means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — Means a housing unit designed to meet the
needs of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of
the population such that: 1) all the residents of the development wherein
the unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or 2) at least 80 percent
of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older;
§ 30-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-1
AO:763
or 3) the development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C.
§ 3607.
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — Means a structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements
include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless;
Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities
as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for
the developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services; and congregate living
arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — Means a facility that is licensed by
the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted
living services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum,
one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable
door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — Means a household that has been certified by
an Administrative Agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — Means the Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the
New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — Means the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — Means a housing unit with health and safety
code violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Means any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
§ 30-1 EDISON CODE § 30-1
AO:764
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — Means a development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a non-residential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 50 percent or less of the median
household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — Means the primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Means housing not restricted to low- and
moderate-income households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — Means the median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total
gross annual household income in excess of 50 percent but less than 80
percent of the median household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to
a moderate-income household.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — Means a structure containing five or more dwelling
units.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Means any sale or transfer of ownership other
than the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer
of ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result of
inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to a class
A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — Means a process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable housing
units such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except
for purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — Means the maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80
percent of the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income
Limits published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
§ 30-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-1
AO:765
REHABILITATION — Means the repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — Means the gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant,
including the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for
its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include
charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — Means a dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
an ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — Means the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, et seq.
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30 percent or less of the median
household income for the applicable housing region.
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to a
very low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Means building insulation (for attic, exterior walls
and crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement
doors, and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation
program.
§ 30-2. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016; Ord. No.
O.1954-2016]
a. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Edison pursuant to
the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
b. In addition, any property in the Township of Edison that is currently
zoned for nonresidential uses and that is subsequently rezoned for
residential purposes or receives a zoning change or a use variance to
permit residential development, or receives a zoning change or a
density variance to permit higher density residential development, and
provided such residential development provides a sufficient
compensatory benefit in terms of the density of development permitted,
shall provide an affordable housing set-aside as set forth in subsection
30-6.5. The determination of a "sufficient compensatory benefit" shall
be made by the reviewing authority based upon prevailing legislation
and/or case law.
§ 30-1 EDISON CODE § 30-2
AO:766
§ 30-3. (RESERVED)
§ 30-4. ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENTS. [Ord. No.
O.1942-2016§ 4]
§ 30-5. PHASING SCHEDULE FOR INCLUSIONARY ZONING. [Ord.
No. O.1942-2016§ 5]
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25% 0%
25%+1% 10%
50% 50%
75% 75%
c. The following sections shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units.
d. All affordable housing developments, including those intended to be
funded through Federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit programs,
shall be deed restricted to comply with COAH and UHAC Rules
pertaining to the income and bedroom distributions of the units.
a. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
1. Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
2. Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
3. With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a 20-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least 30 year controls on
affordability in accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by the Court.
4. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the Administrative Agent for the purposes of administering
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
§ 30-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-5
AO:767
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
90% 100%
§ 30-6. NEW CONSTRUCTION.
§ 30-6.1. Low/Moderate Split and Bedroom Distribution of
Affordable Housing Units. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 6]
§ 30-6.2. Accessibility Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 6]
a. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number of
affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low income unit. At
least 13 percent of all restricted rental units shall be very low income
units (affordable to a household earning 30 percent or less of median
income). The very low income units shall be counted as part of the
required number of low income units within the development. At least
25 percent of the obligation shall be met through rental units, including
at least half in rental units available to families. A maximum of 25
percent may be age restricted. At least half of the units in total shall be
available to families.
b. In each affordable development, at least 50 percent of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
c. Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be structured
in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
1. The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units shall be
no greater than 20 percent of the total low- and moderate-income
units;
2. At least 30 percent of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two bedroom units;
3. At least 20 percent of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three bedroom units; and
4. The remaining units may be allocated among two and three
bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
d. Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
a. The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to the
§ 30-5 EDISON CODE § 30-6.2
AO:768
technical design standards of the Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7
and the following:
b. All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in other
multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is attached to at
least one other dwelling unit shall have the following features:
1. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
2. An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
3. An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
4. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door or
the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor; and
5. If not all of the foregoing requirements in paragraphs b1 through
b4 can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel must
be provided between stories within an individual unit, but if all of
the terms of paragraphs b1 through b4 above have been satisfied,
then an interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit; and
6. An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7, or evidence that Edison has collected funds from the
developer sufficient to make 10 percent of the adaptable entrances
in the development accessible:
(a) Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable entrance,
upon the request of a person with disabilities who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an accessible
entrance shall be installed.
(b) To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit funds
within the Township of Edison's Affordable Housing Trust Fund
sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10 percent of the
affordable units that have been constructed with adaptable
entrances.
(c) The funds deposited under paragraph 6(b) above shall be used
by the Township of Edison for the sole purpose of making the
adaptable entrance of an affordable unit accessible when
requested to do so by a person with a disability who occupies
or intends to occupy the unit and requires an accessible
entrance.
(d) The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design plan
and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the Township
of Edison for the conversion of adaptable to accessible
entrances.
§ 30-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-6.2
AO:769
§ 30-6.3. Design. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 6]
§ 30-6.4. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices. [Ord. No.
O.1942-2016§ 6]
(e) Once the Construction Official has determined that the design
plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable to accessible
meet the requirements of the Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of such conversion is
reasonable, payment shall be made to the Township's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of the Township Chief
Financial Officer who shall ensure that the funds are deposited
into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and appropriately
earmarked.
(f) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier
Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
a. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
b. In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units shall
have access to all of the same common elements and facilities as the
market units.
a. In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units, the
Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set forth in UHAC,
utilizing the regional income limits established by COAH or a successor
entity.
b. The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than 60
percent of median income, and the average rent for restricted rental
units shall be affordable to households earning no more than 52 percent
of median income.
c. The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13 percent of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to very
low-income households, earning 30 percent or less of the regional
median household income.
d. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 70 percent of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55 percent for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
§ 30-6.2 EDISON CODE § 30-6.4
AO:770
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least three
different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income ownership
units must be available for at least two different sales prices for each
bedroom type.
e. In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
1. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
2. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half person
household;
3. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
4. A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half
person household; and
5. A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person household.
f. In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted living
facilities and age-restricted developments, the following standards
shall be used:
1. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
2. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half person
household; and
3. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person household
or to two one-person households.
g. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95 percent of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and condominium or
homeowner association fees do not exceed 28 percent of the eligible
monthly income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that the price shall be subject to the affordability average
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and
supplemented.
h. The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as not
to exceed 30 percent of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to the
§ 30-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-6.4
AO:771
§ 30-6.5. Minimum Presumptive Densities/Maximum Presumptive
Set-Asides for Multi-Family Development; Affordable Housing
Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 6]
§ 30-6.6. Multi-Family Zones. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 6]
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be
amended and supplemented.
i. The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the Administrative Agent be lower
than the last recorded purchase price.
j. The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased annually
based on the permitted percentage increase in the Housing Consumer
Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not exceed nine
percent in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to lowincome
housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the
regulations governing low- income housing tax credits.
a. For Sale Developments.
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under None*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee
b. Rental Developments.
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under None*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee
c. A project shall not be subdivided into two or more lots so as to fall
below the threshold or circumvent the set aside requirement by taking
multiple actions.
§ 30-6.4 EDISON CODE § 30-6.6
AO:772
§ 30-7. UTILITIES. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 7]
§ 30-8. OCCUPANCY STANDARDS. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 8]
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
Administrative Agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
a. Within the R-A —th (townhouse) zone, the base density shall be
increased to eight units per acre with a requirement for a 10 to 20
percent set-aside for affordable sale units, commensurate with the total
number of units in the development as set forth above in subsection
30-6.5.
b. Within the R-BB-th zone, the base density of five units per acre shall be
increased to eight units per acre with a requirement for a 10 to 20
percent set-aside for affordable sale units, commensurate with the total
number of units in the development as set forth above in subsection
30-6.5.
c. Within the R-B-th zone, the base density of 10 units per acre shall be
increased to 15 units per acre with a requirement for a 10 to 20 percent
set-aside for affordable sale units or a 10 to 20 percent set-aside for
affordable rental units, commensurate with the total number of units in
the development as set forth above in subsection 30-6.5.
d. Within the L-R zone the base density of 10 units per acre shall be
increased to 15 units per acre with a requirement for a 10 to 20 percent
set-aside for affordable sale units and a 10 to 20 percent set-aside for
affordable rental units, commensurate with the total number of units in
the development as set forth above in subsection 30-6.5.
e. Within the L-R zone, the base density of 10 units per acre (minimum
three- acre lot size) for a two story building shall be increased to 15
units per acre with a requirement for a 10 to 20 percent set-aside for
affordable rental units, commensurate with the total number of units in
the development as set forth above in subsection 30-6.5.
f. Within the L-R zone, the base density of 15 units per acre (minimum
three- acre lot size) for three stories shall be increased to 23 units per
acre with a requirement for a 10 to 20 percent set-aside for affordable
rental units, commensurate with the total number of units in the
development as set forth above in subsection 30-6.5.
a. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
b. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by DCA for its Section 8 program.
a. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
§ 30-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-8
AO:773
§ 30-9. CONTROL PERIODS FOR RESTRICTED OWNERSHIP UNITS
AND ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 9]
b. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
c. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
d. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
a. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this chapter for a period of at least thirty (30) years, until Edison
takes action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such
action, a restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, except that, for any units approved after October 4,
2016, such controls shall be for at least 50 years, or until such time
after the initial 50 year period as the Township of Edison elects to
release the unit from such requirements.
b. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
c. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the Administrative Agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions
in place.
d. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this chapter, an amount equal
to the difference between the unit's non-restricted fair market value
and its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a
recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
e. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
f. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a Continuing
Certificate of Occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
§ 30-8 EDISON CODE § 30-10
AO:774
§ 30-10. PRICE RESTRICTIONS FOR RESTRICTED OWNERSHIP
UNITS, HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATION FEES AND RESALE PRICES.
[Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 10]
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 30-11. BUYER INCOME ELIGIBILITY. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 11]
a. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
b. The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
c. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
d. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See Section 30-13.
a. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50
percent of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall
be reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80
percent of median income.
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the Administrative Agent may,
upon approval by the Township Council, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy low-income units
in housing markets if the Administrative Agent determines that there is
an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers to permit
prompt occupancy of the units. All such low-income units to be sold to
moderate-income households shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for low-income units.
c. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the Administrative Agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
§ 30-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-11
AO:775
§ 30-12. LIMITATIONS ON INDEBTEDNESS SECURED BY
OWNERSHIP UNIT; SUBORDINATION. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 12]
§ 30-13. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS TO OWNERSHIP UNITS. [Ord.
No. O.1942-2016§ 13]
d. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33 percent of the household's eligible
monthly income.
a. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the Administrative Agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this Section, and the Administrative Agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
b. With the exception of First Purchase Money Mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95
percent of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price
is determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
a. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
b. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the Administrative Agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to 10-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the Administrative
Agent. Unless otherwise approved by the Administrative Agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
§ 30-11 EDISON CODE § 30-13
AO:776
§ 30-14. CONTROL PERIODS FOR RESTRICTED RENTAL UNITS.
[Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 14]
§ 30-15. RENT RESTRICTIONS FOR RENTAL UNITS; LEASES. [Ord.
No. O.1942-2016§ 15]
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
a. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
chapter for a period of at least 30 years, until Edison takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, except that,
for any units approved after October 4, 2016, such controls shall be for
at least 50 years, or until such time after the initial 50 year period as
the Township of Edison elects to release the unit from such
requirements. For new projects receiving nine percent Low Income
Housing Tax Credits, a control period of not less than a 30 year
compliance period plus a 15 year extended use period shall be required.
b. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Middlesex. The deed shall also identify each affordable unit
by apartment number and/or address and whether that unit is
designated as a very low, low or moderate income unit. Neither the unit
nor its affordability designation shall change throughout the term of the
deed restriction. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
Administrative Agent within 30 days of the receipt of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
c. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
2. Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
3. The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
a. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the Administrative Agent.
§ 30-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-15
AO:777
§ 30-16. TENANT INCOME ELIGIBILITY. [Ord. No.
O.1942-2016§ 16]
b. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the Administrative Agent.
c. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed five percent of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to the
costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in
this chapter.
d. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15 percent of the total number of
dwelling units are restricted rental units in compliance with this
chapter.
a. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
1. Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30 percent of
median income.
2. Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50 percent of median
income.
3. Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80 percent of median income.
b. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35 percent (40 percent for age-restricted units) of the
household's eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented; provided, however,
that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of the following
circumstances exists:
1. The household currently pays more than 35 percent (40 percent for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household
income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing
costs;
2. The household has consistently paid more than 35 percent (40
percent for households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible
§ 30-15 EDISON CODE § 30-16
AO:778
§ 30-17. MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON. [Ord. No.
O.1942-2016§ 17]
monthly income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to
pay;
3. The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
4. The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
5. The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the Administrative Agent and the owner of the
unit.
c. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in paragraphs a1 through b5 above with
the Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
a. The Township of Edison shall appoint a specific municipal employee to
serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for administering the
affordable housing program, including affordability controls, the
Affirmative Marketing Plan, monitoring and reporting, and, where
applicable, supervising any contracted Administrative Agent. Edison
shall adopt an Ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing
Liaison. Edison shall adopt a Resolution appointing a Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by
the Governing Body and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the Court and shall
be duly qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable
Housing Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
b. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Edison, including
the following responsibilities which may not be contracted out to the
Administrative Agent:
1. Serving as Edison's primary point of contact for all inquiries from
the State, affordable housing providers, Administrative Agents and
interested households;
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Edison's Fair Share
Plan;
3. Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as
may be required by the Court;
§ 30-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-17
AO:779
§ 30-18. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 18]
The Administrative Agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. For new sale and rental
developments, all of the fees of the Administrative Agent shall be paid
by the owners of the affordable units for which the services of the
Administrative Agent are required. For resales, single family homeowners
and condominium homeowners shall be required to pay three percent of the
sales price for services provided by the Administrative Agent related to the
resale of their homes. That fee shall be collected at closing and paid directly
to the Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent shall perform the
duties and responsibilities of an Administrative Agent as set forth in UHAC,
including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which
include:
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as needed; and
5. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
c. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Township of Edison shall
designate one or more Administrative Agent(s) to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with UHAC. An Operating
Manual for each affordable housing program shall be provided by the
Administrative Agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the Governing
Body and subject to approval of the Court. The Operating Manual(s)
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Township
Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s)
of the Administrative Agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting Administrative Agent(s).
a. Affirmative Marketing.
1. Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the Township of Edison and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15;
and
2. Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
b. Household Certification.
1. Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
§ 30-17 EDISON CODE § 30-18
AO:780
2. Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
3. Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or non-eligibility;
4. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
5. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
6. Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Edison when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
c. Affordability Controls.
1. Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
2. Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
3. Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Middlesex County Register of Deeds or County Clerk's office after
the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
4. Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
5. Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
d. Resales and Rerentals.
1. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the Administrative Agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
2. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
e. Processing Requests from Unit Owners.
§ 30-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18
AO:781
1. Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
chapter;
2. Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
3. Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
4. Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
f. Enforcement.
1. Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
2. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
Administrative Agent;
3. The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the Administrative Agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
4. Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
5. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
6. Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the Administrative
Agent, to be approved by the Township Council and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
g. Additional Responsibilities.
§ 30-18 EDISON CODE § 30-18
AO:782
§ 30-19. AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No.
O.1942-2016§ 19]
1. The Administrative Agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
2. The Administrative Agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet any
monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the Court.
3. The Administrative Agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
a. The Township of Edison shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
b. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. In addition, as a result of the Settlement Agreement with FSHC,
the Affirmative Marketing Plan shall require the notification of the New
Jersey State NAACP, the New Brunswick, Plainfield, Perth Amboy and
Metuchen/Edison NAACPs and the Latino Action Network of affordable
housing opportunities. It is a continuing program that directs
marketing activities toward Housing Region 3 and is required to be
followed throughout the period of restriction.
c. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 3, comprised of
Middlesex, Hunterdon and Somerset Counties.
d. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The Administrative Agent designated by the
Township of Edison shall implement the Affirmative Marketing Plan to
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
e. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative
Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
§ 30-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19
AO:783
§ 30-20. ENFORCEMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 20]
f. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative Agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
g. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
h. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Pre-applications shall be emailed or mailed to prospective
applicants upon request.
i. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
a. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an Owner, Developer or Tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
b. After providing written notice of a violation to an Owner, Developer or
Tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the Owner,
Developer or Tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action(s) against the Owner,
Developer or Tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a period
of 60 days after service of the written notice:
1. The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the Owner, Developer or
Tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the Owner,
Developer or Tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500.00 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
§ 30-19 EDISON CODE § 30-20
AO:784
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an Owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of Edison Affordable
Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally
collected;
(c) In the case of an Owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
2. The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
Owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
Owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any First
Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating Owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating Owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the Owner and shall be held
in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the Owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the Owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
§ 30-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20
AO:785
§ 30-21. APPEALS. [Ord. No. O.1942-2016§ 21]
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent appointed pursuant
to this chapter shall be filed in writing with the Court.
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the Owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
Owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
First Purchase Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the Owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the Owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The Owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the Owner.
§ 30-20 EDISON CODE § 30-22
AO:786
§ 30-22. REPORTING AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord.
No. O.1954-2016]
a. On the first anniversary of the entry of the Order granting the Township
a Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose, and every anniversary
thereafter, through the end of the Repose period, the Township shall
provide annual reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity
to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on
Affordable Housing or Local Government Services, or such other entity
designated by the State of New Jersey, with copies provided to Fair
Share Housing Center and the Intervenors in IMO Application of the
Township of Edison, Docket No.: MID-L-3944-15, and posted on the
municipal website, using forms developed for this purpose by the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable
Housing or Local Government Services. The reporting shall include an
accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the
source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for
which any funds have been expended.
b. On the first anniversary of the entry of the Order granting the Township
a Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose, and every anniversary
thereafter, through the end of the Repose period, the Township shall
provide annual reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity
within the Township through posting on the Township website with
copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center and the Intervenors in
IMO Application of the Township of Edison, Docket No.: MIDL-
3944-15, using forms previously developed for this purpose by the
Council on Affordable Housing or any other forms endorsed by the
Court-appointed Special Master and Fair Share Housing Center.
c. For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020, as
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township shall post on its
Township website, with copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center
and the Intervenors in IMO Application of the Township of Edison,
Docket No.: MID-L-3944-15, a status report as to its implementation of
its Plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled
mechanisms continue to present a realistic opportunity. Such posting
shall invite any interested party to submit comments to the Township,
with copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center and the Intervenors
in IMO Application of the Township of Edison, Docket No.: MIDL-
3944-15, regarding whether any sites no longer present a realistic
opportunity and should be replaced. Any interested party may, by
motion, request a hearing before the Court regarding these issues.
d. For the review of very low income housing requirements required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of the
entry of the Order granting the Township a Final Judgment of
Compliance and Repose, and every third year thereafter, the Township
shall post on its Township website, with copies provided to Fair Share
Housing Center and the Intervenors in IMO Application of the Township
of Edison, Docket No.: MID-L-3944-15, a status report as to its
§ 30-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22
AO:787
§ 30-23. through § 30-29. (RESERVED)
satisfaction of its very low income requirements, including the family
very low income requirements referenced herein. Such posting shall
invite any interested party to submit comments to the Township with
copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center and the Intervenors
in IMO Application of the Township of Edison, Docket No.: MIDL-
3944-15, on the issue of whether the municipality has complied with
its very low income housing obligation.
§ 30-22 EDISON CODE § 30-23
AO:788
ARTICLE II
Affordable Housing Development
§ 30-30. AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FEES.
§ 30-30.1. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
§ 30-30.2. Basic Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
§ 30-30.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Means a development
included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but
is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a one hundred (100%) percent affordable development.
a. In Holmdel Builder's Ass'n v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990),
the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
b. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 Section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH was authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or a Court of competent jurisdiction and
have an approved spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
c. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this ordinance shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This ordinance shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's prior round rules on
development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8 and P.L. 2008, c. 46,
Section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7).
a. This section shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
b. The Township of Edison shall not spend development fees until the
Court has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c).
§ 30-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-30.3
AO:789
COAH or THE COUNCIL — Means the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Means money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
DEVELOPER — Means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Means the assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the
municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance
with sections 1, 5 and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (C. 54:1-35a through C.
54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Means those strategies that minimize
the impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 30-30.4. Residential Development Fees. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning district(s), residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of one (1%) percent of the equalized assessed
value for residential development provided no increased density is
permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of six (6%)
percent of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit
that may be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application, the base density for the purposes of calculating the
bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted by
right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the
variance application.
Example: If an approval allows four (4) units to be constructed on
a site that was zoned for two (2) units, the fees could equal one
(1%) percent of the equalized assessed value on the first two (2)
units; and the specified higher percentage up to six (6%) percent
of the equalized assessed value for the two (2) additional units,
provided zoning on the site has not changed during the two-year
period preceding the filing of such a variance application.
§ 30-30.3 EDISON CODE § 30-30.4
AO:790
§ 30-30.5. Non-residential Development Fees. [Ord. No.
O.1949-2016]
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Residential
Development.
1. Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, unless the owner resided in the previous dwelling for
a period of one year or more prior to obtaining a demolition permit,
or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise exempt from the
development fee requirement. The development fee shall be
calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the
improved or replaced structure as compared to the previous
structure.
4. Homes replaced as a result of a natural disaster (such as a fire or
flood) shall be exempt from the payment of a development fee.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, non-residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee equal to two and one-half (2.5%) percent of
the equalized assessed value of the land and improvements, for all
new non-residential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
2. Non-residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted below, shall also pay a fee equal
to two and one-half (2.5%) percent of the increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from any additions to existing structures
to be used for non-residential purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of two
and one-half (2.5%) percent shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land and
improvement and the equalized assessed value of the newly
improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the time final
§ 30-30.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-30.5
AO:791
§ 30-30.6. Collection Procedures. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under
this section results in a negative number, the non-residential
development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Non-
Residential Development.
1. The non-residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the two and one-half (2.5%)
percent development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
2. The two and one-half (2.5%) percent fee shall not apply to an
increase in equalized assessed value resulting from alterations,
change in use within the existing footprint, reconstruction,
renovations and repairs.
3. Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
non-residential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a non-residential development exempted from the
non-residential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the non-residential
development fee, in that event, within three (3) years after that
event or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of
the non-residential development, whichever is later.
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from
property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the fees
required pursuant to this section within forty-five (45) days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid non-residential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Township of Edison as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
b. For non-residential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a non-residential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
§ 30-30.5 EDISON CODE § 30-30.6
AO:792
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the non-residential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
d. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax
Assessor, based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the
equalized assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
f. Within ten (10) business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should the Township of Edison fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within ten (10) business days of
the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process
set forth in subsection b. of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (C.
40:55D-8.6).
h. Except as provided in subsection 30-30.5a3 above, fifty (50%) percent
of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of the
building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at the
issuance of the building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Township of
Edison. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to
the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within ninety (90)
days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
§ 30-30.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-30.6
AO:793
§ 30-30.7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
2. A developer may challenge non-residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing
escrow account by the Township of Edison. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure
Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within ninety (90) days after the date of
such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the Township of Edison Chief Financial
Officer for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from
residential and non-residential developers and proceeds from the sale
of units with extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make ten (10%) percent of the
adaptable entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of
Edison's affordable housing program.
c. Within seven (7) days from the opening of the Trust Fund account, the
Township of Edison shall provide the State of New Jersey, Department
of Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services with
written authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement
between the municipality, the bank, and NJDCA-LGS to permit NJDCALGS
to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.15, 8.18 and 8.19. This requirement shall be deemed to have
been satisfied by a previously executed three-party escrow agreement
with COAH, provided the bank remains the same as in the original
agreement.
§ 30-30.6 EDISON CODE § 30-30.7
AO:794
§ 30-30.8. Use of Funds. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
d. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Court.
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used
for any activity approved by the Court to address the Township of
Edison's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving
loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to:
preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or
implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of
affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment,
market to affordable, or regional housing partnership programs,
conversion of existing non-residential buildings to create new
affordable units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving
and in accordance with accepted national or State standards, purchase
of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for
affordable housing, extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed
to increase affordability, administration necessary for implementation
of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16 and specified in the approved
spending plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of Edison for
past housing activities.
c. At least thirty (30%) percent of all development fees collected and
interest earned shall be used to provide affordability assistance to lowand
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third (1/3) of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning thirty (30%)
percent or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning thirty (30%) percent
or less of median income may include buying down the cost of lowor
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning thirty (30%) percent or less
of median income.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
§ 30-30.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-30.8
AO:795
§ 30-30.9. Monitoring. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
On an annual basis commencing with the first anniversary of the entry of the
Order granting a Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose to Edison, the
Township of Edison shall report all activity in connection with its Affordable
Housing Trust Fund to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
(either the Division of Local Government Services or the Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH), whichever entity is designated by the State of
New Jersey), with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center and to
the Intervenors/Defendants IMO the Application of the Township of Edison
for a Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose of its Obligations Under
the Fair Housing Act and Approval of its Amended Spending Plan, Docket
No.: MID-L-3944-15, and with a posting of same on the municipal website,
using forms previously developed for this purpose by COAH. The reporting
shall include all sources and amounts collected/earned and the amounts and
purposes for which funds have been expended.
§ 30-30.10. Ongoing collection of fees. [Ord. No. O.1949-2016]
The ability for the Township of Edison to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its Judgment of Compliance and Repose
unless the Township of Edison has filed an adopted Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan with the Court or with COAH or its successor agency
designated by the State of New Jersey, has petitioned for a Judgment
of Compliance and Repose or substantive certification, and has received
the Court's or COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the
Township of Edison fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its Judgment of Compliance and
Repose, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within
its Municipal Trust Fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into
d. The Township of Edison may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance.
e. No more than twenty (20%) percent of all revenues collected from
development fees, may be expended on administration, including, but
not limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal employees or
consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a new construction
program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more
than twenty (20%) percent of the revenues collected from development
fees shall be expended for such administrative expenses.
Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with the reporting and monitoring requirements that have
been approved by the Court. Legal or other fees related to litigation
opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to or appealing Court's
approval of Edison's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 30-30.8 EDISON CODE § 30-30.10
AO:796
the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to
section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-320). The Township of Edison shall
not impose a residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its Judgment
of Compliance and Repose, nor shall the Township of Edison retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. The Township of Edison
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its Judgment of
Compliance and Repose.
§ 30-30.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-30.10
AO:797
Chapter 31
NATURAL AREA PROTECTION
Editor's Note: See also Chapter 33, Flood Damage Prevention and
Protection.
§ 31-1. STREAM BANK PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION.
§ 31-1.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 15.40.010, A]
The purposes of this section are:
§ 31-1.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 15.40.010, B]
As used in this section:
FLOODWAY — Means the channel and portions of the flood plain adjoining
the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
regulatory flood.
FLOOD FRINGE — Means that portion of the flood plain outside the
floodway or encroachment lines.
FLOOD PLAIN — Means the area inundated by the regulatory flood
including the watercourse that creates it.
REGULATORY FLOOD — Means the 100-year flood along non-delineated
watercourses for which this section applies.
§ 31-1.3. Flood Hazard Design Elevation. [1999 Code § 15.40.010,
C]
The flood hazard design elevation shall be determined on an individual
basis based upon stream encroachment line data from the Department of
Environmental Protection or, in the absence of that data, the flood elevation
based on a one-hundred-year storm frequency. Either shall be delineated
on a development plan, site plan or other document depicting proposed
improvements. In addition, the Municipal Engineer may, upon request of
and at the expense of the applicant or at the request of the approving
a. To implement the land use rules and regulations to preserve and
protect stream banks and adjacent areas of streams, either natural or
man-made that are not currently delineated by the State of New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
b. To discourage construction and re-grading in flood hazard areas.
c. To prevent encroachments into flood hazard areas which would
obstruct or constrict the area through which water must pass.
d. To prevent pollution of watercourses during low- or high-water periods
by preventing the placing or storing of unsanitary or dangerous
substances in the flood hazard areas.
§ 30-30.10 EDISON CODE § 31-1.3
AO:798
authority and with the consent of the landowner and at the applicant's
expense, determine the precise location of a floodway and flood fringe area
by close inspection, field survey or other appropriate method and cause the
same to be marked on the ground and on the plan, notifying the owner,
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Department of
Environmental Protection and the approving authority. The assistance of the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, may be sought to
aid in delineating the flood hazard design elevation, except that where State
or Federal agencies shall subsequently publish any reports which delineate
the flood hazard design elevation of a watercourse, said report shall be the
officially delineated flood hazard area as if said report were published in
this section.
§ 31-1.4. Lots Containing Floodway Portion of Drainage Course.
[1999 Code § 15.40.010, D]
Any lot containing a floodway portion of a drainage course and on which
it is proposed to re-grade and to construct an improvement shall not be
permitted unless a floodway permit has been issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, where required by State
regulations.
§ 31-1.5. Lots Containing Flood Fringe Portion of Flood Hazard
Area. [1999 Code § 15.40.010, E]
Any lot containing a flood fringe portion of the flood hazard area and on
which it is proposed to re-grade and/or construct an improvement shall
not be permitted unless the proposed use is permitted by the Code of the
Township of Edison and until plan approval has been granted by the Division
of Engineering.
§ 31-1.6. Review by Division of Engineering Required. [1999 Code
§ 15.40.010, F]
The procedure for reviewing any proposed re-grading and/or construction
shall be by submittal to the Division of Engineering for review and approval.
No application shall be approved and no building permit granted if there
are zoning violations or a variance is required.
§ 31-1.7. Permitted Uses; Nonpermitted Uses. [1999 Code
§ 15.40.010, G]
a. Permitted uses in a flood fringe portion of the flood hazard area shall be
restricted to the following, provided they are permitted uses in the
district in which the flood fringe portion is located:
1. Agriculture: general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming and wild crop harvesting.
§ 31-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-1.7
AO:799
§ 31-1.8. Application; Review. [1999 Code § 15.40.010, H, I]
§ 31-1.9. Grading and Filling. [1999 Code § 15.40.020]
All lots being filled shall be filled with clean fill and/or topsoil in such a
manner as to allow complete surface draining of the lot into local storm
sewer systems or natural drainage rights-of-way.
§ 31-1.10. Preservation of Natural Features; Construction
Restrictions. [1999 Code § 15.40.030]
2. Industrial-commercial: yards, loading areas and parking areas.
3. Recreation: golf courses, improved courts and playing fields,
swimming areas, boat launching ramps, picnic and camping, and
open space uses such as hiking trails.
4. Residential: lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
b. Non-permitted uses shall include, but not be limited to above-ground
and in-ground swimming pools, sheds, fences at ground level, as well as
prohibited uses contained in N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2.
a. The applicant shall submit maps, reports and other appropriate
documents permitting the approving authority to evaluate whether the
proposal has an inherent low flood damage potential; does not obstruct
flood flows or increase flood heights and/or velocities; does not affect
adversely the water-carrying capacity of any delineated or nondelineated
floodway and/or channel; does not increase local runoff and
erosion; does not unduly stress the natural environment of the
floodplain or degrade the quality of surface water or the quality of
groundwaters; does not require channel modification or relocation;
does not require fill or the erection of structures; and does not include
the storage of equipment and materials.
b. Upon reviewing the application, hearing the applicant's representation
and reviewing comments received from other municipal agencies to
which the application was forwarded for comment, the approving
authority shall deny, approve subject to conditions, or approve the
application. Its conclusion shall be based on findings related to the
above criteria.
a. No structure shall be built within one hundred (100) feet of the top of
the bank of any stream, open or partially piped, or other body of water
or within any drainage or conservation easement, and no fence shall be
constructed on a conservation easement. No building shall be
constructed within the one-hundred-year floodplain of any stream or
watercourse, or on land subject to periodic overflow, or on land which
has a water table within two (2) feet from the bottom of the structure's
lowest footing or slab, whichever is lowest.
§ 31-1.7 EDISON CODE § 31-1.10
AO:800
§ 31-1.11. Stream Corridor Preservation Areas. [1999 Code
§ 15.40.040]
The Stream Corridor Preservation Area is required to be delineated as
the most restrictive limit of any of the three (3) distances established in
accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum
Distance from
Stream**
Minimum
Distance on
Either Side of
Stream From
Outer Limits of
Any Flood
Critical Slopes
as Defined
Raritan River 150 feet 50 feet 100 feet or 50
feet
Delineated
Streams
75 feet 50 feet 100 feet or 50
feet
Intermittent Or
Undelineated
streams
50 feet 50 feet 100 feet or 50
feet
**edge of channel
§ 31-2. STEEP SLOPE CONSERVATION AND PROTECTION.
§ 31-2.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 14.44.010; Ord. No.
O.1695-2009§ 1]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the intensity of use in areas
of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion, excessive
stormwater runoff, the degradation of surface water and to maintain the
natural topography and drainage patterns of land. The Township Council
finds that residential and nonresidential developments have encroached
into steep slope areas, thereby increasing the likelihood of erosion in
periods of moderate or heavy rainfall and destruction of the natural
character of the Township of Edison. The Township Council also finds that
disturbance of steep slope areas of Edison Township produces including
increased run-off, soil erosion, creation of retaining walls greater than
four (4) feet in height and destruction of mature woodland areas that
provide natural stabilization of steep slopes, gradual natural surface flows
to streams and their tributaries and natural recharge groundwater
resources in the headwaters and tributaries of the streams that originate
within or flow through the Township. The Township Council finds that many
b. Existing natural features, such as trees, shrubs, brooks, drainage
channels, shall be retained. Whenever such features interfere with the
proposed use of such property, retention of the maximum of such
features consistent with the use of the property shall be required, at the
discretion of the reviewing agency.
§ 31-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-2.1
AO:801
of the steep slope areas are adjacent to streams and their tributaries and
disturbance of these woodlands reduces the natural water filtering function
of the stream banks thereby the water quality of the streams, increasing the
turbidity of the streams and transportation of topsoil from the Township and
reduction of the streams to fulfill their multi-faceted functions of surface
drainage, subsurface recharge, and maintaining the natural stream bank
habitat and canopy that is essential for maintaining and enhancing water
quality, water temperatures and stream benthic and stream-edge vegetation
and wildlife habitats.
§ 31-2.2. Background. [Ord. No. O.1695-2009§ 1]
Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion processes from
stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of waterbodies with
the associated degradation of water quality and loss of aquatic life support.
Related effects include soil loss, changes in natural topography and
drainage patterns, increased flooding potential, further fragmentation of
forest and habitat areas, and compromised aesthetic values. It has become
widely recognized that disturbance of steep slopes should be restricted or
prevented based on the impact disturbance of steep slopes can have on
water quality and quantity, and the environmental integrity of landscapes.
§ 31-2.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. O.1695-2009§ 1]
This section shall be applicable to new development or land disturbance on
a steep slope within the Township of Edison.
§ 31-2.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1695-2009§ 1]
DISTURBANCE — Means the placement of impervious surface, the
exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or
removing of vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Means any structure, surface, or improvement
that reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated
structures. and other similar structures, surfaces, or improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — Means the construction of structures or
improvements on areas which previously contained structures or other
improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Means (i) any slope equal to or greater than twenty
(20%) percent as measured over any minimum run of ten (10) feet, or
(ii) a slope area of twelve (12%) percent or greater having a rise of five
(5) vertical feet or greater. Steep slopes are determined based on contour
intervals of two (2) feet or less based upon reliable data.
§ 31-2.5. Designation of Areas. [Ord. No. O.1695-2009§ 1]
The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal distance) shall be
established by measurement of distance perpendicular to the contour of the
§ 31-2.1 EDISON CODE § 31-2.5
AO:802
slope. The percent of slope shall be calculated for each two-foot contour
interval. For example, any location on the site where there is a one-foot rise
over a 10-foot horizontal run constitutes a ten (10%) percent slope; a one
and one-half (1.5) foot rise over a 10-foot horizontal run constitutes a fifteen
(15%) percent slope; a two-foot rise over a 10-foot horizontal run constitutes
a twenty (20%) percent slope (5 to 1) slope).
§ 31-2.6. Steep Slope Limits. [Ord. No. O.1695-2009§ 1]
§ 31-2.7. Steep Slope Preservation and Conservation. [1999 Code
§ 15.44.020; Ord. No. O.1695-2009§ 1]
a. For steep slopes any disturbance shall be prohibited except as provided
below:
1. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
and
2. New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety or
welfare, such as necessary linear development with no feasible
alternative; to provide an environmental benefit, such as
remediation of a contaminated site; to prevent extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property; or to
prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment. For example, redevelopment, within the footprint of
existing impervious cover should be allowed to support efforts to
revitalize development that has fallen into disrepair. The applicant
shall demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed
development and topography that new disturbance is not located in
areas with steep slopes.
a. Any property which is the subject of a minor or major subdivision or site
plan application and which contains steep slopes shall comply with the
provisions set forth below.
b. Existing and proposed lots with steep slopes and shall be subject to the
following requirements:
1. Existing wooded and well-established steep slopes shall not be
disturbed and shall be contained in conservation easements.
2. Previously disturbed, eroded and/or poorly stabilized steep slopes
in excess of five (5) vertical feet.
(a) The approval board may require filling of the steep slope area
with compacted clean fill to a maximum slope of twenty (20%)
percent and restablization of the slope as described.
(b) Stabilization of the steep slope areas through application of
topsoil, fertilization, seeding, ground cover, and tree planting
§ 31-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-2.7
AO:803
§ 31-2.8. Conflicts and Severability. [Ord. No. O.1695-2009§ 1]
§ 31-2.9. Enforcement, Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No.
O.1695-2009§ 1]
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Township of Edison, of any person or entity believed to be in violation
hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this section
is discovered, a civil action in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in
the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties
may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and
serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to preclude the right of Edison Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25,
to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation
of any section or subsection of this section shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other section or
to promote reforestation based upon a reforestation plan
approved by the approval board.
(c) Steep sloped areas shall be contained in conservation
easements.
3. If retaining walls are used to stabilize existing or proposed steep
slopes, all slope area measurements will be calculated as if
retaining walls were not used. Retaining walls of four (4) feet or
greater shall be permitted only if their design is prepared and
certified by a professional engineer licensed in New Jersey.
c. Steep slope areas shall be maintained in an open space condition and
shall not have any structures constructed within it except for public
structures and facilities (i.e. bridges, headwalls, endwalls, conduits and
outlets).
a. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this section are
hereby superseded to the extent of an inconsistency or conflict, and the
provisions of this ordinance apply.
b. Severability.
1. Interpretation. This section shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provisions of New Jersey or Federal law.
2. Notwithstanding that any provision of this section is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of the section shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
3. The provisions of this section shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 31-2.7 EDISON CODE § 31-2.9
AO:804
subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this section. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 32
SOIL
§ 32-1. SOIL REMOVAL.
§ 32-1.1. Findings. [1999 Code § 15.32.010]
The Township Council, in order to promote, develop, and maintain a
harmonious balance between man and the natural processes and to
effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning, with an intent
towards the promotion of sensitive land development, the guiding of
inevitable land development and the opposition to unnecessary or
detrimental land development and the deterioration of property values,
through the consideration of aesthetics, good landscaping and sound
engineering practice, hereby finds and determines that the unregulated and
uncontrolled relocation, excavation and removal of soil on a large scale
has or will result in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and
general welfare and to the development of the Township.
§ 32-1.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 15.32.020; Ord. No.
O.1722-2009§ 2; Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
As used in this section:
APPLICANT — Means the person requesting a soil importation permit as
provided for in this section.
APPOINTED OFFICER — means the Township Engineer as designated by
the Township Council to act upon applications for permits under this section
to enforce this section.[Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
APPROVED SOIL MATERIAL — Means earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel,
humus, rock or dirt, and may include subsoil or topsoil. No construction
debris is permitted.
DEVELOPER — Means any person who, either directly or through an agent
or independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision
for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by another person or persons.
EROSION — Means detachment and movement of soil, rock, or other
mineral or organic matter by water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXCAVATOR — Means any person engaged in the moving, removal or
excavation of soil from, in or upon any land in the Township.
FARM — Means a tract of land being used for the production of agricultural
or horticultural produce, as food, fiber, nursery stock, livestock, poultry, or
dairy products, or that has been used and has not since been put to other
use including use as woodland as defined herewith.
§ 31-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-1.2
AO:805
FARMER — Means a person who operates a farm.
GARBAGE — Means meat and vegetable waste solids resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods "Garbage" is
considered to originate primarily in kitchens, stores, markets, restaurants,
hotels and other places where food is stored, cooked and consumed.
LAND/SOIL DISTURBANCE — Means any activity by people, including but
not limited to clearing of vegetative cover, removal of topsoil, grading,
trenching, cutting or filling to change the land surface, that would or could
result in loss of topsoil, erosion, and sedimentation.
LOT — Means a parcel or plot of land occupied or designed to be occupied
by a building and its accessory building or by a dwelling group and its
accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are arranged and
designed to be used in connection with such building.
MANAGEMENT PLAN — Means a plan for the management of timbered
land, developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Forestry, or similar State or Federal agency or
Township Forester if the Township names one.
MOVE — Means to dig, excavate, remove, deposit, fill, grade, replace,
level or otherwise alter or change the location or contour of land; to plow,
spade, cultivate, harrow or disc the soil; or any other operation usually and
ordinarily associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural
purposes.
MULCHING — Means the application of plant residue or other material to
the land surface suitable to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant cover.
OWNER — Means any person seized in fee simple of any lot, subdivision
or premises or having any interest or estate therein which would permit
effective possession thereof or dominion therefore.
PERMIT — Means a license to remove or destroy trees or to engage in
a land disturbing activity, issued by the officer designated to enforce this
section.
PERSON — Means and includes an individual, firm, corporation,
association, society or partnership, and their agents or employees.
PREMISES — Means one (1) or more contiguous lots in single ownership.
REFUSE — Means and includes all miscellaneous matters such as, but
not limited to, bottles, construction debris, rags, mattresses, worn-out
furniture, old clothes, old shoes, broken glass, leather, carpets, crockery,
rubber, newspaper cartons, tin cans, metals, abandoned automobiles or
parts.
REDISTRIBUTION — Means any change or alteration in the grade of any
land.
§ 32-1.2 EDISON CODE § 32-1.2
AO:806
SEDIMENT — Means soil, rock or other mineral or organic material moved
from a place or origin by water, wind, ice, or gravity and deposited
elsewhere.
SOIL — Means the fine earth material, and any included coarser fragments
of rock and incorporated organic matter, comprising the surface layers of
the earth, in which plants grow and over which people and animals normally
move about.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — Means the governmental body
organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-17.5 et seq. and designated in the New
Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., for
certification of plans for control of erosion and sedimentation.
SUBSOIL — Means all soil except topsoil.
TOPSOIL — Means the top layer of soil [usually eight (8) to ten (10) inches
deep] in which most of the organic matter occurs and where leaching of the
suspended and dissolved solids is the greatest.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — Means the person appointed to that position or
one acting for him under his authority.
TREE, TREES — Means any and all single and multi-trunked plants having
diameters of four (4) inches or more at heights of three (3) feet above
the base of the trunk or of one or multi-trunks, except flowering dogwood
(Conrus florida) which is to be considered a tree if the diameter is two (2)
inches or more at three (3) feet above the base of the trunk.
§ 32-1.3. Permit Required. [1999 Code § 15.32.030; Ord. No.
O.1965-2017]
a. No owner, developer, excavator or other person shall move or cause,
allow, permit or suffer to be moved or removed any topsoil or subsoil in
the Township for use other than on the lot from which it shall be taken,
except as otherwise defined or provided for in this section, unless and
until after application to the Township Engineer.
b. The Township Engineer shall first determine that the excavation,
grading or removal of the amount of soil applied for is necessary and
essential to the development or the improvement of the premises.
Removal of soil from the Township shall only be permitted after the
Township Engineer determines that there exists no alternative location
for said topsoil within the Township. In determining whether there
exists no alternative location, the Township Engineer shall ascertain
from the other departments whether the Township has need to
purchase a quantity of topsoil or, in the absence of such need, whether
any other person or entity within the Township has, in writing,
expressed a willingness to purchase a quantity of topsoil.
§ 32-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-1.4
AO:807
§ 32-1.4. Compliance with Other Regulations. [1999 Code
§ 15.32.040; Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
Should the Township Engineer find and determine that the excavation,
grading or removal of the amount and type of soil applied for is necessary
and essential to the development or improvement of the premises and
that the applicant has complied with the provisions hereof and all other
applicable ordinances, then the appropriate soil removal permit may be
issued. If the lot is part of an approved subdivision or site plan presently
under construction, then a permit shall be required only if the soil is to be
removed from the subdivision premises or premises within the site plan.
§ 32-1.5. Application for Permit. [1999 Code § 15.32.050; Ord. No.
O.1965-2017]
Applications shall contain the following information in a form and to a
degree to be determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 32-1.6. Consideration of Application; Issuance or Denial. [1999
Code § 15.32.060; Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
a. The names and addresses of the applicant, the owner, the developer and
the excavator.
b. The lot and block numbers of the land from which soil is to be removed,
as shown on the current Tax Map of the Township.
c. The location to which soil is to be removed.
d. The route to be taken during the removal operation.
e. The reason for removing soil.
f. The proposed dates for the commencement and completion of the soil
removal, not to exceed three (3) months for any single application.
g. A map of the lot showing the present contour lines and the proposed
future contour lines resulting from the intended excavation or
redistribution of soil and the location of streams, watercourses or other
environmentally sensitive areas, if different from any such information
appearing on an approved site plan or subdivision.
h. The amount of soil and/or topsoil to be removed from the site and the
amount of soil and/or topsoil to remain on the site.
i. Such other pertinent data as the Township Engineer may deem
necessary.
a. In considering the application, the Township Engineer shall be guided
by the following factors:
1. Soil erosion by water and wind.
2. Inadequate and improper surface water drainage.
§ 32-1.4 EDISON CODE § 32-1.6
AO:808
§ 32-1.7. Appeals. [1999 Code § 15.32.070; Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
If an application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the
Township Engineer by filing a written notice of appeal with the Township
Council within ten (10) days after receiving the notice of denial of the
application.
§ 32-1.8. Fees. [1999 Code § 15.32.080]
A fee of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars shall accompany each
application to cover the cost incurred in investigating and processing the
application and will be retained by the Township whether the permit is
issued or denied.
§ 32-1.9. Bond Required. [1999 Code § 15.32.090; Ord. No.
O.1965-2017]
Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the Township
Engineer cash, certified check, letter of credit or a bond executed by the
applicant as principal and a surety company licensed to do business in the
State of New Jersey as surety unless the applicant, owner or developer
has previously posted such security covering the work to be performed
hereunder in connection with an approved subdivision or site plan. The
3. Impairment of soil fertility.
4. Removal of lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
5. Creation of dangerous depressions and declivities.
6. The statements and findings in subsection 32-1.5.
7. Availability of alternative sites within the Township, as defined
herein.
8. Such other factors as the Township Engineer may deem necessary
or appropriate in light of the particular application.
9. The minimum quantity that will require a permit to be issued.
b. If, after considering the above factors, the Township Engineer
determines that the proposed excavating, grading or removal or
redistribution of soil will not be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the Township or its inhabitants and complies with the terms
hereof, he shall issue the necessary permit. Otherwise, he shall deny
the application and shall notify the applicant. The Township Engineer
shall have thirty (30) days after the application is filed within which to
notify the applicant whether the application has been granted or
denied.
When soil is being removed as part of an application before the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, approval of the soil permit
under this section shall be a condition of approval.
§ 32-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-1.9
AO:809
amount of the bond shall be determined by the Township Engineer but in
no event shall be less than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars and shall be
conditioned as follows:
§ 32-1.10. Permit Conditions; Standards for Operation. [1999 Code
§ 15.32.100; Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
a. That the applicant will complete the work authorized by the permit in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this
section on or before the date of completion set forth in the application.
b. That the applicant will repair any public street, structure or land which
may be damaged as a result of the work authorized by the permit.
a. Soil removal or redistribution conducted under a permit issued under
this section shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Operations shall be conducted so that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions.
2. Lands shall be graded so as to conform to the approved contour
lines and grades and shall be cleared of debris.
3. A minimum of six (6) inches of topsoil shall remain over the entire
lot from which soil was removed, except for those portions of the lot
occupied by a building or structure or pavement, in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications for the development
thereof, upon completion of the intended construction.
4. All of the work described in this section shall be performed
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Saturday. Where possible, work should be performed during
regular business hours of the Township Engineer so that
appropriate inspections may be accomplished.
5. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion and
sedimentation of soil upon surrounding lands, streets, municipal
facilities, bodies of water or waterways, in accordance with the
provisions of the Freehold Soil Conservation District. No soil shall
be removed during periods of rain or other precipitation or within
forty-eight (48) hours thereafter. No soil removal operation shall
commence without the approved SCS plan from the Freehold Soil
Conservation District.
6. Township Engineer shall be notified at least forty-eight (48) hours
before the removal of soil begins.
b. An accounting of the soil removed shall consist of inspection by the
Township Engineer of the receipts given the applicant by the excavator
for the soil removed. The receipts shall record the type and amount of
soil taken, the date it was removed and the capacity of the truck. A final
written estimate of the amount removed shall be submitted by the
§ 32-1.9 EDISON CODE § 32-1.10
AO:810
§ 32-1.11. Sand Banks, Pits and Quarries [1999 Code § 15.32.110]
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any licensed sand bank,
pit or quarry, except to the extent that the operator of any such sand bank,
pit or quarry seeks to remove topsoil, in which case this section shall be
fully applicable.
§ 32-1.12. Injunctive Proceedings. [1999 Code § 15.32.120]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Township from
taking injunctive proceedings to restrain removal of soil as described in this
section.
§ 32-1.13. Inspections. [1999 Code § 15.32.130]
Any officials from the Township and their agents shall have the right at all
times to inspect any property where a permit has been issued under this
section.
§ 32-1.14. Storage of Topsoil. [1999 Code § 15.32.150]
Topsoil, which is to remain for future use, shall be stored and maintained
at designated locations within the permit area, in accordance with Chapter
XXV, Trees, to regulate and control the destruction and removal of trees, the
movement of topsoil, erosion of soil and sedimentation in the Township of
Edison.
§ 32-1.15. Violations and Penalties. [1999 Code § 15.32.150; New]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this section shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter
I, Section 1-5.
§ 32-2. SOIL IMPORTATION.
§ 32-2.1. Depositing Garbage or Refuse Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 15.32.160]
No owner, agent, lessor, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot, grounds,
street, road or alley in the Township of Edison shall deposit thereon or
permit the depositing thereon of any animal or vegetable substance or
garbage or refuse or dirt gathered in cleaning sewers, or waste of mills or
factories, or any materials which are offensive to health or tend to decay, to
become putrid or to render the atmosphere impure or unwholesome.
applicant. The Township Engineer must be satisfied that the inspected
receipts account for all of the amounts indicated in final estimate.
§ 32-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-2.2
AO:811
§ 32-2.2. Permit Required for Deposit of Approved Soil Material.
[1999 Code § 15.32.170; Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
No owner, agent, lessor, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot, grounds,
street, road or alley in the Township of Edison shall deposit thereon or
permit the depositing thereon of any approved soil material unless a permit
is issued by the Township Engineer. Exempt from the provision of this
section shall be the following:
§ 32-2.3. Proof of Compliance with Soil Clean Up Criteria. [1999
Code § 15.32.190]
Unless otherwise exempt under the terms of this section, no permit to
deposit approved soil material upon or used to fill up or raise the surface
of any lot, grounds, street, road, or alley in the Township of Edison shall be
issued unless the applicant submits proof that the approved soil material
has been tested in conformance with subsection 32-2.6 and that it complies
with the Soil Ranking Criteria found in N.J.A.C. 7:26F, Appendix C, Table 1,
as may be amended from time to time.
§ 32-2.4. Permit Fees. [1999 Code § 15.32.200; Ord. No.
O.1965-2017]
The fee for issuance of a permit under this section shall be two hundred
($200.00) dollars. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant furnishes
to the Township Engineer an approved plot plan, site plan or subdivision
plan as the case may be for the proposed filling project, the permit fee, and
a performance guarantee if not covered elsewhere. Such guarantee shall be
a certified check in the sum of two hundred ($200.00) dollars made payable
to the Township of Edison to guarantee performance by the applicant of
the terms and conditions of this section, such funds to be released upon
inspection of the fill project and approval thereof by the Township Engineer
as having been done in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
Township Engineer shall have a period of thirty (30) days from receipt of
the application within which to issue or deny the license application.
a. Select fill for septic installation and/or repair certified to be such by a
New Jersey licensed engineer; or
b. Routine landscaping activities that do not require in excess of ten (10)
cubic yards of approved soil material conducted in connection with
residential use not subject to any other permitting requirements set
forth in the Code of the Township of Edison. Any materials used in
activities permitted herein shall nevertheless conform with all
applicable, local, State and Federal regulations.
§ 32-2.2 EDISON CODE § 32-2.5
AO:812
§ 32-2.5. Supplemental Specifications for Fill Operations with
Approved Soil Material. [1999 Code § 15.32.210]
In addition to applicable site plan and subdivision requirements, and the
requirements of this section, the placement of approved soil material shall
be performed and maintained in the following manner:
§ 32-2.6. Approved Soil Material Quality. [1999 Code § 15.32.220;
Ord. No. O.1965-2017]
Any approved soil material to be brought into the Township must be tested
at the source for compliance with the Soil Ranking Criteria found in N.J.A.C.
7:26F, Appendix C, Table 1, in accordance with subsection 32-2.3, and
evaluated by a State Certified Laboratory; further:
§ 32-2.7. Responsibility for Obtaining Permits. [1999 Code
§ 15.32.230]
Responsibility for obtaining a permit for approval to deposit approved soil
material is with property owner.
§ 32-2.8. Duration of Permit. [1999 Code § 15.32.240]
Each permit issued under the terms of this section shall be valid only for the
location(s) described in the permit and for a period of six (6) months from
the date of issuance, subject to renewal.
§ 32-2.9. Violations and Penalties. [1999 Code § 15.32.250]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter I, Section 1-5. Every day that a violation continues after due notice
a. All sediment and soil erosion controls approved by Freehold Soil
Conservation District must be in place and maintained for the duration
of the project;
b. No approved soil material that would result in the stream
encroachment or interference with wetland areas is permitted; and
c. Dust control shall be affected as needed by spraying of the exposed fill
material and adjacent surface.
a. All expenses connected with such testing are to be borne by the
recipient of the fill;
b. The Township Engineer shall have the authority to order additional
reports or inspections as it may deem necessary and appropriate; and
c. Acceptance or rejection of any approved soil material is to be made by
the Township Engineer according to this section and any additional
rules or regulations it may from time to time enact.
§ 32-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-2.9
AO:813
has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 32-3. SOIL DISTURBANCE.26
§ 32-3.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 15.32.260]
This section shall apply throughout the entire area of the Township, so as
to preserve trees and woodlands from unjustifiable destruction; to preserve
soil from erosion and sedimentation; and to protect the use and transfer of
topsoil, all for the general well-being of the residents of Edison Township
and neighboring downstream areas.
§ 32-3.2. Permit Required for Clearing, Cutting, Leveling, Grading
and Disturbing Soil. [1999 Code § 15.32.270]
Except as otherwise provided herein, no land in the Township in excess
of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be cleared and left barren of
vegetative protection, whether that protection consists of trees as defined
herein, saplings, shrubs or grasses; and no such area shall otherwise be
disturbed in the soil by bulldozing, earth moving, filling, leveling or other
grading, laying of pipe or cable, or otherwise by any person, association,
corporation, or public agency without a land disturbance permit first having
been obtained as provided in this section.
§ 32-3.3. Exemptions. [1999 Code § 15.32.280]
Exempted from the provisions of subsection 32-3.2 shall be the following:
a. Gardening for home consumption.
b. Agricultural use of land under a farm program approved by the
Freehold Soil Conservation District or otherwise likely not to result in
excessive erosion and sedimentation.
c. Construction of a single-family dwelling with accessory structures
approved under the Township Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, not
causing land disturbance of more than five thousand (5,000) square
feet, provided the same is not part of a subdivision in the process of
being developed or in which building lots are being sold by a developer,
except that such a dwelling would not be exempt if located on a slope of
ten (10%) percent or more or within fifty (50) feet of a stream or flood
hazard area as defined in Chapter XXXI, Natural Area Protection, and
Chapter XXXIII, Flood Damage Prevention and Protection, or standing
bay of water or swamp.
d. Any of these exemptions, however, may be voided wherever and
whenever the appointed officer deems that the activity does or likely
would cause soil erosion and sedimentation contrary to the purpose of
26.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 25, Trees.
§ 32-2.9 EDISON CODE § 32-3.3
AO:814
§ 32-3.4. Application for Permit Where Subdivision and/or Site Plan
or Building Permit Approval is Required. [1999 Code § 15.32.290]
An application for approval of a site plan, subdivision or for a building
permit, that adequately shows the land disturbance that would result and
plans for prevention or erosion and sedimentation and for disposal of
topsoil, shall be considered to constitute also an application for a land
disturbance permit, and no additional application for such a permit shall
be required. Applications for subdivision, site plan approval or a building
permit that under State law would fall within the purview of the Freehold
Soil Conservation District shall be referred to that agency for certification
of satisfactory plans for control of soil erosion and sedimentation and for
inspection to see that those plans are carried out. The land disturbance
permit and the building permit shall not be issued until certification of
the erosion and sedimentation plans has been received from the Soil
Conservation District. Those applications that fall within the purview of
the Soil Conservation District shall be reviewed also by the Township for
assurance that control of erosion are included and for all other measures
that could relate to the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents
of the Township, including preservation of trees and the use and disposition
of topsoil.
§ 32-3.5. Application for Land Disturbance Permit Not Involving
Site Plan and/or Subdivision Approval or Building Permit. [1999
Code § 15.32.300]
An application for a land disturbance permit shall be required where site
plan and/or subdivision approval or a building permit is not involved. All
applications for land disturbance permits not involving site plan and/or
subdivision approval or a building permit shall be ruled upon by the
appointed officer in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such
permits shall be required for but not limited to the following:
Applications for land clearing, grading, or filling, cutting out new streets or
roads or widening established thoroughfares that are under the jurisdiction
of the municipality, establishing surface drainage systems, and laying sewer
line, water lines, or underground utility lines through open space, fields,
and woods where there is no pavement or managed lawn to be readily
restored.
this section in which case the appointed officer shall require the
submission of plans to correct for said erosion and sedimentation.
e. The Township of Edison shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section for purposes of soil removal, soil importation and soil
disturbance.
§ 32-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-3.6
AO:815
§ 32-3.6. Contents of Application for Land Disturbance. [1999 Code
§ 15.32.310]
All applications for land disturbance permits other than those submitted
in connection with subdivision or site plan approval, shall include the
following:
a. The name of the applicant, the locations of the property on which the
land would be disturbed, including the sheet, block, and lot numbers on
the tax map, and the purpose for the disturbance.
b. The location and description of existing natural and man-made features
of the site and of adjacent areas. Natural features to be described shall
include trees and other vegetation, topography, soils, geology, and
drainage. Representation of topography shall include a contour
drawing with intervals of one (1) foot where slopes are three (3%)
percent or less; two (2) feet where slopes are more than three (3%)
percent but less than fifteen (15%) percent; and five (5) feet where
slopes exceed fifteen (15%) percent. Soil information shall include a
print or transcript from the soil survey of Middlesex County, obtainable
from the Freehold Soil Conservation District. Besides marshes, ponds,
streams, and flood areas, as well as related soil information, drainage
data shall include where, if anywhere, surface water comes onto the
property from adjacent lands and where, if anywhere, it flows from the
property to which the application applies onto adjacent property.
Drainage data shall include also man-made surface drains, such as
ditches and culverts with information on their dimensions or capacities,
and it shall likewise show systems of man-made underground drainage.
c. Location and description of proposed changes in the site, including
changes, if any, in the form and percent of slope and in drainage.
d. Plans for control of soil erosion and sedimentation.
e. A schedule of the sequence of installation or application of planned
measures for control of soil erosion and sedimentation, as related to the
progress or the project, including the starting and completion dates.
f. Separate erosion and sedimentation control plans for each proposed
final section of the tentative plans.
g. All proposed revisions of required data submitted to the appointed
officer for approval with copies provided for the Township Engineer and
the Environmental Commission.
h. The use to be made of the topsoil.
§ 32-3.6 EDISON CODE § 32-3.7
AO:816
§ 32-3.7. Subdivision Approval or Building Permit. [1999 Code
§ 15.32.320]
In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a
land disturbance permit the appointed officer shall consider the following
factors:
§ 32-3.8. Review and Approval. [1999 Code § 15.32.330]
a. Retention of natural vegetation wherever practicable.
b. Disturbance over areas no larger than are reasonably necessary.
c. Exposure of land to erosion for as little time as appears reasonable.
d. Treatment and use to be made of topsoil.
e. Seeding, sodding, mulching, or use of other stabilizing measures to
protect exposed areas during construction and at other times of land
disturbance. Seeding and other vegetative measures shall be evaluated
according to specified varieties of seed, fertilization, and other
treatments.
f. Use of temporary measures when permanent measures will not be
completed in a short period of time, as within thirty (30) days.
g. Diversion, vegetative buffers, mulching, sodding, or other measures to
check or to divert runoff and to gather sediment from runoff by
interrupting slopes, by blanketing waterways, or by checking in some
other way the flow of water and the movement of soil.
h. Retention of rainfall on site, to the extent practicable, for recharge of
ground water and lessening the risk of flooding.
i. Control of increased runoff resulting from modified soil and surface
conditions from the construction, according to the Township Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinance.
j. Retention of sediment on site to the maximum extent feasible.
k. Installation of diversions, sediment basins, and other control measures
prior to any on-site disturbances except the disturbance that is
necessary for the construction of said measures.
l. Control of erosion and sedimentation over all aspects of a project and
during all stages from beginning through the completion.
m. Assurance of lasting stabilization of the soil after construction.
a. Applications for tree removal and land disturbance permits involving
the issuance of subdivision, site plan and/or a building permit shall be
processed during and by the regular procedures for review of said
subdivision, site plan and/or building permit applications. When all
requirements under this section have been met, permits for the activity
§ 32-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-3.8
AO:817
§ 32-3.9. Performance Guarantee. [1999 Code § 15.32.340]
The appointed officer may require Performance Bonds according to size and
nature of projects to be administered by the Township according to this
section for preservation of trees, control of erosion and sedimentation, and
disposal of topsoil.
§ 32-3.10. Inspections. [1999 Code § 15.32.350]
shall be issued. If a building permit is denied, the tree removal and land
disturbance permits pertaining thereto shall be denied. No building
permits shall be issued without the issuance of any permits required
under this section.
b. Applications for tree removal and land disturbance permits not
involving the issuance of subdivision, site plan approval and/or building
permits shall be reviewed by the Environmental Commission.
Recommendations from the Environmental Commission which shall not
be binding shall be forwarded to the appointed officer within fifteen
(15) days of the receipt of the application by the Commission. In the
absence of said recommendations the appointed officer shall grant or
deny said application in accordance with this section.
c. All approved tree removal and land disturbance permits not issued in
conjunction with subdivision, site plan approval and/or building permit
shall expire at the end of six (6) months from the date of issuance unless
extended on application for an additional six (6) month period.
d. An environmental impact assessment pursuant to the Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinance may be required on any application for tree
removal or land disturbance, with or without a building permit.
a. The Township shall provide for inspection of projects involving
preservation of trees and control of soil erosion, sedimentation, and
disposal of topsoil. To this end, the Township may enter into working
agreements with the Soil Conservation District for sharing in the
inspections of projects certified by the District. All other projects for
which conservation permits are required according to this section shall
be made subject to inspections by the Township at any time. The
inspector shall certify that installation and practices are or are not in
compliance with performance principles and standards prescribed by
this section and with any specific requirements that have been stated as
conditions of approval of the application. With projects for which
Performance Guarantees have been posted, the applicant shall be
required to have a certified plan and permit on site during construction
or other operations and to show the same to any agency or agent of the
Township or the Soil Conservation District whenever requested to do
so.
b. The Appointed Officer may issue a stop operations order if a project is
not being executed in accordance with the certified plan, whether that
§ 32-3.8 EDISON CODE § 32-3.10
AO:818
§ 32-3.11. Fees. [1999 Code § 15.32.360]
§ 32-3.12. Appeals. [1999 Code § 15.32.370]
Whenever the appointed officer shall deny any application for a permit, the
applicant may appeal the denial to the Township Council by filing a written
notice of appeal with the Township Clerk within ten (10) days after receiving
written notice of the denial of such application. The Township Council shall
thereafter hold a public hearing on the matter in accordance with rules
plan is one certified and administered by the Soil Conservation District
or one administered wholly by the Township. This provision is in
accordance with the State Soil Erosion and Sediment Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
c. As stated in Section 11 of the State Soil Erosion and Sediment Act, no
certificate of occupancy for a building shall be issued by the Township
unless there has been compliance with the provisions of a certified plan
for permanent measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation in
accordance with this section. A formal report of such compliance must
be filed with the municipal agent authorized to issue certificates of
occupancy, and a copy of the report shall be sent to the Soil
Conservation District.
d. The Township may, within thirty (30) days after date of a report of such
compliance, release in whole or in part any Performance Bond it is
holding, depending upon the Township's assessment of need to
withhold all or a portion of the bond to assure full compliance with
requirements and adequate maintenance of the facilities.
a. With a Building Permit, Subdivision or Site Plan Approval:
1. For all applications to be certified by the Soil Conservation District:
(a) The fee required by the District shall be paid, which fee shall
be paid directly to the District unless, by a special working
agreement between the District and the Township, the
Township would receive said fee on behalf of the District.
(b) Also an additional Township fee may be required for Township
participation with the District in enforcing this section, the
amount of said fee to be determined.
2. With a Building Permit but not for Certification by the Soil
Conservation District: ten ($10.00) dollars.
3. Without a Building Permit, Subdivision or Site Plan Approval - Fifty
($50.00) dollars for one (1) acre; ten ($10.00) dollars for every acre
over one (1) acre and up to and including twenty (20) acres; five
($5.00) dollars for every acre and fraction thereof over twenty (20)
acres.
§ 32-3.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-3.12
AO:819
or procedures to be established by the Township Council and may modify,
affirm or reverse the decision of the appointed officer.
§ 32-3.13. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 15.32.380]
Any person, partnership, association, organization, company, firm,
corporation, industry, public agency, legal entity, or other party violating
or causing to be violated any of the provisions of this section, shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 for each
violation of this section. Each and every day such violation continues shall
be considered a separate and distinct violation.
Violations subject to the jurisdiction of the Soil Conservation District will be
subject to such penalties as the District might levy.
§ 32-3.14. Authorization of Entry. [1999 Code § 15.32.390]
Each application for tree removal or land disturbance permit shall be
deemed to be authorization by the applicant for the appointed officer,
the Township Engineer, the Environmental Commission, the Department
of Planning and Zoning, the Soil Conservation District, and the Bureau of
Forestry of the State, or a representative of any one of them, to enter
upon the land referred to in the application for inspections contemplated
by this section, for both consideration of approval and review of operations
if approval is granted. If the applicant is not the owner of the land, said
applicant shall furnish with the application a sworn authorization from the
owner for such entry.
Chapter 33
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1999
Code §§ 15.36.010—15.36.180.
§ 33-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 33-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and the Municipal Council
of the Township of Edison, Middlesex County, New Jersey does ordain as
follows.
§ 33-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
§ 32-3.12 EDISON CODE § 33-1.2
AO:820
§ 33-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 33-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No.
O.1739-2010]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard, which increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. Protect human life and health;
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard;
h. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the end of initial
construction;
§ 33-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-1.4
AO:821
§ 33-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application:
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Township Engineer's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or VO
Zone on the community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a
one (1%) percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth
of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one (1%) percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a one (1%) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended, through its design and construction,
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a nonbasement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 33-1.4 EDISON CODE § 33-2
AO:822
columns (post and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD or FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
two-tenths (0.2) foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or:?Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
c.
§ 33-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-2
AO:823
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
(1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2)
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured
at the longest horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
§ 33-2 EDISON CODE § 33-2
AO:824
stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the
structure either before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage,"
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 33-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 33-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No.
O.1739-2010]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Edison, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
Any project for improvement of a structure existing violations of State
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
§ 33-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-3.2
AO:825
§ 33-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
The areas of special flood hazard for the areas of special flood hazard for the
Township of Edison, Community No. 340261, are identified and defined on
the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
§ 33-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated
in Chapter I, Section 1-5 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township
of Edison from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 33-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No.
O.1739-2010]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 33-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Middlesex
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated July 6, 2010.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Middlesex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as sown on Map Index—Map Number 34023CIND0A, and
panel numbers 34023C0032F, 34023C0034F, 34023C0039F,
34023C0041F, 34023C0042F, 34023C0043F, 34023C0044F,
34023C0051F, 34023C0052F, 34023C0053F, 34023C0054F,
34023C0061F, 34023C0062F, 34023C0063F, 34023C0064F,
34023C0131F, 34023C0132F, 34023C0151F, 34023C0152F; whose
effective date is July 6, 2010.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at
the Office of the Township Engineer, 100 Municipal Blvd., Edison, New
Jersey, 08817-3302.
§ 33-3.2 EDISON CODE § 33-3.5
AO:826
§ 33-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No.
O.1739-2010]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township, any officer
or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 33-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 33-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No.
O.1739-2010]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
33-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Township Engineer and may include but not be limited to;
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under State
statutes.
a. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 33-5.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 33-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-4.2
AO:827
§ 33-4.2. Designation of the Local Floodplain Administrator. [Ord.
No. O.1739-2010]
The Township Engineer is appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 33-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Township Engineer.
[Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
Duties of the Township Engineer, as the Local Floodplain Administrator,
shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 33-5.3a are met.
b. Use of Other Base Floodway Data . When base flood elevation and
floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
33-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Township Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or
other source in order to administer subsection 33-5.2a, Specific
Standards, Residential Construction, and 33-5.2b, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level,) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement;
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures.
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 33-4.1c;
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
§ 33-4.2 EDISON CODE § 33-4.3
AO:828
§ 33-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulations Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection 33-4.4.
f. Issuance of Flood Zone Letters. Flood Zone Letters will be prepared by
the Office of the Township Engineer, Department of Planning and
Engineering, Division of Engineering, when requested in writing and
payment of an application fee in the amount of twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars, payable to the Township of Edison, is made by the applicant for
each letter request made. Flood Zone Letters will be issued based upon
the review of the flood zone information identified under subsection
33-3.2.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by the Township
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Township Engineer in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Municipal Council
of the Township of Edison, as provided in this chapter.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
§ 33-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-4.4
AO:829
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 33-4.4a4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Township Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided
that the items in (a)—(k) subsection 33-4.4a4 have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
§ 33-4.4 EDISON CODE § 33-4.4
AO:830
§ 33-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 33-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required.
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
33-4.4a4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
§ 33-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-5.1
AO:831
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
§ 33-5.1 EDISON CODE § 33-5.1
AO:832
§ 33-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 33-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 33-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings, having a total net area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding, shall be provided.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation.
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities:
1. Either:
(a) Elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; and
(b) Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified
in feet (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified).
And, require adequate drainage paths around structures on
§ 33-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-5.2
AO:833
§ 33-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. O.1739-2010]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
33-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
Chapter 34
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
2. Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in subsection 33-4.3c2(b).
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 33-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 33-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 33-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths (0.2) of a
foot at any point.
§ 33-5.2 EDISON CODE § 33-5.3
AO:834
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
This chapter is consistent with all relevant sections of N.J.D.E.P.'s
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8. (Ord. No.
O.1692-2009§ I)
§ 34-1. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
§ 34-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 2]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Edison, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 34-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 2]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Means waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Means any physical or nonphysical connection
that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Edison, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJO141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Means nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U. S. C. § 1317 (a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — Means a conveyance
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Edison or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Means a permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Means water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
§ 33-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-1.2
AO:835
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Means any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Means water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that run off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 34-1.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 2]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Edison any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 34-1.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 2]
This section shall be enforced by the Department of Health and Human
Services, Department of Planning and Engineering and Department of
Public Works of the Township of Edison.
§ 34-1.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 2]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-2. IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
§ 34-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 3]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Township of Edison, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 34-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 3]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — Means a conveyance
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
§ 34-1.2 EDISON CODE § 34-2.2
AO:836
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Edison or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Means water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runoff the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 34-2.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 3]
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Edison is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 34-2.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 3]
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
c. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
h. Flows from firefighting activities.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
1. Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
2. Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications, Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
§ 34-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-2.4
AO:837
§ 34-2.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 3]
This section shall be enforced by the Edison Township Police Department,
Department of Health and Human Services and Department of Public Works
of the Township of Edison.
§ 34-2.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 3]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
section, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two
thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-3. LITTER CONTROL.
§ 34-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 4]
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Township of Edison, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 34-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 4]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein.
LITTER — Means any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap
or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Means a container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 34-3.3. Prohibited Acts and Regulated Activities. [Ord. No.
O.1611-2008§ 4]
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 34-2.4 EDISON CODE § 34-3.3
AO:838
§ 34-3.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 4]
This section shall be enforced by the Edison Township Police Department
and Department of Health and Human Services of the Township of Edison.
§ 34-3.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 4]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-3A. REFUSE CONTAINERS/DUMPSTERS.
§ 34-3A.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 2]
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for dumpsters
and other refuse containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater
to be covered at all times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or
otherwise discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to
the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of
Edison and/or the waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 34-3A.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 2]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Edison or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
b. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle, or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this section.
§ 34-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-3A.2
AO:839
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 34-3A.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 2]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Edison.
§ 34-3A.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 2]
§ 34-3A.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 2]
This section shall be enforced by the Edison Township Division of Police,
and Department of Health and Human Services of the Township of Edison.
§ 34-3A.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 2]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-4. PET WASTE.
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 34-3A.2 EDISON CODE § 34-4.1
AO:840
§ 34-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 5]
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Township of Edison, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 34-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 5]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein.
IMMEDIATE — Means that the pet solid waste is removed at once, without
delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Means any person who shall possess, maintain, house
or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — Means a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Means waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Means placement in a designated waste receptacle,
or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
§ 34-4.3. Requirement for Disposal. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 5]
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 34-4.4. Exemptions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 5]
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 34-4.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 5]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Edison Township
Police Department and Department of Health and Human Services of the
Township of Edison.
§ 34-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-4.6
AO:841
§ 34-4.6. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 5]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-5. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 34-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 6]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of Edison, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 34-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 6]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein.
FEED — Means to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Means all animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 34-5.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 6]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the Township of Edison, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers, or feral cats as part
of an approved Trap-Neuter-Release program).
§ 34-5.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 6]
§ 34-5.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 6]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-6. CONTAINERIZED YARD WASTE.
a. This section shall be enforced by the Edison Township Police
Department, Department of Health and Human Services and
Department of Public Works of the Township of Edison.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 34-4.6 EDISON CODE § 34-6.1
AO:842
§ 34-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 7]
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the Township of Edison, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 34-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 7]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein.
CONTAINERIZED — Means the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Means leaves and grass clippings.
§ 34-6.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 7]
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of
yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall
be deemed in violation of this section.
§ 34-6.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 7]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by Department of Public
Works, Department of Health and Human Services and the Edison Township
Police Department.
§ 34-6.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 7]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-7. YARD WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM.
§ 34-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-7.1
AO:843
§ 34-7.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 8]
The purpose of this section is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Township of Edison, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 34-7.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 8]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein:
CONTAINERIZED — Means the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Means leaves and grass clippings.
§ 34-7.3. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 8]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is prohibited within the
Township of Edison. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the party
responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the yard waste
from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this section.
§ 34-7.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 8]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by Department of Public
Works, Department of Health and Human Services and the Edison Township
Police Department.
§ 34-7.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 8]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
§ 34-8. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS FOR MAJOR
AND MINOR DEVELOPMENTS.
This section is consistent with all relevant sections of NJDEP's Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8.
§ 34-8.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
§ 34-7.1 EDISON CODE § 34-8.1
AO:844
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through or low impact techniques shall be explored before
relying on structural Best Management Practices ("BMPs"). Structural
BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater
management strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural
strategies include both environmentally sensitive site design and
source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or
from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be
developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature,
and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the
established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "minor
development" and "major development," as defined in subsection
34-8.2.
c. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to the development of any
individual lot that meets the definition of "minor development" as
defined in subsection 34-8.2.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or. subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
3. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Edison.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this section are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
§ 34-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.1
AO:845
§ 34-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — Means the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and
CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Means those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — Means the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Means a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Means an agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management
plans and implementing ordinance(s). The County review agency may either
be:
A County planning agency; or
A County water resource association treated under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if
the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — Means the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Means a State Development and Redevelopment
Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Means a person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include,
but not necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements,
creation and development of project design and preparation of drawings
and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two (2)
or more parcels, the construction. reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 34-8.1 EDISON CODE § 34-8.2
AO:846
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development means: any activity that requires a State permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — Means a geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Means a neighborhood designated
by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with"
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Means an area or feature which
is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — Means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT — Means any development that creates less than
five hundred (500) square feet of new impervious area and disturbs less
than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of land.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Means a surface that has been covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Means the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Means any "development" that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose
of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or
movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Means any development that results in the
creation of between five hundred (500) square feet and ten thousand eight
hundred and ninety (10,890) square feet of new impervious area or one that
disturbs between one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet and
forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet of land area.
MUNICIPALITY — Means any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — Means an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Means a chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen
or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
§ 34-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.2
AO:847
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Edison, or political subdivision of this State subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works.
POLLUTANT — Means and include both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants.
RECHARGE — Means the amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Means the lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur
or has occurred.
SOIL — Means all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PAI) — Means an area delineated on the State Plan
Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended
to be the focus for much of the State's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Means the geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Means water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface,
or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage
facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Means an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry, (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Means any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
§ 34-8.2 EDISON CODE § 34-8.2
AO:848
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Means water flow on the surface of the ground
or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Means a flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Means a neighborhood given priority access to State resources through
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — Means a zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Means previously developed portions
of areas: (1) Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PAI), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes; (2)
Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes; (3) Designated as Urban
Enterprise Zones; and (4) Designated as Urban Coordinating Council
Empowerment Neighborhoods.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to
its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — Means an area that is inundated or saturated
by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 34-8.3. General Standards. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
a. Design and Performance Standards for Exempt Developments.
1. Any project meeting the definition of "exempt development" shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section.
b. Design and Performance Standards for Minor Developments.
1. Water Quality. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be
installed in accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey.
2. Rate/Volume Control. Seepage pits or other infiltration measures
shall be provided with a capacity of three (3) inches of runoff for
each square foot of new impervious area. Stone used in the
infiltration devices shall be two and one-half (2 1/2) inches clean
§ 34-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.3
AO:849
§ 34-8.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9; Ord. No. O.1692-2009§ II]
stone and a design void ratio of thirty-three (33%) percent shall be
used. The infiltration measures shall be designed with an overflow
to the surface which shall be stabilized and directed to an existing
stormwater conveyance system or in a manner to keep the overflow
on the developed property to the greatest extent feasible. If the
new impervious surface is not roof area, an equivalent area of
existing roof may be directed to the infiltration system. This shall
be permitted where the existing roof is not already directed to
infiltration devices.
c. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures for Major Developments.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in subsection 34-7.4. To the maximum extent practicable,
these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this section apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with subsection 34-8.10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of subsection 34-8.4f and g.
§ 34-8.3 EDISON CODE § 34-8.4
AO:850
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet, provided that
the access is made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsection 34-8.4f and g may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means.
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of subsection 34-8.4f and g to the
maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of subsection 34-8.4f and g existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under subsection 34-8.4d3 above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of subsection 34-8.4f and g that were not achievable
on site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsection
34-8.4f and g shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at subsection 34-8.4e
into the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural
measures incorporated into the design of the project. If the
applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph 2 below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify
the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
§ 34-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.4
AO:851
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy subsection 34-8.4e3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under subsection 34-8.4e2(i)(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means
§ 34-8.4 EDISON CODE § 34-8.4
AO:852
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see subsection
34-8.4e3(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (noncurbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two (2) or more clear spaces) shall have
an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection 34-8.4g1 are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one (1) of the
following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8)
inches long and one and one-half inches wide (this
option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
§ 34-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.4
AO:853
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection 34-8.4g1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in subsection 34-8.4f
and g shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 34-8.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This paragraph contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at subsection 34-8.5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain one hundred (100%) percent of the
average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
§ 34-8.4 EDISON CODE § 34-8.4
AO:854
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the
2-year storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area,", or to
projects subject to paragraph (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products, industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
§ 34-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.4
AO:855
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at subsection 34-8.5, complete
one (1) of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10- and
100-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80 percent,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (3)
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at subsection 34-8.2 shall be
submitted to Freehold Soil Conservation (see subsection 34-8.7b3
for review and consideration in accordance with the requirements
of this section and any applicable Soil Conservation District
guidelines for stormwater runoff rate and erosion control. For the
purposes of this section, "agricultural development" means land
uses normally associated with the production of food, fiber and
livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land
§ 34-8.4 EDISON CODE § 34-8.4
AO:856
for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of
agriculturally related products.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by eighty (80%) percent of the anticipated load
from the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional one-quarter (1/4) acre of
impervious surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff
in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for
TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge
specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement.
The water quality design storm is one and one-quarter (1.25)
inches of rainfall in two (2) hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume
of runoff may take into account the implementation of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
§ 34-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.4
AO:857
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 34-8.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in subsection
34-8.7. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one (1) BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty (80%) percent TSS reduction for a site, the
applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS
reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs,
and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90%
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90%
Extended Detention Basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration Structure 80%
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See subsection 34-8.6c.
Sand Filter 80%
Vegetative Filter Strip 60% to 80%
Wet Pond 50% to 90%
4. If there is more than one (1) on-site drainage area, the eighty (80%)
percent TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the subareas converge on site in which case the
§ 34-8.4 EDISON CODE § 34-8.4
AO:858
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in subsection 34-8.4f and g.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in subsection 34-8.7.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one (1) of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
§ 34-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.4
AO:859
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than one hundred fifty (150) feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or centerline of the waterway where the bank
is undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharge outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area requires stabilization
measures to comply with the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then those measures must
comply with the "Standard for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey" established under the Act and may be
placed within the special water resource protection area,
provided that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five (95%) percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
§ 34-8.4 EDISON CODE § 34-8.4
AO:860
§ 34-8.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to subsection 34-8.4g8 has been approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
subsection 34-8.4g8 shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area as defined in subsection
34-8.4g8(a)(1) above. In no case shall a stream corridor
protection plan allow the reduction of the Special Water
Resource Protection Area to less than one hundred fifty (150)
feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection 34-8.4g8 does not apply to the construction of one
(1) individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at subsection 34-8.5a1(a) and the Rational
and Modified Rational Methods at subsection 34-8.5a1(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five (5) years without
interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one (1)
§ 34-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.5
AO:861
§ 34-8.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
land cover have existed on the site during the five (5) years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with
the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations.
In addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
§ 34-8.5 EDISON CODE § 34-8.6
AO:862
§ 34-8.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No.
O.1611-2008§ 9]
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of
the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the
water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the
diameter of the orifice or one-third (1/3) the width of the weir, with
a minimum spacing between bars of one (1) inch and a maximum
spacing between bars of six (6) inches. In addition, the design of
trash racks must comply with the requirements of subsection
34-8.8b.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
subsection 34-8.8.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
subsection 34-8.4 of this section.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of subsection 34-8.4 of this section, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at paragraphs 1 and 2 below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
§ 34-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.7
AO:863
§ 34-8.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Freehold Soil Conservation District, 4000 Kozloski Road, P.O.
Box 5033, Freehold, New Jersey 07728-5033, (732) 683-8500.
a. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
(6) inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
§ 34-8.7 EDISON CODE § 34-8.8
AO:864
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two (2) inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
subsection 34-8.8c a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two (2) steps. Each step shall be
four (4) to six (6) feet in width. One (1) step shall be located
approximately two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the
permanent water surface, and the second step shall be located
one (1) to one and one-half (1 1/2) feet above the permanent
water surface. See subsection 34-8.8d for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
§ 34-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.8
AO:865
§ 34-8.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, County or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at subsection 34-8.9c below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit five (5) copies, unless part of a Board
Application, which will require submission via Board requirements,
of the materials listed in the checklist for site development
stormwater plans in accordance with subsection 34-8.9c of this
section.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
§ 34-8.8 EDISON CODE § 34-8.9
AO:866
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this section.
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of two hundred (200) feet
beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of
1"=200' or greater, showing 2-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of subsections
34-8.3 through 34-8.6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be
to describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
§ 34-8.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.9
AO:867
§ 34-8.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9; Ord.
No. O.1692-2009§ III]
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post development conditions for
the design storms specified in subsection 34-8.4 of this section.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of subsection 34-8.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in subsection 34-8.9c1 through c6 of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in subsection 34-8.10c of this section
shall comply with the requirements of subsection 34-8.10b and c.
b. General Maintenance.
§ 34-8.9 EDISON CODE § 34-8.10
AO:868
1. The Design Engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules, cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 34-8.10b2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance
plan and any future revisions based on subsection 34-8.10b7 below
shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on
which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 34-8.10b2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders. Such person shall report his
findings to the Municipal Clerk annually, by February 1st of the
following year.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 34-8.2b2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
§ 34-8.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.10
AO:869
§ 34-8.11. Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the following penalties: two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars per
occurrence as determined by the Department of Planning and Engineering.
§ 34-8.12. Effective Date. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9; Ord. No.
O.1692-2009§ IV]
deed as needed. Such person shall report his findings to the
Municipal Clerk annually, by February 1st of the following year.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 34-8.10b2 above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by subsections 34-8.10b6 and
b7 above.
9. The requirements of subsection 34-8.10b3 and b4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved
by the Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance
and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses
to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or
County may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost
thereof to the responsible person.
c. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
a. Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the municipal stormwater
plan and ordinance(s), the municipality shall place the plan and
ordinance(s) on its website and notify the NJDEP, the Freehold Soil
Conservation District and State Soil Conservation Committee, or:
1. Submit a copy of the approved municipal stormwater management
plan and ordinance(s) to the NJDEP; and
§ 34-8.10 EDISON CODE § 34-8.12
AO:870
§ 34-8.13. Severability. [Ord. No. O.1611-2008§ 9]
If the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this
section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section,
subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this section.
§ 34-9. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
§ 34-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 3]
The purpose of this section is to establish the requirements for the
retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with
repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities
on private property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such
as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Edison so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 34-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 3]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Edison or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
film, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
2. Provide notice of such approval to the Freehold Soil Conservation
District and State Soil Conservation Committee and, upon request,
submit a copy of the approved plan and ordinance(s).
§ 34-8.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-9.2
AO:871
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 34-9.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 3]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
(1) single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding
the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 34-9.4. Design Standard. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 3]
Storm drain inlets identified in Section 34-9.3 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
subsection 34-9.4c below.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection 34-9.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following rates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater
than 0 5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two (2) or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than
§ 34-9.2 EDISON CODE § 34-9.4
AO:872
§ 34-9.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 3]
This section shall be enforced by the Department of Planning and
Engineering of the Township of Edison.
§ 34-9.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. O.1801-2012§ 3]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars for
each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
Chapter 35
TOWNSHIP OF EDISON REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
§ 35-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF AGENCY. [Ord. No. O.1626-2008§ 1]
Pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1,
et seq., (the "Redevelopment Law") and the Local Authorities Fiscal Control
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-1, et seq., (the "Authorities Fiscal Control Law"), the
Township hereby creates a body corporate and politic to be known as the
seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two (2.0) inches across
the smallest dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8) inches long
and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting- facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 34-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-1
AO:873
"Township of Edison Redevelopment Agency" (the "Agency") which shall
constitute a redevelopment agency contemplated and provided for in the
Redevelopment Law, as an agency and instrumentality of the Township.
§ 35-2. COMMISSIONERS. [Ord. No. O.1626-2008§ 1]
a. Pursuant to the Redevelopment Law, there shall be seven (7)
commissioners of the Agency to be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Township Council. Commissioners shall each
serve for a term of five (5) years; except that the first of these
appointees shall be designated to serve for the following terms:
One (1) for a term of one (1) year;
One (1) for a term of two (2) years;
Two (2) for terms of three (3) years;
One (1) for a term of four (4) years; and
Two (2) for terms of five (5) years.
No more than two (2) commissioners shall be officers or employees
of the Township. Each commissioner shall hold office for the term
of his or her appointment and until his or her successor shall have
been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in the office of
a commissioner, from any cause, shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment, but for the unexpired term. One (1) of
the commissioners shall be a member of the Township Council. A
commissioner who is a member of the Township Council shall serve
for a term of one (1) year. Commissioners shall serve for the terms of
office provided herein and as required under the Redevelopment Law,
specifically, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-11.
b. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of each
commissioner shall be filed with the Clerk of the Township, and that
certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper
appointment of that commissioner.
c. A commissioner shall receive no compensation for his or her services,
but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily
incurred in the discharge of his or her duties of commissioner, including
travel expenses, solely out of the budget for the Agency but only to the
extent funds are available for such costs.
d. The powers of the Agency shall be vested in the commissioners thereof
in office from time to time.
e. Four (4) commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
conducting business and exercising powers and all other purposes.
Action may be taken by the Agency upon the affirmative vote of the
majority, but not less than four (4) of the commissioners present, unless
in any case the bylaws of the Agency shall require a larger number.
§ 35-1 EDISON CODE § 35-2
AO:874
§ 35-3. STANDARD OF DUTY. [Ord. No. O.1626-2008§ 1]
§ 35-4. POWERS. [Ord. No. O.1626-2008§ 1]
f. The Agency shall select a chairman and a vice-chairman from among
the commissioners, and it shall employ an executive director, who shall
serve as its secretary.
a. No commissioner or employee of the Agency shall acquire any interest,
direct or indirect, in a redevelopment project or in any property
included or planned to be included in a redevelopment project, nor shall
be or she have any interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or
proposed contract for materials and services to be furnished or used in
connection with a redevelopment project. If any commissioner or
employee of the Agency owns or controls an interest in, direct or
indirect, any property included or planned to be included in a
redevelopment project, he or she shall immediately disclose the same in
writing to the Agency and the disclosure shall be entered upon the
minutes of the Agency.
b. Failure to disclose such an interest shall constitute misconduct in office.
A commissioner or employee required by this section to make a
disclosure shall not participate in any action by the Agency affecting the
property with respect to which disclosure is required.
c. For inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office, a
commissioner may be removed by the. Township; but a commissioner
may be removed only after he has been given a copy of the charges at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing thereon and has had the
opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. In the event of a
removal of a commissioner, a record of the proceedings, together with
the charges and findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk
of the Township. The executive director of the Agency shall have
attained a degree from an accredited four (4) year college or university,
and shall have at least five (5) years' experience in public
administration, public finance, realty or similar professional
employment. A master's degree in an appropriate program may
substitute for two (2) years of that experience.
d. The executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioners
of the Agency, any may be relieved of his or her duties only after one
hundred twenty (120) days' notice. The executive director shall be the
appointing authority for all or any portion of the employees of the
Agency. The executive director shall assign and supervise employees in
the performance of their duties.
a. The Agency is authorized to exercise all those public and essential
governmental functions necessary or convenient to effectuate the
purposes of the Redevelopment Law, which shall include, but not be
limited to those powers described in Section 22 of the Redevelopment
Law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Agency shall not issue bonds
§ 35-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-4
AO:875
Chapter 36
SUBDIVISIONS AND SITE PLANS
§ 36-1. SHORT TITLE. [1999 Code § 16.04.010]
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the Land Subdivision and Site
Plan Regulations of the Township of Edison.
§ 36-2. STATUTORY AUTHORITY. [1999 Code § 16.04.020]
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 291
of the Laws of 1975, commonly cited and referred to as the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 36-3. PURPOSE. [1999 Code § 16.04.030]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations and standards
to guide land subdivision and site planning in the Township; to promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; to ensure adequate
and suitable streets, water supply, drainage, sewerage facilities and other
necessary utilities, public area and open space, protection from flooding
and conservation of soils; and to promote desirable visual environment and
harmonious arrangement of structures and other improvements.
§ 36-4. DEFINITIONS. [1999 Code § 16.04.040]
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, all definitions set forth in Chapter 37, Zoning, and
Chapter 39, Land Use, are incorporated in full by reference herein.
§ 36-5. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
or notes that are secured by the full faith and credit of the Township
without the approval of the Township Council.
b. The Agency shall be authorized to undertake the actions authorized
under Section 8 of the Redevelopment Law in order to effectuate the
purposes of the Redevelopment Law and the terms of the applicable
redevelopment plan.
c. To the extent the Agency is designated a redevelopment entity in
accordance with Section 4 of the Redevelopment Law, the Agency, upon
the adoption of a redevelopment plan for a redevelopment project, may
proceed with the clearance, replanning, development and
redevelopment of the area designated in that redevelopment plan;
provided, however, that the Agency is prohibited from exercising the
power of eminent domain to acquire property from a private landowner
without acquiring the private landowner's consent when the purpose or
result of such acquisition is to sell, transfer, lease, or in any way convey
such property in whole, or in part, to any private entity or party.
§ 35-4 EDISON CODE § 36-5.1
AO:876
§ 36-5.1. Fiscal Impact Statement/Staging Requirement. [1999
Code § 16.08.010]
§ 36-5.2. Certain Subdivisions Exempt from Local Approval. [1999
Code § 16.08.020]
a. Any development application classified as a major subdivision, major
site plan, planned residential development and the urban renewal
district (UR Zone) of Edison Township shall be accompanied by the
following:
1. A fiscal impact statement describing the anticipated demand on
municipal and school district services, including a projection of tax
revenues generated and costs incurred to the Township and the
school district following completion of development. The fiscal
impact statement shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Population Determinant — estimates of the number of school
age children and senior citizens based upon housing type as
well as number of bedrooms.
(b) Cost of providing municipal and school services to the new
development.
(c) Projections of the potential revenues to be produced by the
project including property tax, development fees, building fees
and sewer connection fees.
(d) Comparisons and conclusions based upon revenue and costs.
2. A staging plan setting forth the sequence of development. The
staging plan shall address all of the following:
(a) Creation of self-contained development phases ensuring the
proper completion of roads, utilities, etc., if any phase of the
development plan is subsequently abandoned;
(b) Establishment of a sequence of use development if applicable
within the overall plan to ensure the integrity of the plan;
(c) The submission of adequate guaranties to ensure completion of
improvements located beyond the boundaries of individual
stages of the development but necessary to provide for proper
development in accord with paragraph a1 above.
b. The Planning Board if approving the development application shall set
forth any requirements for timing of development among the various
types of uses and subgroups thereunder of all classes of development
applications cited above and whether some nonresidential uses are
required to be built before, after or at the same time as the residential
uses.
§ 36-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-5.2
AO:877
§ 36-5.3. Waiver of Development Application Requirements. [1999
Code § 16.08.030]
In the performance of review and action upon any development application,
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, may waive
requirements for plat preparation and standard improvement specifications
for any site plan or subdivision application based upon the particular
conditions or factors associated with the tract of land, whether such
conditions are natural or man-made. Such waiver of requirements shall not
apply to fees, performance or maintenance guaranties, inspections or any
development regulation set forth in the zoning ordinance.
§ 36-5.4. Violations; Penalties; Civil Action. [1999 Code § 16.08.040]
If, before final approval has been obtained on a subdivision plan, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which
forms a part of the subdivision, such person shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars; and each parcel, plot or lot
so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation. In addition, if the
streets in the subdivision are not such that a structure on said land in
the subdivision would meet the requirements for a building permit under
Section 3 of the Official Map and Building Permit Act (1963), as amended
and supplemented, the Township Council may institute and maintain a civil
action for injunctive relief and/or to set aside and invalidate any conveyance
made pursuant to such contract or sale. In any such action, the transferee,
purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the
land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession
of the subdivider or his or her assigns or successors, to secure the return
of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search
fee, survey expense and title-closing expense, if any. Such action by the
Township shall not be taken except within two (2) years of the date of the
a. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7, the following class of subdivisions
are exempt from the requirements of local municipal approval as
established by law:
1. Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or subdivision
committee thereof appointed by the chair to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in
size;
2. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
3. Divisions of property upon court order;
4. Conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
b. In all cases involving such exempted divisions, the Planning Board chair
and the Township Clerk shall certify the exemption on the plat, deed or
instrument to be filed with the County Recording Officer.
§ 36-5.2 EDISON CODE § 36-5.4
AO:878
recording of the instrument of transfer, or within six (6) years of application
for a permit to build on the land or application for a certificate of approval
of the subdivision of which the land is a part, if the instrument of transfer
was not recorded.
§ 36-6. MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 36-6.1. Sketch Plat; Application Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 16.12.010]
§ 36-6.2. Payment of Fees with Application. [1999 Code § 16.12.020]
The applicant shall submit to the administrative official, at the time of
submission of an application for subdivision, payment of the application and
review fees as set forth in subsection 39-8.9.
§ 36-6.3. County Planning Board. [1999 Code § 16.12.030]
The applicant shall file the application and all supporting documentation to
the County Planning Board for review and action. The applicant shall certify
to the administrative official that such submission has been properly made
and the date of submission to the County Planning Board.
a. Sketch Subdivision. An applicant shall file with the administrative
official, at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of a regular meeting of
the board, the following documents:
1. Six (6) completed copies of the Township subdivision application
form. The form shall be obtained from the Planning Board
secretary;
2. Four (4) copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions or
easements, either presently affecting the property or proposed in
the subdivision, such as a conservation, drainage or utility right-ofway
or a sight triangle;
3. Ten (10) folded copies of the plat of the proposed subdivision. A
mylar copy shall be submitted upon approval;
4. A certification from the Township Tax Collector that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which the subdivision application is made. This
certification shall be required prior to declaration of a completed
application by the Board.
b. The applicant shall have the right, before submitting a formal
application hereunder, to request and obtain an informal conference
before the Planning Board.
§ 36-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-6.4
AO:879
§ 36-6.4. Approvals Subject to Conditions. [1999 Code § 16.12.030]
Whenever the Board shall grant approval to an application classified as a
minor subdivision subject to conditions, a notation shall be made on the
plat or deed indicating that the approval of the subdivision is subject to
conditions as set forth in the resolution of the Planning Board.
§ 36-6.5. Expiration of Approval. [1999 Code § 16.12.040]
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety (190) days
from the date of approval, unless within such period a plat in conformity
with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision, is filed by the applicant with the County Clerk, the Township
Engineer and the Township Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted
for such filing shall have been signed by the chair and the secretary of the
Planning Board.
§ 36-7. MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 36-7.1. Preliminary Approval. [1999 Code § 16.16.010]
a. Submissions for Preliminary Major Subdivision. An applicant shall file
with the administrative official, at least three (3) weeks prior to the date
of a regular meeting of the Board, the following documents:
1. Six (6) completed copies of the major subdivision application form;
2. Four (4) copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions or
easements, either presently affecting the property or proposed in
the subdivision, such as a conservation, drainage or utility right-ofway
or a sight triangle;
3. (a) Fourteen (14) folded copies of the preliminary plat of the
proposed major subdivision.
(b) A compact disc containing an electronic copy of the
preliminary plat of the proposed major subdivision in PDF
format.
(c) A mylar copy shall be submitted upon preliminary approval.
4. A certification from the Township Tax Collector that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which the subdivision application is made. This
certification shall be required prior to declaration of a completed
application by the Board.
b. The applicant shall have the right, before submitting a formal
application hereunder, to request and obtain an informal conference
before the Planning Board.
§ 36-6.4 EDISON CODE § 36-7.1
AO:880
§ 36-7.2. Final Approval. [1999 Code § 16.16.020]
c. Application and Review Fees. The applicant shall submit to the
administrative official, at the time of submission of an application for a
major subdivision, payment of the application and review fees as set
forth in subsection 39-8.9.
d. County Planning Board Review. The applicant, where required,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, shall make application to the County
Planning Board.
e. Public Notice. The applicant shall give notice of the application at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing on the application. Public
notice shall be accomplished in accordance with applicable sections of
Chapter 39, Land Use. No applicant shall advertise for a public hearing
until the Township administrative officer declares the application
complete.
a. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards for plat submission, the conditions of
preliminary approval and the standards prescribed by the Map Filing
Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
b. Final approval shall be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days
after submission of a complete application or within such further time
as may be consented to in writing by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final
approval, and a certificate of the Township Clerk as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the County
Clerk for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
c. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Township Planning Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
d. Whenever the Planning Board shall grant approval subject to
conditions, a notation shall be made on the plat indicating that the
approval of the subdivision is subject to conditions as set forth in the
minutes of the Planning Board.
e. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer, at the time of
submission of the application for final approval of a major subdivision,
payment of such fee as established in subsection 39-8.9.
f. At the time of filing, nine (9) folded copies of application and plans shall
be submitted. The plan shall comply with requirements of preliminary
§ 36-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-7.2
AO:881
§ 36-7.3. Effect of Final Approval; Selling Before Approval. [1999
Code § 16.16.030]
plat submission (subsection 36-7.1). If final major subdivision is
granted, the applicant shall file two (2) cloth copies and two (2) mylar
copies of the final plan incorporating all conditions of approval,
revisions, etc., as applicable.
a. The zoning requirements and all other rights conferred upon the
developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for
a period of two (2) years after the date of final approval, provided that
the rights conferred by this subsection shall expire if the plat has not
been duly recorded within the time provided by law.
b. For major subdivisions only, if the applicant has followed the standards
prescribed by law, the Planning Board may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one (1) year, but not to exceed three (3)
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the
granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary
approval for the section granted final approval.
c. Recording of Final Approval of Major Subdivision. Final approval of a
major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95) days from the date of the
signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Clerk. The Planning Board
may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an
additional period not to exceed one hundred ninety (190) days from the
date of the signing of the plat.
d. Selling Before Approval; Penalty; Suit by Township.
1. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for
which Township approval is required by this chapter, such person
shall be liable, in addition to any statutory penalty, for suit by the
Township:
(a) For injunctive relief; and
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract of sale.
2. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to the statutory lien upon the portion of the land from
which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of
the developer or his or her assigns or successors, to secure the
return of any deposits made or purchase price paid and also to a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if
any. Any such action must be brought within two (2) years after the
§ 36-7.2 EDISON CODE § 36-7.3
AO:882
§ 36-8. SITE PLANS.
§ 36-8.1. Classification of Site Plans; Exemptions. [1999 Code
§ 16.20.010]
date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of said land or within six (6) years, if unrecorded.
a. Site Plan Exemption. No site plan approval shall be required prior to
issuance of a building permit or change of occupancy permit for any one
(1) of the following:
1. Interior alterations;
2. Exterior building facades, windows and roofing;
3. Single-family and two-family dwellings.
b. Small Additions and Changes.
1. No site plan approval shall be required if the following three (3)
criteria exist:
(a) The proposed addition is less than ten (10%) percent of the
existing gross floor area or one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor area of the building(s) on the lot, whichever the lesser;
(b) No more than ten (10) new parking spaces are required for the
addition or an increase of ten (10%) percent of the existing
number of spaces, whichever the lesser;
(c) A change of occupancy and/or a change of use, other than a
conditional use as set forth in the zoning ordinance; provided,
that the existing building and new use comply with all of the
above and the structure and lot comply with all of the zoning
district regulations, inclusive of parking, buffer areas and
location and size of signs for a change of use and/or change of
occupancy, and a written report from the site plan committee
that adequate landscaping exists or is proposed.
2. Prior to issuance of a building permit for a small addition or
change, the Building Subcode Official shall obtain an opinion in
writing from the Township Engineer that improvements will have
no effect upon drainage and from the Zoning Officer that the
improvement complies with all zoning ordinance standards. No
more than one (1) grant of exemption shall be given to any site.
3. The Construction Official shall submit a report to the Planning
Board each month of all permits issued for development classified
as small additions and changes.
§ 36-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-8.1
AO:883
§ 36-8.2. Preliminary Site Plan Approval. [1999 Code § 16.20.020]
4. For a change of occupancy permit, the Planning Board committee,
for a change of occupancy, shall submit a report to the Board each
month of all permits issued.
a. Site Plan Application. An applicant shall file with the administrative
official, at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of a regular meeting of
the board, the following documents:
1. Six (6) completed copies of the Township site plan application form;
2. Four (4) copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions or
easements presently affecting the property;
3. (a) Fourteen (14) folded copies of the preliminary plat of the
proposed site plan.
(b) A compact disc containing an electronic copy of the
preliminary plat of the proposed site plan in PDF format.
(c) A mylar copy shall be submitted upon preliminary approval.
4. A certification from the Township Tax Collector that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which the site plan application is made. No application
shall be declared complete until certification that taxes are paid.
b. The applicant shall have the right, before submitting a formal
application hereunder, to request and obtain an informal conference
before the Planning Board.
c. Application and Review Fees. The applicant shall submit to the
administrative official, at the time of submission of an application for
site plan approval, payment of the application and review fees as set
forth in subsection 39-8.9.
d. County Planning Board. The applicant shall make application to the
County Planning Board for site plan review and action.
e. Whenever the Planning Board shall grant approval subject to
conditions, a notation shall be made on the plat indicating that the
approval of the site plan is subject to conditions as set forth in the
minutes of the Planning Board.
f. The applicant shall not proceed with installation of the required
improvements until a performance guaranty is posted therefor, and no
building permit shall be issued until trial approval is granted, except to
permit site improvements limited to site grading, drainage facility,
sewer facility and water facility installation, and the issuance of permits
in connection therewith.
§ 36-8.1 EDISON CODE § 36-8.2
AO:884
§ 36-8.3. Final Site Plan Approval. [1999 Code § 16.20.030]
§ 36-9. SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN MAP REQUIREMENTS.
§ 36-9.1. Preparation of Maps for Subdivision Applications. [1999
Code § 16.24.010]
g. Effect of Preliminary Approval. Preliminary approval of a site plan shall
have the same effect as granted to a major preliminary subdivision.
h. Public Notice. If a public hearing is required pursuant to Chapter 39,
Land Use, notice shall be given by the applicant as prescribed in
subsection 36-7.1e.
a. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings
and specifications of the application for final approval conform to the
standards established by subsection 36-11.1 and the conditions of
preliminary approval.
b. Final approval shall be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days
after submission of a complete application to the administrative official
or within such further time as may be consented to in writing by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a certificate of the
Township Clerk as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsements or other evidence of approval herein required.
c. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the Township Planning Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
d. Whenever the Planning Board shall grant approval subject to
conditions, a notation shall be made on the plat indicating that the
approval of the site plan is subject to conditions as set forth in the
minutes of the Planning Board.
e. The applicant shall submit to the administrative official, at the time of
submission of the application for final approval, payment of such fee as
is established in Chapter 39, Land Use.
a. All minor and final major subdivision plans submitted to the Township
shall be drawn by a professional land surveyor licensed in the State of
New Jersey and shall contain his or her signature, seal and license
number. The map shall be prepared on a scale of not more than fifty (50)
feet to the inch and it shall be accurate to a precision of one (1) in ten
thousand (10,000). It shall show all lot lines, distances, bearings and
easements encumbering the same.
§ 36-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.1
AO:885
§ 36-9.2. Compliance with Provisions; Size Requirements. [1999
Code § 16.24.020]
No plat shall be accepted for consideration unless it fully conforms to
the requirements of this chapter as to form, content and accompanying
information and is one (1) of the following standard sizes: eight and one-half
by fourteen (8 1/2 x 14) inches, twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches
or twelve by eighteen (12 x 18) inches as measured from cutting edges. All
prints shall be folded, with the nameplate on the outside, to a size not to
exceed eight and one-half by fourteen (8 1/2 x 14) inches.
§ 36-9.3. Sketch Plat. [1999 Code § 16.24.030]
The sketch plat for either a minor or major subdivision shall be based on
tax map information or some other similarly accurate base, shall be at such
scale (preferably not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch) that the
entire tract which in whole or in part comprises the land to be subdivided
can be shown on one (1) sheet and shall show or include the following
information:
b. This requirement may be waived by the Township for minor
subdivisions, provided that the application is accompanied by a survey
prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor and dated
within one (1) year of the date of application.
a. A key map showing the location of the tract to be subdivided with
reference to surrounding areas and existing street intersections;
b. The location of the tract to be subdivided in relation to any larger tract
of which it is a part;
c. Names and addresses of the owner and subdivider, names of the owners
of all contiguous land as shown by the most recent municipal tax
records and the name and license number of the person(s) preparing
the plan;
d. Existing and proposed elevations based on United States Geological
Survey system to show the natural slope and drainage of the land and
high and low points;
e. All existing streets and streams within the proposed subdivision and,
for subdivisions of four (4) or more lots, within five hundred (500) feet
of the boundaries thereof. All plans shall show existing and, if
applicable, proposed improvements (curbs, gutters, pavements, water
and sewer lines, etc.) within all adjacent streets;
f. The location, size and use of existing buildings, the boundaries and
nature of wooded areas and the location of extensive rock formations
within the proposed subdivision and within two hundred (200) feet of
the boundaries thereof. All plans shall state the existing and proposed
use of land;
§ 36-9.1 EDISON CODE § 36-9.3
AO:886
§ 36-9.4. Preliminary Subdivision Plat. [1999 Code § 16.24.040]
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less
than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. It shall be designed and
drawn by an engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey. All engineering
drawings or elements of the plat requiring professional engineering
expertise shall be signed and sealed by a New Jersey licensed professional
engineer. The plat shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
g. The layout of the proposed subdivision. In the case of a minor
subdivision, all proposed lot lines shall be dimensioned to the nearest
tenth of a foot and bearing of all lines shown;
h. For minor subdivisions only, the general system of drainage of the
subdivision and of any larger tract of which it is a part, together with
full information as to the final disposal of surface drainage;
i. The tax sheet, block and lot numbers;
j. Date, north point and scale.
a. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to all areas
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site;
b. A title containing the tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number,
date, north point, written and graphic scales, and the names and
addresses of the owner, subdivider and the person who prepared the
map;
c. The acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre;
d. A map showing two-foot contour lines over the entire area of the
proposed subdivision. A map shall also show the natural flow of surface
drainage, together with watercourses and an indication of the final
disposal of surface waters. Elevations shall refer to the United States
Geological Survey system. Further, the plat shall show the first-floor
elevation, building corner elevations and finished grade at each lot
corner;
e. The locations and dimensions of existing streets, watercourses, railroad
rights-of-way, bridges, culverts, drainpipes and natural features such as
wooded areas, lakes, ponds and extensive rock formations;
f. All streets, both existing and planned (so far as the latter can be
ascertained) within a distance of five hundred (500) feet of the
boundaries of the subdivision, showing any connections from the
proposed streets in the subdivision thereto and to nearby arterial and
collector streets;
g. The locations and widths of proposed streets, easements and rights-ofway
in the subdivision and the required yard areas for all proposed lots;
§ 36-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.4
AO:887
§ 36-9.5. Final Subdivision Plat. [1999 Code § 16.24.050]
The final plat shall be drawn in waterproof India ink upon mylar or
equivalent of good quality at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals
one hundred (100) feet and in compliance with all the provisions of the
Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. The final plat shall show, be
accompanied by or conform to the following:
h. All proposed lot lines, with the accurate dimensions thereof, and the
areas of all lots greater than one-half (1/2) acre in area shown to within
one one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre;
i. All parcels proposed for either general or limited public use, such as
parks, playgrounds, building sites and the like, with their respective
areas to within one one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre, and a statement
of the purpose of each;
j. Cross sections, center-line profiles and tentative grades of all proposed
streets based on the vertical datum specified by the Township Engineer,
together with full information as to the final disposal of surface
drainage. A drainage study using the rational method shall accompany
the application;
k. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas,
electricity) showing feasible connections to any existing or proposed
utility systems;
l. A copy of any existing or proposed protective covenants or other deed
restrictions applying to the land being subdivided;
m. Tract boundary lines; exterior lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way; street names; land reserved or dedicated to public use;
center-line or road data, with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles and radii and central angles of all curves. All
dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision shall balance and close within the limit of error of one (1) to
ten thousand (10,000).
a. A title containing the tract name, the general location of the
subdivision, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date, north point,
written and graphic scales, acreage of the tract being subdivided, and
the names and addresses of the owner, the subdivider and the person
who made the map;
b. Certification by a land surveyor authorized to practice in the State of
New Jersey as to the accuracy of the details of the plat;
c. Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land, or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement;
d. Tract boundary lines; exterior lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way; street names; land reserved or dedicated to public use;
§ 36-9.4 EDISON CODE § 36-9.5
AO:888
§ 36-9.6. Preliminary Site Plans. [1999 Code § 16.24.060]
Except for small additions or changes, twelve (12) folded copies of the
plat and six (6) copies of the application shall be filed, size twenty-four by
thirty-six (24 x 36) inches. All site plans shall comply with the requirements
hereinafter set forth and shall contain the following information and date if
applicable:
all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves. All
dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision shall balance and close within the limit of error of one (1)
to ten thousand (10,000), and of all lot lines to within one (1) to ten
thousand (10,000);
e. The purposes of all easements and rights-of-way and of all land
reserved for or dedicated to public use, and the proposed use of lots
other than residential;
f. Block numbers and lot numbers in accordance with established
standards and in conformity with the Township Tax Maps;
g. The names, exact locations and widths along the property lines of all
existing or recorded streets intersecting the tract boundaries or lying
within two hundred (200) feet thereof; the delineation, names and block
and lot numbers of all bordering subdivisions; the names of the owners
of all bordering unsubdivided acreage;
h. As-built mylars showing cross sections, profiles and established grades
of streets, approved by the Township Engineer;
i. As-built drawings, plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers
and water mains, approved by the Township Engineer;
j. The location and description of all monuments;
k. A certificate of approval by all other bodies of which approval is
required by law, including but not limited to the Soils Conservation
District, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
Township Health Department, etc.;
l. A certificate by the Tax Collector that all taxes levied against the land
subdivided have been paid to date.
a. The date of the site plan. All revisions shall be noted and dated;
b. A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding areas and existing street intersections;
c. The title of the development, north point, scale, block and lot number,
name and address of record owner and name, address, license number
and seal of the person preparing the site development plan;
§ 36-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.6
AO:889
d. The location of all existing and proposed signs;
e. A scale of not more than fifty (50) feet to the inch. All distances shall be
in feet and decimals of a foot, and all bearings shall be given to the
nearest ten (10) seconds. The error of closure shall not exceed one (1)
to ten thousand (10,000);
f. The names of all owners of record within two hundred (200) feet and
the block and parcel number of the property;
g. Zone boundaries shall be shown on the site plan as they affect the
parcel;
h. Boundaries of the property, building or setback lines and lines of
existing streets, lots, reservations, easements and areas dedicated to
public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way;
i. A copy of any covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions that are
intended to cover all or any part of the tract;
j. All distances as measured along the center lines of existing streets
abutting the property to the nearest intersection with any other public
street;
k. The location of existing buildings which shall remain and all other
structures such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways, etc., with
spot elevations of such structures. Structures to be removed shall be
indicated by dashed lines;
l. The location of all storm drainage structures and utility lines, whether
publicly or privately owned, with pipe sizes, inverts, grades and
direction of flow; and if any existing utility lines are underground, the
estimated location of the already underground utility lines shall be
shown;
m. Existing contours with intervals of two (2) feet referred to United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and to be indicated by a dashed line.
Where any changes in contours are proposed, finished grades should be
shown as solid lines;
n. The location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas, single trees not in wooded
areas with a diameter of twelve (12) inches or more as measured three
(3) feet above the base of the trunk, and other significant existing
features, including previous flood elevations of watercourses, ponds
and marsh areas as determined by survey. When and where applicable,
the plan shall delineate the flood hazard boundaries;
o. A survey prepared by a licensed surveyor of the State of New Jersey
shall accompany the site plan and shall show the boundaries of the
parcel and the limits of all proposed streets, recreation areas and other
property to be dedicated to public use. The site plan shall be
§ 36-9.6 EDISON CODE § 36-9.6
AO:890
§ 36-9.7. Final Site Plan. [1999 Code § 16.24.070]
accompanied by an architectural rendering and building elevation
plans;
p. All proposed easements and public and community areas; all proposed
streets with profiles indicating grading; and cross sections showing the
width of the roadway, the location and width of the sidewalk and the
location and size of utility lines, according to the standards and
specifications of the Township;
q. The proposed use(s) of land and buildings and proposed location of
buildings, including proposed grades. No site plan shall show future
buildings if the applicant does not intend to apply for a building permit
upon approval of the site plan. However, a site plan application may be
accompanied by an overall development plan for purposes of
information. Plans shall be accompanied by elevations;
r. All means of vehicular access for ingress and egress to and from the site
onto public streets showing the size and location of driveways and curb
cuts including the possible utilization of traffic channels,
channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional width
and any other device necessary to prevent a difficult traffic situation.
The plan shall also show walkways;
s. The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading areas,
showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers;
t. The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and all
sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or sewage disposal
and treatment in conformance with the applicable standards of the
Township and for the appropriate utility company;
u. The proposed location, direction or illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting;
v. The proposed screening and landscaping, including a planting plan
which identifies the type, size and quantity of plantings. All site plans
shall be accompanied by a landscaping plan;
w. The proposed stormwater drainage system is to conform with design
standards set forth hereinafter. All site plans shall be accompanied by a
plan sketch showing all existing drainage within five hundred (500) feet
of any boundary, and all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas,
wooded areas and any other surface area contributing to the
calculations should show methods used in the determination;
x. The method of providing garbage collection is to be indicated and
screening to be provided about all dumpsters.
a. One (1) mylar or equivalent copy, twelve (12) folded black-on-white
prints and three (3) copies of the application form for final approval
§ 36-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.7
AO:891
shall be submitted at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of the
regular Board meeting. Unless the preliminary site plan is approved
without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all changes or
modifications by the Board. The plan shall be drawn in accordance
with subsection 36-9.6, and, further, as-built drawings of all site
improvements to be dedicated to the Township shall accompany the
final site plan submission.
b. The final site plan shall be accompanied by a statement by the Township
Engineer that he or she is in receipt of a map showing all utilities or
extensions thereof in exact location and elevation, identifying those
portions already installed and those to be installed and that the
developer has complied with one (1) or both of the following:
1. Installation of all improvements in accordance with requirements
of this chapter;
2. A performance guaranty in sufficient amount to assure the
completion of all required improvements which are proposed to be
dedicated to the Township for maintenance.
c. Utilities Approval Notice Required. In approving the final site plan, the
Board shall condition such approval upon a notice of approval of plans
for water and sewerage installation from the Township and approval
notices from the Health Department.
d. Performance Guaranty. In approving the final site plan, the Planning
Board shall require that the applicant first furnish a performance
guaranty to be approved by the Board for the purpose of guaranteeing
the completion of the items as set forth in the site plan which will affect
the public interest, such as but not limited to drainage, streets (both
public and private), public recreational areas, shade trees and parking
lots where same are open to the general public or serve multifamily
dwellings. The provisions of this subsection not withstanding, in
approving a site plan for a commercial or industrial structure which is
located within a designated "area in need of rehabilitation or
development" in accordance with this Code and which is subject to a tax
abatement agreement with the Township as authorized by this Code
and N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. "The Five Year Exemption and Abatement
Law," the Municipal Council may require that the performance
guarantees required by this section be provided at the time of the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and only for those on-site
improvements not completed. This subsection shall not apply to any
other performance guarantees or any required for off-site
improvements.
e. Approval Requirements. Planning Board approval of the site plan shall
be granted in the event that the site plan complies with the following
standards and regulations:
1. The applicant has submitted a site plan containing all of the
information and data as provided for in this section.
§ 36-9.7 EDISON CODE § 36-9.7
AO:892
§ 36-10. IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 36-10.1. Improvements Required Prior to Issuance of Certificate
of Occupancy. [1999 Code § 16.28.010]
2. The details of the site plan are in accord with the standards of this
section and of all ordinances of the Township, including the Master
Plan as may be in existence at the time of the application.
3. All parking and traffic problems shall be reasonably resolved.
4. Adequate provisions are made so as to prevent any drainage
problems.
5. Reasonable screening at all seasons of the year of all playgrounds,
parking and service areas from the view of adjacent properties and
streets shall be provided where necessary for the purpose of
protecting the health, safety, general welfare, comfort and
convenience of the public.
6. The location, power, direction and time of any outdoor lighting will
not have an adverse effect upon any properties in adjoining
residential districts by impairing the established character or the
potential use of properties in such districts.
7. The details of the site plan for the authorized use will be such that
the operation will not be detrimental to the public interest.
f. After approval, a mylar or linen copy shall be submitted for signature
and file, to be of a size of no more than twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x
36) inches, and all information appearing thereon shall be in black India
ink. Additional prints as required shall also be submitted after approval.
g. Conditions of Approval. After Planning Board approval of a final site
development plan, the plan shall not be subject to change except for
minor engineering changes approved by the Township Engineer. Any
change in site design subsequent to approval shall be regarded as a
separate plan, and site development plans showing the proposed new
design shall be submitted under the requirements of this section and
shall be separately approved under the provisions set forth herein.
a. Except as provided hereinafter, the developer shall install the following
improvements prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy: street
grading and pavement or other surfacing; gutters, curbs and sidewalks;
shade trees; streetlighting; street signs; water mains, culverts, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers or dry sewers, or other means of sewage
disposal, drainage structures, and all appurtenances to such facilities
properly connected with approved systems of water supplies, sewage,
and stormwater drainage, as the case may be.
b. Such requirements shall take account of the characteristics of potential
development of various parts of the Township as reflected in the
§ 36-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-10.1
AO:893
§ 36-10.2. Off-Tract Improvements. [1999 Code § 16.28.020]
comprehensive land use plan embodied in the zoning ordinance, with
a view to providing safe, convenient and pleasant means for the
movement of traffic appropriate to the streets of the various classes
defined in this title and protecting the public health, safety, comfort
and convenience by provision for the proper distribution of water and
for adequate sewage and stormwater drainage in a manner appropriate
to the existing and prospective type and intensity of development in
various parts of the Township and in arrangements that will not impose
unnecessary financial burdens on property owners or add to the normal
costs of operation of the government of the Township.
c. The standards in this chapter shall be deemed to be in the minimum
standards necessary for any particular development.
d. All improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
specifications contained in this chapter and the adopted standard
specifications and details of the Department of Engineering and
Planning.
e. In a major subdivision for which the use of land is restricted by zoning
to nonresidential uses, a certificate of occupancy permit may be issued
prior to completion of all on-site improvements, provided that adequate
posting of performance guaranties is given. No final certificate of
occupancy for residential and nonresidential buildings shall be issued
until all improvements have been completed and for which a
performance guaranty is posted.
a. Where the need for off-tract improvements is in whole or in part made
necessary by the application of the developer and the installation of the
improvements would confer a benefit upon the development, a
determination of the contribution of the developer for said off-tract
improvements shall be made in accordance with the provisions as
hereinafter set forth, and the performance of the work or the posting of
adequate performance guaranties to ensure installation of the required
off-tract improvements shall be made by the developer.
b. Where the Planning Board has determined the necessity of an off-tract
improvement, it shall forward its recommendation, together with the
estimated cost of the off-tract improvement, to the Governing Body of
the Township. The estimated cost of the off-tract improvement shall set
forth an estimate by which all properties to be serviced thereby,
including the developer's property, shall be benefited thereby. Upon
receipt of the recommendation and report of the Planning Board, the
Governing Body shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt
thereof, make a determination as follows: that the recommended offtract
improvement should not be required of the developer. If the
Governing Body, by resolution, concurs with the recommendation of the
Planning Board in whole or in part, it shall notify the Planning Board of
its recommendation, and the Planning Board shall then, with the aid of
§ 36-10.1 EDISON CODE § 36-10.2
AO:894
the Township Engineer or such other persons who have pertinent
information or expertise, calculate the cost of the improvement and the
amount by which all properties to be serviced thereby, including the
subdivider's property, will be specially benefited therefrom.
c. Manner of Construction. Upon completion of the Planning Board
studies with respect to the cost of the improvement and special benefits
to be conferred, these reports shall be forwarded to the Governing Body
and a determination made by the Governing Body as to whether the offtract
improvement is to be constructed:
1. By the Township as a general improvement;
2. By the Township as a local improvement; or
3. By the developer under a formula providing for partial
reimbursement by the Township for benefits to properties other
than the subdivision.
d. Amount of Contribution. When this has been determined, the developer
may be required to provide, as a condition for final approval of the
development, a bond or a cash deposit to ensure payment to the
Township of one (1) of the following amounts:
1. If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as a
general improvement, an amount equal to the difference between
the estimated cost of the improvement and the estimated total
amount, if less, by which all properties to be served thereby,
including the developer's property, will be specially benefited by
the off-tract improvement;
2. If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as a local
improvement, the estimated amount by which the subdivision will
be specially benefited by the off-tract improvement;
3. If the improvement is to be constructed by the developer, an
amount equal to the estimated cost of the off-tract improvement,
less an offset for benefits to properties other than the subdivision.
e. Determination of Special Benefits. In determining benefits conferred on
properties specially benefited by an off-tract improvement, the
following formula shall, subject to adjustment for peculiar or
exceptional conditions, be used:
1. The development shall be allocated that percentage of one hundred
(100) computed by dividing the development land area by the total
land area benefited by the off-tract improvement.
2. The development shall be allotted that percentage of one hundred
(100) computed by dividing the maximum potential intensity of use
of the development (total square feet of building floor area) by the
maximum potential intensity of use under existing zoning limitation
in the total land area benefited by the off-tract improvement.
§ 36-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-10.2
AO:895
3. In the case of linear improvements, i.e., roads, curbing, sidewalks,
pipes, drains, sewers, drainage easements, etc., the development
shall be allotted that percentage of one hundred (100) computed by
dividing the distance (measured along the course of the off-tract
improvement) from the connecting facility to the farthest abutting
point of the subdivision by the sum of the distance of all intervening
properties, including the developments abutting the off-tract
improvements which shall be apportioned to the developer.
f. When Required. The requirement of appropriate off-tract improvements
and the apportionment of the cost of a portion thereof to the developer
shall, where applicable, be a condition of either preliminary approval or
final approval of a subdivision or site plan. If not imposed as a condition
of preliminary approval, such off-tract improvements and the
apportionment of the cost thereof shall be considered improvements
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which may be imposed at the time of
final approval.
g. Payment of Allocated Cost.
1. The estimated cost of the off-tract improvement allocated to the
developer, if deposited in cash, shall be paid by the developer to the
Township Treasurer, who shall provide a suitable depository
therefor, and such funds shall be used only for the off-tract
improvements serving the same purpose. If such improvements are
not initiated by the Township within a period of ten (10) years from
the date of payment, then funds so deposited shall be returned
together with accumulated interest or other income thereof, if any.
2. In the event the payment by the developer to the Township
Treasurer provided for herein is less than its share of the actual
cost of the off-tract improvements, then it shall be required to pay
its additional share of the cost thereof.
3. In the event the payment by a developer to the Township Treasurer
provided for above is more than its appropriate share of the actual
cost of installation of the off-tract improvements, it shall be repaid
an amount equal to the difference between the deposit and its
share of the actual cost.
4. Before apportioning the cost of off-tract improvements to a
developer, the Planning Board shall notify and afford the developer
an opportunity to be heard thereon at a public meeting. If the
developer shall deem that any of the amounts so estimated by the
Planning Board are unreasonable, it may challenge them and seek
to have them revised in appropriate proceedings brought to compel
development application approval.
5. If the developer and the Township cannot agree with respect to the
developer's appropriate share of the actual cost of the off-tract
improvement, or the determination made by the officer or board
charged with the duty of making assessments as to special benefits,
§ 36-10.2 EDISON CODE § 36-10.2
AO:896
§ 36-10.3. Improvement Standards; Inspection Fee; Responsibility
of Developer. [1999 Code § 16.28.030]
if the off-tract improvement is constructed as a local improvement,
the dispute shall be decided in an appropriate judicial proceeding.
h. Assessment of Properties. Upon receipt from the developer of its
allocated share of the costs of the off-tract improvements, the Township
may adopt a local improvement assessment ordinance for the purpose
of construction and installation of the off-tract improvements based
upon the actual cost thereof. Any portion of the cost of the
improvements not defrayed by a developer may be assessed against
benefiting property owners by the Township. Any assessments for
benefits conferred made against the developer or its successors in
interest shall be first offset by a pro rata share credit of the allocated
costs previously deposited with the Township Treasurer pertaining
thereto. The developer, or his successors in interest, shall not be liable
for any part of an assessment for such improvements unless the
assessment exceeds its pro rata share credit for its deposit, and then
only to the extent of the deficiency.
i. Credit for Work Performed. In the event the developer installs and
constructs an off-tract improvement or any portion thereof, which
improvement is accepted by the Township, then the cost shall be
treated as a credit against any future assessment for that particular offtract
improvement, or portion thereof, constructed by the Township in
the same manner as if the developer had deposited its apportioned cost
with the Township Treasurer, as provided herein.
j. Installation of Improvements by Applicant.
1. At the discretion and option of the Township, the Township may
enter into a contract with the developer providing for the
installation and construction of the off-tract improvements by the
developer upon contribution by the Township of the remaining
unallocated portion of the cost of the off-tract improvement.
2. In the event the Township so elected to contribute to the cost and
expense of installation of the off-tract improvements by the
developer, the portion contributed by the Township shall be subject
to possible certification and assessment as a local improvement
against benefiting property owners in the manner provided by law,
if applicable.
k. Design Standards. Should the developer and the Township enter into a
contract for the construction and erection of the off-tract improvements
to be done by the developer, it shall observe all requirements and
principles of this chapter and other ordinances in the design of such
improvements.
§ 36-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-10.3
AO:897
a. Grading. Grades and cross sections shall be such as to provide for the
disposal of stormwater and such groundwater seepage as may be
encountered, all in accordance with the plans therefor approved at the
time of the approval of the preliminary plat of the subdivision and as
may be required in the field by the Township Engineer as the work
progresses. All underground utilities, drains or other facilities located
within the roadway portion of a street shall be installed prior to the
placing of any road surfacing material.
b. Installation of Street Improvements. All street improvements (i.e.,
pavements, curbs, gutters and sidewalks) shall be installed in
conformance with the Township standards and specifications.
c. Installation of Utilities. Installation of all sewer, water and other
utilities shall be in strict accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Township or other public utility concerned.
d. Street Signs. Appropriate street signs shall be installed at all street
intersections and shall be of a type specified by the Township
Department of Public Works.
e. Monuments. Monuments of prescribed size and shape shall be located
and installed in accordance with State statutory requirements (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.11).
f. Topsoil Replacement; Seeding. Topsoil shall not be removed from the
site. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least four (4) inches of cover to all
areas disturbed and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting and
inspected by the Township Engineer.
g. Supervision of Installation of Improvements. All improvements (except
electric, gas and water main extensions to a privately owned utility
company) shall be installed under the supervision and inspection and to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, who shall certify that
Township specifications have been conformed to. The subdivider shall
furnish the Township Engineer with a certification by a licensed
engineer that all grades shown on the preliminary plat have been met.
h. Notification of Township Engineer; Inspection. No construction work
relative to the installation of required improvements shall commence
without the Township Engineer or other responsible officer being
notified at least forty-eight (48) hours before the commencement of the
work. No street underground installations shall be covered until
inspected and approved by the Engineer or other authorized official.
i. Shade Trees. A minimum of two (2) shade trees per dwelling unit shall
be required of all development applications acted upon pursuant to this
chapter. The developer shall pay to the Township seventy ($70.00)
dollars per tree required.
§ 36-10.3 EDISON CODE § 36-10.3
AO:898
j. Any individual private water supply or sewage disposal system shall
conform to the requirements of the Sanitary Code and the Health
Department.
k. Inspection Fees. The applicant shall submit inspection fees pursuant to
subsection 39-8.9.
l. Suspension of Work. Failure of the developer, his or her contractor or
agents to conform to the specifications for installing improvements
indicated above or to conform to the preliminary plat plan as approved
by the Planning Board will be just cause for the suspension of work
being performed, and no person, firm or corporation shall have the
right to demand or claim damages from the Township, its officers,
agents or servants by reason of such suspension by the Township
Engineer.
m. Duty of Developers to Provide Services. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the developer of a major residential subdivision to
provide and pay for the following services until acceptance of a public
street by the Township:
1. Sweeping of streets;
2. Snowplowing;
3. Garbage collection twice per week from the front of each unit;
4. Payment of streetlighting utility cost.
n. Display of Certain Maps, Plans and Documents by Developers
Subsequent to Development Application Approval. All owners,
developers and subdividers having an interest in a major subdivision or
major residential site plan in the Township shall display within all of
their sales offices or the sales office of any broker or agent engaged by
them for the purpose of selling residential dwellings the following:
1. A sales map in the sales office in a place that may be observed and
reviewed by any person(s) calling at the office;
2. A copy, on standard legal size paper, in type or clear print, of any
proposed protective or restrictive covenants and easements to be
applied to all or any portion of the lands within the subdivision;
3. A copy of any board-approved revisions to the site plan or
subdivision and all approved revisions or field changes to
construction plans. Any such revised item or plan sheet shall have a
notation marked on the original document that it is "Revised as of
(date)." The corresponding item or revision sheet shall note
thereon the following. "Original document dated (date) has been
revised on (include all dates)";
4. A public offering statement for the entire development, if the tract
of land is to be developed as a planned unit development, as that
§ 36-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-10.3
AO:899
term is defined in the Municipal Land Use Act and filed with the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs;
5. A copy of the Environmental Assessment Report (EAR) as described
below for any project of ten (10) or more dwelling units.
(a) The project location and vicinity map shall be based on the
Official Tax Map information or some other similarly accurate
base at the scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to an
inch or greater throughout the map, which scale shall be
clearly indicated thereon and shall be consistent in all
directions shown thereon. The map shall show the owner's
approved subdivision and all lands contiguous thereto for a
distance of two thousand (2,000) feet, within or without the
Township.
(b) The map shall clearly show and include for the area within two
thousand (2,000) feet of the development in all directions the
following information:
(1) The location of proposed streets and the layout of
proposed lots within the development,
(2) The location of all State, County and municipal roads in
existence on the date of the final approval of the
development,
(3) The location of all proposed roads as shown on the Official
Master Plan adopted by the appropriate agency of the
State, County or municipality,
(4) The location of all existing structures and wooded areas
within the development,
(5) A designation of the zoning district of property to be
developed and the zoning districts of all contiguous
properties within the distance of two hundred (200) feet,
(6) The location of all railroads and railroad rights-of-way for
public utilities,
(7) The location of all public or private utility plants; the
location of all sanitary landfill and hazardous waste site
operations in existence; location of all Superfund sites as
listed within the Middlesex County Solid Waste
Management Program,
(8) The location of all schools, parks, playgrounds, public
buildings and hospitals,
(9) The location of all streams, ponds and watercourses and a
legend reference as to whether flood hazard insurance is
required,
§ 36-10.3 EDISON CODE § 36-10.3
AO:900
(10) The location of all drainage ditches within the area shown
on the map,
(11) The size of each parcel in the subdivision to be sold,
whether improved or unimproved.
(c) Environmental Risk Audit. An environmental risk audit shall be
conducted for all of the property which is the subject of the
development and which is listed by the Middlesex County Solid
Waste Management Program as a hazardous site. The risk
audit shall include a statement setting forth the use of the
subject property for a period of ten (10) years prior to the
application for development. If there is any evidence of
environmental contamination or any other information which
could affect the health, safety or welfare of persons exposed to
the property, the details of the same shall be set forth based
upon the Middlesex County Solid Waste Management Program
Inventory list and description. The Township may require onsite
soil sampling and water testing based upon data provided.
In the alternative, an ECRA clearance statement by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or a New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approved
ECRA plan may be filed.
o. Site Maintenance During Construction. It shall be the responsibility of
the developer to maintain the entire subdivision in a safe and orderly
condition during construction. Necessary steps shall be taken by the
subdivider to protect occupants of the subdivision and the general
public from hazardous and unsightly conditions during the entire
construction period. These steps shall include, but are not limited to,
the following:
1. Open excavation shall be enclosed by fencing or barricades during
nonconstruction hours. Movable barricades shall be equipped with
yellow flashing hazard markers or other lighting during hours of
darkness.
2. Excavation of previously installed sidewalk and pavement areas
which provided access to occupied buildings in the subdivision
shall be clearly marked with signs and barricades. Alternate safe
access shall be provided for pedestrians and vehicles to the
occupied buildings.
3. Safe vehicular and pedestrian access to occupied buildings in the
subdivision shall be provided at all times.
4. Construction activities which create dust, fumes, odor, smoke,
vibration or glare noticeable on occupied lots in the subdivision and
adjoining properties and streets shall not be permitted.
§ 36-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-10.3
AO:901
5. Construction activities which will result in damage to trees and
landscaping on occupied lots in the subdivision or adjoining
properties shall not be permitted.
6. All locations and activities in the subdivision which present
potential hazards shall be marked with signs indicating the
potential hazard.
7. Unsightly construction debris, including scrap materials, cartons,
boxes and wrappings, must be removed daily at the end of each
working day.
8. Construction traffic control devices shall be provided in accordance
with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Service, with any
subsequent addendum, as approved by the New Jersey Department
of Transportation.
9. Should the developer fail in his or her obligation to maintain the
subdivision in a safe and orderly condition, the Township may, on
two (2) days' written notice, or immediately in the case of hazard to
life, health or property, undertake whatever work may be necessary
to return the subdivision to a safe and orderly condition. The cost
thereof shall be charged against the performance guaranty.
p. Transfer or Assignment of Interest; Contractor Performance
Requirements.
1. Before any subdivider transfers or assigns any of his or her interest
in any tentative or final approval of any subdivision, he or she must
notify the Municipal Council and supply detailed information with
regard to the name, address, principals, type of organization,
competency, experience and past performance of the assignee,
transferee or agent. Notice of such assignment or transfer shall be
given at least ten (10) days prior to its effective date, and the
assignee must be made acquainted with all the conditions of
approval, and the subdivider shall so certify.
2. No contractor, builder, developer or subcontractor shall engage
any personnel in any of the work on constructing any
improvements on the site of the subdivision unless they are
continually supervised by a competent supervisor acceptable to the
Township Engineer.
3. Not less than five (5) days prior to commencing construction of any
improvements on the site, the subdivider or his or her agent shall
provide the Township Engineer with the names, addresses, phone
numbers, and emergency phone numbers of the subdivider and/or a
representative empowered to act for the subdivider and of each
contractor and the supervisor in charge of the construction, setting
forth the aspect of construction for which each is responsible.
§ 36-10.3 EDISON CODE § 36-10.4
AO:902
§ 36-10.4. Performance and Maintenance Guaranties. [1999 Code
§ 16.28.040]
§ 36-11. DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 36-11.1. Design Standards for Storm Drainage, Fire Hydrants and
Streetlighting. [1999 Code § 16.32.010]
a. Performance guaranties shall be required in lieu of installation of all
improvements in an amount equivalent to the reasonable cost of the
proposed installations as determined by the Township Engineer. The
performance guaranty shall include an amount equal to the estimated
cost to cover the planting of shade trees to conform to the standards set
forth in this chapter. The form and sufficiency of bond shall be subject
to approval of the Planning Board Attorney, and the term shall be for the
life of the contract between the Township and the subdivider and any
extension thereof. Performance bonds shall be expressly conditioned
upon the subdivider's full compliance with all Township ordinances and
regulations governing the installation of improvements and utilities and
faithful performance of the terms of agreement with the Township.
b. Maintenance guarantees shall be required in a sum equal to five (5%)
percent of the amount of the original bond for installation of
improvements. The guaranties shall be in a form and sufficiency
approved by the Planning Board Attorney. The maintenance bond shall
be posted upon final release of the performance bond by the Township
and shall be expressly conditioned upon the maintenance by the
developer of all such improvements for a period of two (2) years and
particularly shall guarantee the remedy of any defects in such
improvements which occur during that period. The maintenance bond
shall further guarantee the replacement of any shade trees found not
healthy two (2) years after planting.
c. Prior to the release of a performance guaranty, the developer shall
submit as-built drawings to the Township Engineer.
a. Storm Drainage.
1. Streets adjacent to streets served by storm sewers shall be
designed to adequately continue the existing storm sewer system.
2. Streets not adjacent to streets with existing storm systems shall be
designed to adequately serve the tributary area with the
assumption that the tributary area is fully developed.
3. The estimated runoff for drainage areas shall be computed
according to standards set forth by the Department of Planning and
Engineering.
4. Detention basins may be required (but not limited to) when the
property to be developed requires a major site plan or major
§ 36-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-11.1
AO:903
§ 36-11.2. Additional Design Standards. [1999 Code § 16.32.020;
Ord. No. O.1547-2007§ 1; Ord. No. O.1603-2007§ II; Ord. No.
O.2011-2018]
Subdivisions shall conform to the requirements and principles of design
which are provided for in this section.
subdivision or when it is determined that the receiving drainage
system or outfall is inadequate.
b. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants and control valves shall be installed no
more than six hundred (600) feet apart at proper locations to be
determined by the fire inspector. All fire hydrant locations shall be
properly indicated on all development applications. All fire hydrants
shall be connected to a water supply pressurized and fully operational
for fire suppression purposes prior to the construction, installation or
on-site storage of combustible building materials.
c. Streetlighting. The developer shall install or cause to be installed at his
or her own expense streetlighting facilities in accordance with
Recommended Practice of Street and Highway Lighting of the
Illuminating Engineering Society (latest edition) or other equivalent
and acceptable standards.
a. General. The design of the development shall be in harmony with and in
furtherance of the purposes set forth in this section and shall in all
respects, including the extent, if any, to which access lanes are included
in the layout, be subject to approval by the Planning Board in
accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. The design of
the subdivision shall conform in general to the Master Plan of the
Township and in detail to the Official Map of the Township and the
Official Map of the County, if any.
b. Streets.
1. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the
extension of existing streets where appropriate.
2. In general, minor streets shall be designed so as to discourage
through traffic.
3. In a subdivision abutting an arterial street, either a marginal
service road shall be provided along such arterial street, or the
frontage shall be reversed so that the lots contiguous to such
arterial street will front on an internal street, with a buffer strip for
planting provided along the arterial street, or such other means of
separating through and local traffic shall be provided as the
Planning Board may determine to be appropriate.
4. Right-of-way widths shall be measured from lot line to lot line.
Roadway paving width shall be in accordance with the Edison
§ 36-11.1 EDISON CODE § 36-11.2
AO:904
Township Department of Planning and Engineering's adopted
standard specifications and details.
5. There shall be no reserved strips controlling access to streets
except where control and disposal of the land comprising such
strips has been placed in the Township under conditions approved
by the Planning Board.
6. In a subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street that does
not conform to the width required herein, such additional width
shall be provided along either or both sides of such streets as the
Planning Board may determine to be necessary and reasonable, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 through
40:55D-41.
7. Street Grades.
(a) In general, street grades shall not exceed the following:
(1) On arterial streets: four (4%) percent;
(2) On collector streets: four (4%) percent;
(3) On other streets: ten (10%) percent.
(b) The minimum grade on any street shall be five-tenths (.5%)
percent except for cul-de-sac streets which shall have a
minimum grade of one (1%) percent.
8. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than sixty (60) degrees. Intersecting
street lines at a block corner shall be rounded by an arc having a
radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Where, because of
existing conditions, street intersections are likely to require
channelization for proper traffic control, street lines shall be
designed to accommodate such special treatment as the Planning
Board may specify.
9. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twentyfive
(125) feet shall be avoided where possible.
10. In general, tangents of at least the following lengths shall be
introduced between reverse curves:
(a) On arterial streets: three hundred (300) feet;
(b) On collector streets: one hundred (100) feet;
(c) On other streets: fifty (50) feet.
11. When street lines deflect by more than five (5) degrees, they shall
be connected by curves with the following radii measured to the
center line of the right-of-way:
§ 36-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-11.2
AO:905
(a) On arterial streets: eight hundred (800) feet;
(b) On collector streets: four hundred (400) feet;
(c) On other streets, except alleys: two hundred (200) feet.
12. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient length in accordance with Township Engineering
department standards to provide a smooth grade transition and
proper sight distance.
13. A dead-end street shall terminate in a circular right-of-way (cul-desac)
having a radius of not less than sixty (60) feet and paved to a
radius of not less than fifty (50) feet and tangent whenever possible
to the right side of the street when viewed toward the closed end,
or in a turnaround of such other design as may be approved by the
Planning Board. Dead-end streets shall not be longer than five
hundred (500) feet in length or serve more than fifteen (15)
dwelling units unless the Planning Board finds, taking into
consideration the physical characteristics of the land to be
subdivided and the adjacent land, together with the economically
sound development of the adjacent land, that the most desirable
street design and layout requires a dead-end street longer than five
hundred (500) feet.
14. A dead-end street is a temporary dead-end street as hereinafter
defined. A "temporary dead-end street" shall be a dead-end street
on which no building lots abut the closed end of the turnaround and
for which provision is made for future extension of the street either
by proposed connection to future streets on contemplated
subdivision of adjacent land or by ordinance. Whenever "temporary
dead-end streets" are permitted, provision shall be made for the
subsequent reversion of the excess right-of-way of the adjoining
land.
15. Street names shall not duplicate or nearly duplicate the names of
existing streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have
the same name. Street names for all streets, inclusive of townhouse
and apartment developments, shall be approved by the engineering
department.
c. Blocks.
1. Blocks lengths and widths or the dimensions of acreage within
bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot
required in the area by the zoning ordinance and to provide for
convenient access, circulation and safety of street traffic.
2. Pedestrian walks shall be provided in locations deemed necessary
by the Planning Board across blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet
long, from the closed ends of culs-de-sac and where elsewhere
required for the public convenience, including the provision of
§ 36-11.2 EDISON CODE § 36-11.2
AO:906
walks giving access to schools, playgrounds and shopping centers
without the necessity of crossing traffic thoroughfares. Any such
walk shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet and shall
generally be straight from street to street.
3. For commercial, multifamily housing or industrial use, block sizes
shall be such as to meet all area and yard requirements for such
use.
d. Lots.
1. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.
2. Each lot shall front on an approved street except as provided for
condominium and cooperative ownership or for a fee simple
attached housing development.
3. Where extra width has been provided for the widening of existing
streets, lot measurements shall begin at such extra width line, and
all setbacks shall be measured from such line unless otherwise
provided by the zoning ordinance.
e. Rights-of-Way and Easements.
1. Easements or rights-of-way shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide
for utility installation where required. The locations of such
easements or rights-of-way shall coincide with existing or proposed
lot lines.
2. Where a subdivision is traversed by watercourse, drainage channel
or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both,
as will provide adequate drainage. Such easement shall be for
maintenance and drainage purposes.
f. Areas for Public Use.
1. Such lands shall be so shown and reserved on the plat. Such
designation is intended to precede the reservation of such lands in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44.
2. Natural features in a subdivision, such as trees, brooks, hilltops
and outlook views, shall be preserved wherever possible in
designating the street and lot arrangement.
3. Dedication. All areas proposed to be dedicated may be in one (1) or
more parcels as determined by the Planning Board.
4. Location and Size. The area of the development to be dedicated by
deed to the Township by the owner for public use shall be in such
locations, size or sizes as shall be determined and approved by the
§ 36-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-11.2
AO:907
Chapter 37
ZONING
§ 37-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 37-1.1. Short Title. [1999 Code § 17.04.010]
The short title by which this chapter shall be known shall be the Zoning
Regulations of the Township of Edison.
§ 37-1.2. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.04.020]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Among other purposes,
the provisions of this chapter are intended to provide adequate light, air
Planning Board. Such area or areas to be so dedicated shall be,
in total, at least three (3) acres, have a depth of not less than
two hundred (200) feet and a continuous street frontage of not
less than fifty (50) feet. Every such dedicated public use area
shall be accessible directly from one (1) or more streets within
the subdivision or directly through or over lands owned by the
Township.
g. Shade Trees. A minimum of two (2) shade trees per dwelling unit shall
be required for every development application proposing residential
construction.
h. Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be
required along all public and private street frontages unless specifically
waived by the Technical Review Committee (the "TRC") established
under subsection 39-12.15. Any waiver granted shall be conditioned
upon the payment by the applicant of a sum equal to the cost of
installation of the sidewalks, curbs and gutters which would otherwise
have been constructed. The calculation of the payment shall be based
upon estimates prepared by the applicant's engineer and submitted to
the Township Engineer for review and approval. The funds shall be
deposited into the Township's capital expenditure account and be
realized as general revenue of the Township.
1. Waiver application fee: An applicant seeking a waiver under this
paragraph h. shall file an application with the TRC. The applicant
shall include with the application a fee of two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars, payable to the Township of Edison. The applicant
must attach a land survey of the location in question. The
application must be submitted no later than two (2) weeks before
the TRC meeting scheduled for that month in order for said
application to be considered.
§ 36-11.2 EDISON CODE § 37-1.2
AO:908
and convenience of access; avoid undue concentration of population by
regulating and limiting the use of land, the height and bulk of buildings
wherever erected; to limit and determine the size of yards and other open
spaces; to regulate the density of population; and to conserve the value of
property and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the
Township.
§ 37-1.3. Interpretation of Provisions. [1999 Code § 17.04.030]
§ 37-2. DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; MAP.
§ 37-2.1. Establishment of Districts. [1999 Code § 17.04.040, A;
Ord. No. O.1500-2006; Ord. No. O.1839-2013; Ord. No.
O.1898-2015]
a. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter title or
any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or
other private agreement unless repugnant thereto.
b. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage, or
requires greater lot area or larger yards or other open spaces than are
imposed or required by such rules, regulations or permits or by such
private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
a. Districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is divided into
various zoning districts as follows:
R-AA Residential district
R-A Residential district
R-A (PRD) Residential district
R-A-th Residential district
R-BB Residential district
R-BB-th Residential district
R-B Residential district
R-B (PUD) Residential district
R-B-th Residential townhouse district
L-R Residential district
L-B Local business district
AAR Amboy Avenue Revitalization
C-B General business district
G-BH General business district
G-C Golf course district
§ 37-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-2.1
AO:909
§ 37-2.2. Official Zoning Map.
P-B Planned business district
O-S Office-service district
O-S-1 Office-service district
O-S-2 Office-service district
OSR-C Open space/recreation conservation district
R-I Restricted industrial district
R-I-1 Restricted industrial district
L-I Light industrial district
ROL Research, office and laboratory district
E-1 Educational-institutional district
T-C Township center district
U-R Urban renewal district
AHOZ Affordable housing district
AHOZ-2 Affordable housing district
RRRD Raritan River Revitalization District
MHP Mobile Home Park District
E-1 Educational District 1
T-1 Township District 1
FBZ Flexible Business Zone
a. The aforesaid zones are established by the designations, locations and
boundaries set forth and indicated on the Official Zoning Map to be
located in the office of the Township Engineer (hereinafter referred to
as "Engineer") and maintained by him or her. A map, entitled "official
zoning map," as amended by a plan dated August 18, 2004, prepared by
Schoor DePalma Engineers and Consultants, shall be included with the
Zoning Regulations of Edison Township for informational purposes only.
The official zoning maps of Edison Township shall be on file with the
Township Engineer's office and shall be definitive as to all zone
boundary lines for the Township. The official zoning map consists of a
reproducible duplicate copy of the official tax maps of the Township on
which zone boundaries are drawn. [1999 Code § 17.04.040, B; Ord.
No. O.1500-2006§ 2; Ord. No. O.1516-2006; Ord. No.
O.1530-2006§ 2; Ord. No. O.1670-2008§ I, II; Ord. No.
O.1782-2011; Ord. No. O.1787-2011; Ord. No. O.1792-2011; Ord.
No. O.1839-2013§ 3; Ord. No. O.1849-2013§ 2; Ord. No.
O.1875-2014§ 2]
b. Zoning map amendments. Beginning with Supplement No. 13 zoning
map amendments are listed by ordinance number.
Ord. No. 1898-2015: Creating Flexible Business Zone, FBZ.
§ 37-2.1 EDISON CODE § 37-2.2
AO:910
§ 37-2.3. Amendments. [1999 Code § 17.04.040, C]
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, changes in the district boundaries or
other matters portrayed in the map are made by the Township Council,
Street Block Lot
Current
Zone New Zone
Woodbridge
Ave.
390 51 RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390 47-B RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390 48-A RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390 48-B RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390 49-A RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390 50-A LI FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
396 5.01 AHOZ-2/GB FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
396 10 LI FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390-A 2 RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390-A 3 RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390-A I-A-4 RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390-F 2 RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390-F 3 RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390-F 4 RRRD FBZ
Woodbridge
Ave.
390-N 2 RRRD FBZ
[Note: Tax maps highlighting the above parcels are attached to Ord. No.
1898-2015 as Exhibit A.]
Ord. No. O.1910-2015: Establishes Roosevelt Care Center site as a
Redevelopment Zone. 1 Roosevelt Drive (Block 690, Lots 1 and 2B.)
§ 37-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-2.3
AO:911
such changes shall be made promptly by the Engineer after the amendment
has taken effect as provided by law. For each change in the map, note
shall be made thereon, in the revision box, of the date of revision, zones
affected by the revision and a brief identifying description of the revision.
These changes are to be endorsed upon the map on the effective date of the
amendment.
§ 37-2.4. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. [1999
Code § 17.04.040, D]
Whenever an uncertainty or ambiguity exists as to the true location of any
boundary line of any district (zone) shown on the map, the following rules
shall apply:
§ 37-3. WORD USAGE.
a. Center Lines. Boundary lines indicated as following or approximately
following streets, highways or other public or private ways shall be
construed to follow the center lines thereof as determined by the
Engineer.
b. Platted Lines. A boundary indicated as following or approximately
following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines
as the same appear on the tax map of the Township as revised, unless
its position is shown on the zoning map by a specific dimension
expressing its distance in feet from a street line or other boundary line
as indicated.
c. Municipal Lines. Boundaries indicated as following or approximately
following municipal lines shall be construed as following such
municipal lines.
d. Shorelines. Boundaries indicated as following or approximately
following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, but in
the event of change in the shorelines, shall be construed as moving with
the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as following streams, rivers
or other bodies of water shall be construed as following the center lines
thereof.
e. Parallels and Extensions. All distances between parallel or concentric
lines, or extensions or prolongations of features indicated in
paragraphs a. through d. above, shall be construed to be at right angles
in the case of parallel lines or radial in the case of concentric lines.
f. In the case of uncertainty as to the true location of a zone boundary line
in a particular instance, the determination thereof shall be made by the
Zoning Officer. An appeal may be taken to the board of adjustment as
provided in subsection 39-7.4.
§ 37-2.3 EDISON CODE § 37-3.1
AO:912
§ 37-3.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 17.04.050; Ord. No.
O.1485-2006§ 2; Ord. No. O.1515-2006§ 1]
As used in this chapter:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — Means a separate living unit, as defined by the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, whether or not individual utilities
or access (doorways) are provided.
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — Means a subordinate use or building,
the purpose of which is incidental to that of the main use or building on the
same lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Means the person designated by the
appropriate department director, pursuant to State Statute and Township
ordinance.
APPROVED STAIRWAY — Means a permanent access, conveyance, either
fixed or mechanically operated that allows for the uninterrupted ingress
and egress from or to a space within a structure. Manual pull down stairs
or openings requiring the placement of a ladder device for access are not
considered an approved stairway.
AREA, BUILDING—BUILDING AREA — Means the total of areas of outside
dimensions on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal
building and all accessory buildings.
AREA, LIVABLE OR HABITABLE—HABITABLE OR LIVABLE AREA — Means
the sum of the gross horizontal areas of a floor or several floors of a building
measured between the outside face of exterior walls or from the center line
of walls separating two (2) dwelling units.
ATTIC — Means that part of a building that is immediately below and wholly
or partly within the roof framing not served by an approved stairway for
ingress and egress.
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA — Means an open area, other
than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor
vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or FILLING STATION — Means a
building or place of business where gasoline, oil and grease, batteries,
tires and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to
the motor vehicle trade at retail. See definition of "gasoline station" which
appears herein.
AVERAGE ALIGNMENT — Means a distance which is the total setback
distance of all buildings within two hundred (200) feet on each side of the
lot and within the same block and on the same side of the street, divided by
the total number of houses included within that distance.
BASEMENT AND CELLAR — A basement shall be a story of a building
partially below grade but having more than half its cubic volume above
grade, and a cellar shall be defined as a story of a building partially below
grade and having more than half its cubic volume below grade.
§ 37-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-3.1
AO:913
BOARDINGHOUSE — Means a structure containing two (2) or more
rooming units. See "rooming unit."
BUFFER AREA — Means an open unoccupied area primarily intended to
restrict a clear view, beyond which no improvement is located except for a
driveway to provide property access.
BUILDING — Means any structure having a roof supported by columns,
including dining cars, camp cars or other structures on wheels or other
supports.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Means the vertical distance measured to the highest
point of the building from the original lot grade on a site plan, subdivision
plan, or other plan approved by the appropriate approving authority. The
vertical distance shall be the average measured along the perimeter of the
building, measured at a minimum of four (4) corners of the structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL—PRINCIPAL BUILDING — Means a building in
which is conducted the principal use of the building site on which it is
situated.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY — Means any change of tenancy.
DAY-CARE CENTER — Means a facility designed for and/or used for the
care of more than three (3) preschool children who do not live at the
site. All such facilities shall be required to be licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs or by the Edison Township Department of
Health and Human Services, as applicable.
DECK — Means any extended horizontal accessory structure [not covered
by any type of roof] serving as a floor which covers, partially or fully any
portion of the lot area of a particular lot or track, so long as such floor is
pervious. A deck which is over two (2) feet above grade shall be subject
to the principle building set back requirements of this chapter. See also
subsection 37-4.16 for deck maximum lot coverage requirements.
DRIVEWAY — Means a paved unoccupied space providing access to
property and parking spaces and is accessory to the use.
DWELLING UNIT — Means a permanent building or portion thereof
providing sleeping room(s), bathroom(s) and kitchen facilities for the use of
one (1) or more persons. "Dwelling units" shall be differentiated one from
the other as follows:
Dwelling, Single-Family. Single-family dwelling means a detached
building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family.
a.
Dwelling, Townhouse. Townhouse dwelling means more than one (1)
single-family dwelling contained in a building, wherein each dwelling
unit shall have private parking, storage space and individual systems
and utilities.
b.
Dwelling, Two-Family. Two-family dwelling means a building designed
for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of
each other.
c.
§ 37-3.1 EDISON CODE § 37-3.1
AO:914
ENTERTAINMENT — Means any activity of a cultural, artistic or sporting
nature, or special talent, skill or unique ability demonstrated by a person
or persons for the purpose of enjoyment and/or diversion by the public at
large performed in a specific venue. In no way shall entertainment cater to
prurient interests, be unlawful or of a pornographic nature.
FAMILY — Means one (1) or more persons related by blood or marriage
living together in a single housekeeping unit, or a collective number of
persons living together in one (1) house whose relationship is of a
permanent and distinct domestic character, and cooking as a single
housekeeping unit. This definition shall be deemed to include maids,
servants or other employees of one (1) or more members of the family.
FARM — Means land consisting of five (5) acres or more on which produce,
crops or flowers are grown for profit.
FLOOR AREA — Means the calculated surface area of all floors within a
building, excluding cellars.
FREESTANDING TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — Means any structure
upon which there is located any devices which are used for the transmission
and reception of wave frequencies for the purpose of any wireless
communication [e.g. telephone, radio, internet, paging and/or television].
"Freestanding telecommunication tower" shall not be considered a "public
utility."
GASOLINE STATION or AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Means any
area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating
substances.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Means a comprehensive plan for the
conceptual design and layout of a planned development for a tract of
land more than one hundred (100) acres in size as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.2.
GRANDFATHER CLAUSE — Pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5,
means any nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the structure
so occupied and, subject to the provisions of the Code of the Township of
Edison, any such structure may be restored or repaired in the event of
partial destruction thereof.
HABITABLE ATTIC — Means an attic in a residential dwelling unit that has
a stairway as a means of access and egress from the residential story below
and in which the ceiling area at a height of at least seven (7) feet above the
attic floor is no more than one-third (1/3) of the floor area of the residential
story below. A habitable attic shall not constitute a story unless it exceeds
the limits of the definition herein set forth.
Dwelling, Multifamily. Multifamily dwelling means a building used or
designated as a residence for three (3) or more families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein,
including apartment houses but not including motels.
d.
§ 37-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-3.1
AO:915
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See Building height.
HISTORIC SITE — Means as defined by the Office of New Jersey Heritage.
HOME OCCUPATION — Means an accessory use conducted entirely within
a dwelling by the residents of the dwelling, provided that such use shall be
limited to twenty-five (25%) percent of the total floor area of the building.
Any advertisement shall be demonstrative of the existence of a home
occupation at the address cited within such advertisement.
HOME-BASED OCCUPATION — Means an activity conducted for profit by
residents of a single-family home limited in nature to service and crafts
and not resulting in any exterior alteration of the principal residential
structure nor residential character of the lot and not including any use
which customarily includes clients visiting the site to receive service and
advice, such as but not limited to the practice of medicine, dentistry,
chiropractic, law, real estate, music studios, dance studios, gymnastics,
astrology, automotive repair, appliance repair and any use which generates
vehicular traffic to the site in addition to that normally associated with the
occupants of the property as a single family.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — Means an area of land twenty-five (25) acres or
greater in size having access to an existing or proposed public street
consisting of a minimum number of permitted industrial uses individually
located on lots of a minimum specified size which have been planned as an
integrated development regarding circulation, traffic, parking, utility needs,
landscaping, buffering, aesthetics and land use compatibility.
JUNKYARD (SALVAGE YARD) — Means as defined by the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
LOT — Means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a
plat or otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Means a development plan of one (1) or more lots
which proposes new development or building alteration or addition of less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, requiring no more than
ten (10) new parking spaces for the proposed development; does not involve
coverage by building or impervious lot coverage in excess of that permitted
CORNER LOT — Means a lot at the junction of and fronting on two (2)
or more intersecting streets. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its
depth, and its lesser frontage is its width.
a.
b. LOT LINE — Means any boundary line of a lot.
DEPTH OF LOT — Means the mean distance between the mean front
lot line and the mean rear lot line.
c.
WIDTH OF LOT — Means the width of any lot shall be measured along
a straight line connecting the points of intersection of the required
minimum front setback line and the side lines of the lot.
d.
§ 37-3.1 EDISON CODE § 37-3.1
AO:916
in the Zone Bulk Schedule27; and does not involve any planned development,
any new street or the extension of any off-tract improvements.
MOTEL/HOTEL — Means a use which shall contain at least one hundred
(100) sleeping rooms each having its own bathroom. Such use may also
contain meeting rooms, office and temporary office space, restaurants and
retail-commercial space.
NONCONFORMING USE — Means a use that does not comply with the
regulations of this chapter for the zone in which it is located.
NONRESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA RATIO (NRFAR) — Means the result of
dividing the total floor area of building(s), excluding attics, basement floors
and parking garages, by the total area of the lot.
OPEN PORCH — Means a roofed piazza, porch or porte cochere which
projects beyond the main wall of a building into a yard for which the
columns supporting the roof shall present a minimum of obstruction to the
view and the circulation of air.
OPEN SPACE — Means any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OVERALL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Means a comprehensive plan for the
conceptual design and layout of a planned development for a tract of land
having a minimum size of twenty (20) acres and a maximum size of one
hundred (100) acres and as further specified elsewhere in this chapter.
PATIO — Means a level, landscaped and or impervious surfaced area, also
referred to as a terrace, directly adjacent to a principle building which is
less than two (2) feet above grade and not covered by any type of roof. The
surface upon which a patio is constructed shall constitute pavement for the
purpose of this chapter. A patio which is over two (2) feet above grade shall
be subject to the principle building setback requirements of this chapter.
PRIVATE GARAGE — Means a building or space used as an accessory to the
main building which provides storage space for motor vehicles and in which
no occupation, business or service for profit is carried on.
PUBLIC GARAGE — Means any building, premises or land or part thereof,
other than a private garage, used for the storage, care or repair of motor
vehicles for profit, or where any such vehicles are kept for hire.
RECREATIONAL USE — Means the use of land for leisure time activities,
more specifically, the following land uses:
27.Editor's Note: See Chapter 37, Section 37-63, Area, Yard and Building Requirements.
§ 37-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-3.1
AO:917
RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA RATIO (RFAR) — Means the result of dividing
the total floor area of the residential dwelling (excluding basements and
attics, but including garages) by the total land area of the lot.
RESTAURANT — Means any establishment, however designated, at which
food is sold for consumption on the premises, but normally to patrons seated
within an enclosed building, excluding drive-in restaurants. For purposes
of this definition, the word "diner" shall be synonymous with the word
"restaurant."
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN—DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Means:
ROOMING HOUSE — Means a building or rooming unit wherein occupants
are furnished shelter by the owner or his agent. The term "rooming house"
shall include boardinghouse, tourist home and hostel.
SETBACK LINE — Means a line delineating the limits of a yard as defined
herein.
SHOPPING CENTER — Means a structure used for retail sales having a
gross square foot area of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet or
more.
SIGN — Includes every billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, sign
painted on the exterior surface of a building structure, illuminated sign,
projecting sign, temporary sign, awning and canopy sign and any
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia
used to advertise or promote the interests of any person, firm or corporation
when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public.
Recreation, Commercial—Commercial recreation means recreational
facilities operated as a business and open to the general public for a
fee.
a.
Recreation, Private or Membership—Private or membership recreation
means clubs or recreation facilities operated by organizations and open
only to bona fide members of such nonprofit organizations.
b.
Recreation, Public—Public recreation means recreation facilities
operated as a nonprofit enterprise by the Township, other governmental
entity or any nonprofit organization and open to the general public.
c.
An establishment where patrons are served food, soft drinks, ice cream
and similar confections, inclusive of refreshment stands commonly
called "snack bars," "dairy bars," "hamburger stands" or "hot dog
stands" or similar uses where customers and patrons are served food,
soft drinks or ice cream primarily for their immediate consumption
outside the confines of the building or structure in which the business
is conducted, regardless of whether seats or other accommodations are
provided for the patrons thereto.
a.
No such use shall include drive-through window(s) or other physical
appurtenances designed or used to service customers outside of the
principal structure.
b.
§ 37-3.1 EDISON CODE § 37-3.1
AO:918
SITE — Means a parcel or portion or other division of land which may
reasonably be separated from other parcels or portions of land by
description and which is used or is intended to be used for a separate use,
lease, tenancy or occupancy.
STREET LINE — Means the dividing line between the public right-of-way
and a lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Means any change in the structural
members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE — Means anything constructed the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having
permanent location on the ground, including stationary and portable
carports.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Means a sign authorized by this chapter and
regulated by Section 37-62. All banners, inflatables and the like shall be
classified as temporary signs and require permits.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — Means as defined by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT — Means dwellings developed as a single
entity in which individual dwellings and associate lots if applicable have a
common or public open space as an appurtenance, and further provided
that no more than fifty (50%) percent of all townhouse units contained
within the "townhouse development" shall occupy air space one above
the other as defined in N.J.S.A. 46:8-1 et seq., and further provided that
wherever a unit is proposed to occupy air space above another, a noise and
fire barrier between the two units shall be provided.
TRAILER — Means a piece of apparatus or equipment designed to be
hauled, pulled or moved by a motor vehicle and not classified as a structure.
TRANSFER STATION — Means a facility licensed by the Board of Public
Utilities which license shall be subservient to the Zoning Regulations of
Edison Township.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Means any building, structure or land area
which enables the movement of people between one or more modes of
transportation. Transportation facilities may provide for the movement of
goods ancillary to passenger transportation but shall not involve freight
transhipment as a primary function. Such facilities may include, but not
be limited to, bus terminals, taxi stands, train stations or private charter
services.
TRUCK DEPOT — Means any building, structure or land area used for the
storage of trucks including facilities utilized for the repair and maintenance
of such vehicles, but where no transshipment of freight occurs.
TRUCK TERMINAL — Means an area and buildings where trucks load
and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be
broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other
vehicles or modes of transportation. Truck terminals are transshipment
§ 37-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-3.1
AO:919
facilities which include ancillary storage facilities and parking areas for
trucks awaiting cargo and may include facilities for servicing of trucks.
USE — Means the specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USED CAR LOT — Means any place out of doors where two (2) or more
motor vehicles in operating condition are displayed or offered for sale.
VARIANCE — Means a departure from the terms of this chapter.
WAREHOUSE — Means a facility designed for the storage of goods and
materials and having restricted access to the general public. Such use shall
not include repackaging or assembly of products.
YARD — Means an open space located between the setback line and the
nearest lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except as herein permitted.
ZONE — Includes the word "district."
ZONING OFFICER — Means an official of the Township and/or any other
Township employee who is authorized by this chapter to enforce these
regulations.
ZONING PERMIT — Means a document signed by the Zoning Officer,
which document is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to
the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and which
acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of this chapter, or variance therefrom duly authorized by a
municipal agency pursuant to Sections 39-4 and 39-7. The term "this
chapter," when used herein, shall be construed to refer to all sections and
subsections of the Edison Township Zoning Regulations, unless otherwise
specified.
§ 37-4. GENERAL DESIGN AND USE REGULATIONS.
YARD, FRONT—FRONT YARD — Means an open space extending
across the full width of the lot between the front setback line and
the front lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
a.
YARD, REAR—REAR YARD — Means a yard extending across the full
width of the lot and between the rear line of the lot and the rear yard
setback line. The depth of the yard shall be measured at right angles to
the rear line of the lot or, if the lot is not rectangular, then in the general
direction of its side lot lines.
b.
YARD, SIDE—SIDE YARD — Means an open, unoccupied space between
the side line of the lot and the side setback line and extending from the
front yard to the rear yard or, in the absence of either of such yards,
to the street or rear lot lines as the case may be. The width of a "side
yard" shall be measured at right angles to the side line of the lot.
c.
§ 37-3.1 EDISON CODE § 37-4.1
AO:920
§ 37-4.1. Application of District Regulations. [1999 Code
§ 17.08.010]
This chapter shall apply to the construction, nature and extent of uses of all
buildings and structures and to the nature and extent of the uses of land. No
building, structure or land, or any part thereof, shall be used or occupied
and no building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved, repaired, extended, converted, altered, maintained or used unless in
conformity with all the regulations of this chapter specified for the district
in which it is located. All regulations set by this chapter within each of the
districts shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each
class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 37-4.2. Application to Township. [1999 Code § 17.08.020]
Regardless of whether the Township or any duly constituted Township
board, agency or department is acting in or pursuant to the performance
of a governmental or proprietary function, any municipally owned, operated
or controlled building, structure, facility or use, either existing or proposed,
shall be permitted in any class of zone as set forth in this chapter, it being
the intention of this section that whatever the Township may authorize to do
shall constitute a function of government and that whenever the Township
shall act pursuant to granted authority, it acts as government and not as a
private entrepreneur.
§ 37-4.3. Yards; Fences. [1999 Code § 17.08.030]
a. No yard or any other open space or off-street parking or loading space
required about or in connection with any building or buildings on a lot
for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part
of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly
required for any other building.
b. No existing yard or existing lot shall be reduced in dimension or area
below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created
hereafter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by
this chapter.
c. Except as hereinafter specified in this section, yards and courts
required under this section shall be entirely free of buildings or parts
thereof and parking and storage.
d. Cornices and eaves may project not to exceed two (2) feet over any
required yard or court.
e. Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental or structural features
may project only four (4) inches into any required yard. Any open fire
balcony, fire escape or fire tower may project into a required yard not
more than eight (8) feet.
§ 37-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-4.3
AO:921
f. The requirements of this section respecting yards shall not apply to any
necessary retaining wall or steps or to any fence or wall which is less
than six (6) feet high. In addition to the above, the following shall
control the location, height and design of fences:
1. In any residential zone, no fence shall be permitted in the front
yard area which will restrict visibility and be over four (4) feet high.
No fence shall exceed six (6) feet in height. On a corner lot, the
fencing along the street frontage coincident with the architectural
front door, or main dwelling entrance, shall be subject to the same
restrictions as for a front yard area. On a corner lot, the fencing
along the street frontage not coincident with the architectural front
door, or main dwelling entrance, shall be permitted to extend into
the front yard setback area for a distance equal to one-half (1/2) of
the required front yard setback distance. On a through lot, the
fencing along both street frontages shall be subject to the same
restrictions as for a front yard area. For the purposes of this
section, a "through lot" shall be defined as: an interior lot which
fronts upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries
of the lot, and which runs unobstructed from one street to another.
A corner lot shall not be considered a through lot.
2. No fence shall be constructed of any material or in any manner
which may be dangerous to persons or animals.
3. The finished side of any fence shall face the adjoining properties.
4. In any nonresidential zone, fences shall be permitted in the front,
side and rear yards. A fence in the side and rear yard of an
industrial zone only may exceed six (6) feet but shall not exceed ten
(10) feet in height.
5. All fences, shrubs, trees, etc., must be installed within the property
lines of the lot.
6. On any corner lot, no fence, wall or other structure shall be
permitted within a triangle formed by two (2) sides measured
twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection of the street
right-of-way lines and the connecting of the two (2) points twentyfive
(25) feet in distance from the intersecting point of the street
right-of-way lines.
7. No fence shall be permitted on or about a lot created by subdivision
and/or site plan approval for any townhouse as defined by this
chapter in any residential district or any single detached dwelling
located on a lot which was created as a result of approval of a
planned residential development with the R-A (PRD) zone, except
and unless such fencing was specifically authorized by site plan
and/or subdivision plan approval of a townhouse or planned
residential development. Fencing within such development may be
permitted only after approval of a plan as provided in Chapter 36,
subsection 36-8.1
§ 37-4.3 EDISON CODE § 37-4.3
AO:922
§ 37-4.4. Installation of Fence Adjacent to Residential Use/Zone.
[Ord. No. O.1502-2006]
§ 37-4.5. Accessory Buildings. [1999 Code § 17.08.040]
No accessory buildings permitted by this chapter shall be placed in any
required yard except as specified hereinafter in this subsection:
8. The provision of this subsection notwithstanding, a fence may be
erected in a residential zone up to eight (8) feet in height along the
rear property line of the residential lot when said rear property lot
line borders a nonresidential zone other than the OSC zone.
g. No building or structure shall be located on a corner lot nearer to a
street boundary line than the required front yard as set forth in the
schedule (see Section 37-63).
a. In addition to the regulations of subsection 37-4.3, any applicant for site
plan approval for a nonresidential use upon land which either abuts a
residential zone or residential use lawfully existing thereon, shall install
an eight (8) foot high board-on board fence on said nonresidential
property for the entire length of the property line between the
nonresidential property and said residential zone or use. The
requirements of this subsection are in addition to, and are not to be
interpreted as a substitute for, any buffer area that may be required by
this chapter.
b. No such fence shall be required when a street, rail or utility right-ofway
separates the residential zone or residential-use and the proposed
nonresidential use.
c. Any deviation from the requirements of this subsection shall require a
design waiver from the appropriate board.
a. Within any residential zone, the aggregate ground area covered by
accessory buildings, including the ground area covered by any
projections hereinabove permitted, shall not exceed ten (10%) percent
of the total lot area or thirty-five (35%) percent of the rear yard area,
whichever is the lesser. Within any other zone, the aggregate area
covered by any accessory building(s) shall not exceed fifty (50%)
percent of the rear yard area.
b. No accessory building within any residential zone or business zone shall
be more than fifteen (15) feet or one and one-half (1 1/2) stories,
whichever is the lesser, in height. In all other zones, no accessory
building, including tanks, silos or similar structures, shall exceed the
height of the principal building to which same is accessory. No building
permit for any accessory building shall be issued in any residential zone
until a permit for a dwelling or other permitted principal structure has
been issued and construction started.
§ 37-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-4.5
AO:923
§ 37-4.6. Lot Frontage. [1999 Code § 17.08.050]
§ 37-4.7. Reduction of Open Space Prohibited. [1999 Code
§ 17.08.060]
c. No accessory building shall be located within the required front yard
area.
d. On through lots (any lot running from one street to another), no
accessory building erected in the rear yard shall be nearer the street
line than the minimum distance specified for a front yard setback on
that part of the street which the yard abuts.
e. Any accessory building attached to the main building shall be
considered part of the main building.
a. On any lot running through from one street to another, the front of the
lot shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be considered that frontage
upon which the majority of the buildings in the same block front, but, in
case there has been no clearly defined building frontage established,
the owner may, when applying for a building permit, specify which lot
line is to be considered the front lot line for the purposes of this chapter.
b. In the case of lots fronting on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac street or
fronting upon any other curved street, lot frontage (as distinguished
from lot width) may equal but shall be no less than two-thirds (2/3) of
the required lot width as set forth in the schedule (see Section 37-63),
and further provided that no lot shall have a frontage of less than fifty
(50) feet.
a. No lot shall be so subdivided or reduced in area as to cause any open
space required by this chapter to be less in any dimension than is
required for the zone and lot in question.
b. Where a lot is formed from part of another lot and occupied by a
building, such division shall be effected in such a manner as not to
impair any of the requirements of this chapter with respect to the
existing building or yards and open spaces in connection therewith. No
permit shall be issued for the erection of a new building on a new lot
thus created, unless it complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
c. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking space shall be provided as
specified in Section 37-60 or as otherwise may be required in this
chapter.
d. Access Driveways. Any access driveway to any use shall be deemed to
be accessory to such use. No driveway that is accessory to a business or
industrial use shall be established in any residential zone.
e. Ingress or Egress. No ingress or egress over private roads or private
driveways of Edison Township through districts zoned for residential
uses shall be permitted to or from nonresidential properties.
§ 37-4.5 EDISON CODE § 37-4.8
AO:924
§ 37-4.8. Measurement of Building Height. [1999 Code § 17.08.070]
§ 37-4.9. Minimum Lowest Floor Level. [1999 Code § 17.08.080]
The lowest floor level in a cellar, basement, crawl space or other structure
in any building or structure shall not be less than specified by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or other flood elevation
established by the Township Engineer.
§ 37-4.10. Flood Hazard Protection Area Delineation. [1999 Code
§ 17.08.090]
The standards for control and regulation of land within flood hazard areas
as promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
are incorporated in this chapter.
§ 37-4.11. Site Plan Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.08.100]
a. The measurement shall be made from the mean finished grade of the lot
immediately adjacent to the building foundation.
b. Height limits in this chapter shall not apply to transmission or aerial
towers, masts, flagpoles or chimneys, provided that the horizontal area
of such parts does not exceed one and zero-tenths percent of the
ground area covered by the main building, nor shall the limits apply to
parapet walls not over four (4) feet high for buildings located in
nonresidential zones, and further provided that height limits shall not
apply to roof-mounted heating, air conditioning or other mechanical
equipment, except that such equipment shall not be visible while
standing at ground level and shall be screened by a wall, cover, parapet,
fencing or by other means equal to the height of the equipment to be
screened and such screening shall be in keeping with the architectural
motif of the building.
a. Except as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued for a
building or use or enlargement of any building or use unless a site plan
is first submitted and approved, and no certificate of occupancy shall be
given unless all construction conforms to the approved plan, except that
site approval shall not be required for single-family or two-family
dwellings or for permitted accessory uses incidental to single-family
dwellings.
b. No change of occupancy permit pursuant to Chapter 36, subsection
36-8.1b) for any nonresidential use shall be authorized or permitted
until approved by the Planning Board committee for change of
occupancy.
c. The Planning Board committee, for a change of occupancy, may require,
as a condition of permit approval, the installation of landscaping,
paving, fencing, lighting and building facade renovation.
§ 37-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-4.11
AO:925
§ 37-4.12. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.08.110]
Notwithstanding compliance with specific conditional use standards
hereinafter set forth, no conditional use will be permitted if the use at the
proposed location would be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
§ 37-4.13. Sight Triangles. [1999 Code § 17.08.120]
On a corner lot, with a triangular area, no wall or fence or other structure
shall be erected of a height in excess of three (3) feet, and no hedge, shrub
or other growth shall be maintained at a height in excess of three (3) feet,
except that trees whose branches are trimmed away to a height of at least
ten (10) feet above the curb level shall be permitted. Such triangular area
shall be determined by the intersecting center lines of the streets and a
diagonal connecting points on each street center line seventy-five (75) feet
from the intersection of such street center lines.
§ 37-4.14. Prohibited Uses in All Zones. [1999 Code § 17.08.130;
Ord. No. O.1880-2014]
d. Site plan application and approval shall be required for all parking
areas not accessory to a single-family or two-family dwelling.
a. All uses not specifically permitted by zone or by State or Federal law
are prohibited, inclusive of, but by no means limited to, refineries,
cement manufacturing, slaughterhouses, explosive manufacturing,
adult bookstores, movies and the like and as further prohibited by this
chapter.
b. Drive-through windows or other physical appurtenances designed or
used to serve food to customers.
c. Chemical manufacture for storage or sale of extremely toxic chemicals,
such as but not limited to phosphine, phosgene, stibine, arsine,
hydrogen selinide, methyl isocyanate, chlorine dioxide, chlorine
trifloride, diborane, mercury and chloroform.
d. Hazard or toxic waste disposal, storage and transfer facilities designed
or used for the incineration, disposal, storage or transfer of hazardous
or toxic waste produced off-site.
e. In any approved lot in a zone which permits the construction of a singlefamily
dwelling as the principal structure, it shall be prohibited to
construct more than one (1) such principal structure on that lot.
f. Drilling for natural gas; using the drilling technique of hydraulic
fracturing; exploring for natural gas beyond the reconnaissance phase;
or the treatment, discharge, disposal, or storage of waste from
hydraulic fracturing or any by-product of hydraulic fracturing.
§ 37-4.11 EDISON CODE § 37-4.14
AO:926
§ 37-4.15. On-Site Trailers. [1999 Code § 17.08.140]
The use of trailers or modular office buildings as accessory buildings shall
be temporarily permitted at a site for which a building permit has been
issued for development of land as defined by the Municipal Land Use Law.
Upon completion of the approved project, such trailer or other modular
structure shall be removed from the site unless specifically authorized by
site plan and/or subdivision application approval by the Edison Township
Planning Board. No trailer or modular structure not permanently affixed to
the ground shall be permitted unless approval is granted in accordance with
the Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, Chapter 36. Trailers or modular
buildings used as an accessory building must be approved in accordance
with the Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, Chapter 36. This section
does not apply to recreation or house-type trailers.
§ 37-4.16. Decks and Patios. [1999 Code § 17.08.150]
§ 37-4.17. Private Swimming Pools. [1999 Code § 17.08.170]
Pools shall be located in conformance with the side yard requirements of the
principal structure and shall be located no less than twenty (20) feet from
the rear lot line in the R-AA and R-A zones. In the R-BB and R-B zones, no
pool shall be located less than six (6) feet from any side or rear lot line. No
pools shall be located in the required front yard area.
1. Applicability. The provisions of this paragraph f. shall apply to the
entire municipality of Edison and the Township Code shall be
deemed amended accordingly.
a. All decks or patios as described in this chapter shall comply with
accessory building yard requirements for accessory buildings and with
lot coverage regulations as set forth in the schedule in Section 37-63,
except that for the purposes of this chapter, decks in the R-AA, R-A, RA(
PRD), R-BB and R-B zone districts shall have their own lot coverage
requirements, separate and apart from the requirements for lot
coverage as set forth in Section 37-63 and the schedule attached
thereto. The following maximum lot coverage requirements in the R-AA,
R-A, R-A (PRD), R-BB and R-B zone districts shall apply to decks:
Zone District Maximum Deck Lot Coverage
R-AA 2%
R-A 3%
R-A [PRD] 3%
R-BB 3%
R-B 4%
§ 37-4.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-4.18
AO:927
§ 37-4.18. Private, Nonprofit School. [1999 Code § 17.08.180]
Such uses shall be located on a tract of land of no less than five (5) acres;
and further provided that for each one hundred (100) students permitted
by license of New Jersey Department of Institutions and Agencies or New
Jersey Board of Education, an additional one (1) acre shall be required.
§ 37-4.19. Stables. [1999 Code § 17.08.190]
No structure used for the feeding, care and housing of hoofed animals shall
be located within seventy-five (75) feet of a property line.
§ 37-4.20. Buffer Area Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.08.200]
All construction, alteration or enlargement of nonresidential structures
or multifamily structures shall require a planted buffer area when such
use adjoins single-family dwellings. The purpose of the buffer area is to
provide a visual screen to separate the impacts of nonresidential use and/
or disproportionate building bulk to adjoining single-family residents. The
buffer area may consist of preservation of existing natural mature plant
growth, new plant materials, fencing or any combination of the same to
ensure proper separation of one use from the other. This regulation shall
apply to all districts unless specifically regulated elsewhere by zone district.
§ 37-4.21. Interference with Pipelines. [1999 Code § 17.08.210]
a. Definitions. As used in this chapter:
DISTRIBUTION LINE — Means a pipeline other than a gathering or
transmission line.
GATHERING LINE — Means a pipeline that transports gas from a
current production facility to a transmission line or main.
PIPELINE — Means any conduit through which natural gas, petroleum,
oxygen or other flammable or combustible products or any of their
products is conveyed or intended to be conveyed. The definition of
"pipeline" shall include compressor plants and other facilities
integrated with pipeline operations.
SERVICE LINE — Means a distribution line that transports natural gas
from a common source of supply to a customer meter or the connection
to a customer's piping, whichever is farther downstream, or to the
connection to a customer's piping if there is not a customer meter. The
"customer meter" is the meter that measures the transfer of gas from
an operator to a customer.
TRANSMISSION LINE — Means a pipeline subject to pressures of one
hundred twenty-five (125) or more pounds per square inch gauge, other
than a gathering line, that:
§ 37-4.18 EDISON CODE § 37-4.21
AO:928
§ 37-4.22. Community Residences for Developmentally Disabled and
Community Shelters for Victims of Domestic Violence. [1999 Code
§ 17.08.220]
Transports gas from a gathering line or storage facility to a
distribution line in a storage facility to a distribution center or
storage facility;
1.
Operates at a hoop stress of twenty (20%) percent or more of SMYS
(specified minimum yield strength);
2.
3. Transports gas within a storage field.
b. No building or land disturbance shall be permitted within seventy-five
(75) feet of any distribution, gathering or transmission line, as defined
in paragraph a. above.
c. No building or structure or part thereof which is used for the
manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of corrosive, highly
toxic, oxidizing, pyrophoric, water-reactive, highly combustible,
flammable or explosive materials that constitute a high fire, explosion
or health hazard, including loose, combustible fibers, dust and unstable
material, shall be constructed within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
of any distribution, gathering or transmission line.
d. Exceptions and Exemptions. This subsection shall not apply to:
1. Any building, land disturbance or construction involved in the
crossing of a pipeline to provide access to a property when no other
reasonable access is permitted and the crossing of a pipeline to
provide utility services to a parcel of land;
2. Any work done to any building, land disturbance or construction on
a pipeline by or on behalf of the owner or operator of any pipeline.
e. The approving board may permit the encroachment upon the buffer
area provided for in this subsection upon a demonstration that the strict
application of this section would result in particular and exceptional
practical difficulties or undue hardship caused by reason of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness or shape of the property or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features uniquely
affecting a property or by reason of extraordinary and exceptional
situations uniquely affecting a property or the structures lawfully
existing thereon.
a. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1, no community residence for
the developmentally disabled and no shelter for victims of domestic
violence shall house more than six (6) persons, excluding resident staff,
unless a conditional use permit has been issued by the Planning Board
for the use or conversion to use of a dwelling unit to such a community
residence or shelter.
§ 37-4.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-4.22
AO:929
§ 37-4.23. Performance Standards and Procedures. [1999 Code
§ 17.08.230]
All uses and activities shall comply with performance standards as set forth
in this subsection.
b. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall file an application for
development which shall be the subject of a public hearing at the
Planning Board following the required notice and service requirements
of an application for development as more particularly set forth in
Sections 39-12.5 and 39-12.6. In each case, the decision of the Planning
Board shall be reasonably related to the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the zoning district in which the proposed use is to be
located. Before granting such a conditional use permit, the Planning
Board shall make specific findings of fact including, but not limited to
the following:
1. The proposed area shall be sufficient for the intended purpose;
2. Adequate parking facilities shall be provided;
3. Means of ingress and egress shall be adequate to prevent traffic
hazard, congestion or excessive interference with normal traffic
movement on adjacent public streets and thoroughfares;
4. The building and use shall be appropriately located and designed
and will meet a community need without adversely affecting the
neighborhood;
5. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, no more than fifteen (15)
persons other than resident staff shall be permitted in the
residence;
6. The applicant shall satisfy the Planning Board as to the adequacy of
all items required in an application for site plan approval, including
but not limited to, drainage, illumination, sewerage, landscaping
and all other items required for site plan approval.
a. General Intent. As a condition to approval and as a condition to
continuance of any building, process, installation, production or other
use in an industrial district, the applicant shall supply evidence,
satisfactory to the Planning Board or to its designated representative,
that the proposed building, process, installation, production or other
use will conform fully to all the applicable performance standards. As
evidence of compliance, the Board may require certification of tests by
appropriate government agencies or by recognized testing laboratories,
any costs to be borne by the applicant. The Planning Board may require
that specific types of equipment, machinery or devices be installed or
require specific operating procedures or methods in order to assure
compliance with the applicable performance standards.
§ 37-4.22 EDISON CODE § 37-4.23
AO:930
b. Liquid Wastes. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any
watercourse in the municipality.
c. Industrial Waste. No industrial waste shall be discharged into the public
sewage collection and disposal system unless the appropriate officials
of the Township sewer utility or Middlesex County Sewerage Authority,
whichever has jurisdiction, shall have first investigated the character
and volume of such waste and shall have certified that it will accept the
discharge of the waste material into the system. The applicant shall
comply with any requirements of the utility, including the pretreating of
such wastes, control of pH and other methods of improving such wastes
prior to discharge, as a condition to acceptance by the utility.
d. Noise and Vibration. All uses and activities shall comply with applicable
noise and vibration standards of the State and Federal government,
provided that no use shall cause an increased vibration beyond the
limits of the property on which it is located nor increase the ambient
noise levels present at boundaries of the site nor cause intermittent or
point audible noise or noise vibration to adversely impact adjoining
property.
e. Heat. No process or use shall be permitted that produces heat to the
extent that the temperature has an adverse effect of any kind upon
adjoining properties and uses.
f. Glare. Any process producing intense glare or flashing of lights shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building in such manner that
no discomfort glare shall be disseminated beyond the building. No skyreflected
or indirect glare shall be permitted if any operation is to be
conducted in any area outside of a building except where required for
safety purposes. Lighting of any interior roadway or driveway shall
conform to American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, ASAD
12.1-1963, sponsored by the Illuminating Engineering Society and
published by the United States American Standards Institute. Lighting
of any parking area or of any loading and unloading area shall conform
to the strictest standards described in Recommended Practice for
Outdoor Parking Area Lighting, published by the Illuminating
Engineering Society, with spacing and type of luminaire such that spill
light shall be kept at a minimum objectionable glare to any point
beyond the lot line. Parking and loading and unloading areas that are in
use after dark shall be so situated as to provide maximum shielding and
concealment of lighting from adjoining properties. Lighting of any sign,
building exterior, fountain or decorative fixture shall be placed in such a
manner that it is directed toward the object to be lighted and does not
disseminate glare. The subsection shall not be construed to prohibit
lighting required by police or other enforcement agencies for the safety
and protection of employees and of the general public.
g. Additional Standards and References. In order to satisfy itself that the
applicant will comply fully with all of the applicable performance
standards, the Planning Board or its designated representative may
§ 37-4.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-4.23
AO:931
§ 37-4.24. Architectural Appearance. [1999 Code § 17.08.240]
examine and refer to any or all of the available standards, codes,
regulations and requirements of Federal, State, County, this Township
and recognized professional organizations, associations and societies.
h. Testing Procedures and Technical Assistance. In all cases where the
Planning Board shall deem it advisable to determine whether or not the
facility will be in conformity with the applicable performance standards
or other provisions of this chapter, the Planning Board or its designated
representatives shall require adequate testing procedures and shall
utilize the expert assistance at the expense of the applicant.
a. In all single-family residential developments, no dwelling shall be
similar, alike, coincide or the same in architectural appearance as any
other dwelling within that development, or within three hundred (300)
feet [sight outside] of that dwelling [development].
b. The proposed residential unit shall be of such character, quality or
architectural design and construction materials as will assure that the
proposed structure will be in keeping with the general character of the
neighborhood in which it is located, and that the proposed structure
will have a harmonious visual relationship with the neighboring
residential structures.
c. The floor plans of the affected dwellings need not be different, however,
the dwellings shall differ substantially in the following features:
1. Orientation of house on the lot (e.g., garage location);
2. Landings, porches or other prominent ornamentation on street
façade;
3. Color of all exterior wall veneers to include but not be limited to
siding, stucco and brick;
4. The relative location or type of windows and doors on street
elevation;
5. Color and design of front entry doors;
6. Color and design of window treatments, such as shutters,
keystones, arches and panels;
7. The type of pitch of roof, including roof lines and roof
appurtenances such as dormers, parapet, belfries, skylights and
roof windows;
8. The type of roofing material, or the color thereof, or the pattern.
d. Reversing the layout of the same dwelling without substantial
architectural changes as set forth above does not satisfy the
requirements of this subsection.
§ 37-4.23 EDISON CODE § 37-4.24
AO:932
§ 37-4.25. Mobile Temporary Storage Units. [Ord. No. O.1969-2017]
e. A building permit will be denied to a proposed development consisting
of two (2) or more houses where the proposed development will create
a building or buildings of such dissimilar character and appearance to
those prior existing structures and/or buildings as to destroy the
character of the existing neighborhood.
f. In a multi-unit development, there shall be a minimum of two (2) models
of dwellings that differ in layout as it refers to footprint, setbacks,
elevation, perimeter and room configuration.
g. In any proposed development of two (2) or more attached or detached
single-family homes, there shall be a variety of separate basic house
designs. In no event shall there be less than the following separate
basic designs:
Total Number of Houses in the
Development
Minimum Number of Separate
Basic House Designs
2-10 2
11-20 3
21-30 4
31-40 5
41 and over 5 plus 1 additional basic house
design for every additional 25
housing units
h. Architectural plans shall be submitted when applying for a zoning
permit for appropriate review by the Zoning Officer to determine
compliance with this subsection.
a. Mobile temporary storage units shall be permitted on private property
provided that:
1. No temporary storage unit or units shall be permitted on any
private property in the Township for greater than thirty (30)
consecutive days without a zoning permit, nor shall a temporary
storage unit or units be permitted on a private property for a period
of time to exceed ninety (90) days per three hundred sixty (360) day
period;
2. Temporary storage units shall not obstruct the free flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and shall not be located within a
public right-of-way; and
3. Temporary storage units shall not contain advertising or any other
writing, except to identify the manufacturer or owner of the mobile
temporary storage units.
§ 37-4.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-4.25
AO:933
§ 37-4.26. Exceptions. [Ord. No. O.1938-2016; Ord. No.
O.1969-2017]
No exception shall be made from the Chapter 37, section 37-4, "General
Design and Use Regulations" unless the proposed waiver is reasonable and
within the general purposes and intent of the Chapter 37 and/or the Code,
and/or that literal enforcement of Chapter 37 and/or the Code is impractical
and will exact undue hardship because of the peculiar conditions pertaining
to a certain property and can be granted without substantial detriment to
the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose
of the Township's Master Plan and Zoning Ordinances and redevelopment
plan if applicable.
§ 37-5. through § 37-9. (RESERVED)
§ 37-10. R-AA RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-10.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.12.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
b. All private property owners in the Township seeking to maintain a
temporary storage unit or units upon private property for greater than
thirty (30) days, but in no case greater than ninety (90) days per three
hundred sixty (360) day period, shall first obtain a zoning permit which
shall dictate the location of a temporary storage unit or units on a
property, and which shall also take into account the accessibility, safety
and aesthetics of the temporary storage unit or units in relation to the
subject private property.
a. Single-family detached house;
b. Church, synagogue or other place of worship, including parish house
and school buildings, provided that the lot has a minimum area of three
(3) acres and a width of two hundred (200) feet and further that no
accessory use shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line;
c. Private nonprofit school approved by the State of New Jersey, provided
that said use is located on a lot of three (3) acres or more and has direct
access to a street classified as other than a local access street in the
Master Plan of Edison Township;
d. Private golf courses, provided that the lot has a minimum area of one
hundred (100) acres and that no structure or parking area is located
within one hundred (100) feet of a lot line.
§ 37-4.25 EDISON CODE § 37-10.2
AO:934
§ 37-10.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.12.020]
Accessory uses usually incidental to the above uses, including but not
limited to those specified below. The term "accessory use" shall not include
a business nor any building or unit not located on the same lot with the
principal building to which it is accessory.
§ 37-10.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.12.030]
Private membership recreation facility offering activities limited to
swimming, tennis, racquetball and handball courts, but not to include
commercial use such as banquet hall restaurants open to the general public,
etc., provided that:
§ 37-10.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.12.040]
As specified in the schedule of regulations Section 37-63.
Variable Lot Size Provision. In a major subdivision application, variable
lot sizes may be approved by the Planning Board. The lot sizes may be
varied to the extent that the lots may have areas of not less than thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet each and widths of not less than one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet if a sufficient number of the remainder of the lots
are increased in area so that the average lot size will be not less than
forty thousand (40,000) square feet. The Planning Board, in passing on such
plats, shall consider the physical and structural characteristics, including
a. Private garages, carports and parking areas;
b. Private swimming pools erected in accordance with applicable
Township ordinances and tennis courts;
c. Outdoor barbecue structures and storage sheds;
d. Animal shelters for domestic pets;
e. Private stables, provided that the plot or lot contains an area of not less
than three (3) acres.
a. The use is located on a lot of not less than five (5) acres in size;
b. A planted buffer area of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth and
fencing, or both, shall be required between all parking areas, picnic
areas, playfields and buildings and the adjacent lot lines. This provision
may be waived if natural topography, wetlands or other natural or manmade
features adequately separate the above from adjoining
residentially zoned land;
c. No building shall be located within seventy-five (75) feet of any lot line
nor have a total floor area of more than ten (10%) percent of the lot
area, nor shall any building exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25)
feet in height.
§ 37-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-10.4
AO:935
topography of the land comprised in the subdivision, and determine that
such variation in lot size will provide a better layout of the subdivision
and a better use of the land for building sites that would a uniform lot
size. The subdivider shall submit a plat map showing the development
according to the requirements of the R-AA district as shown in the schedule,
Section 37-63, and another plat map showing the development as modified
in accordance with this subsection. In no event shall the density of
development throughout the subdivision exceed the exact number of lots
that would have been permitted to be built if such development has
proceeded on the basis of forty thousand (40,000) square feet per lot with a
width of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
§ 37-10.5. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.12.060]
Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto, shall
be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60. Not more than twenty
(20%) percent of the required front yard shall be paved for driveways and
parking.
§ 37-10.6. Sign Regulations. [1999 Code § 17.12.070]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-11. R-A AND R-A (PRD) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
§ 37-11.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.20.010]
The following regulations are applicable in the R-A Residential District:
No building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered, except for the following
uses:
a. A single-family detached house;
b. A church, synagogue or other place of worship, including parish house
and school buildings, provided that the lot has a minimum area of three
(3) acres and a width of two hundred (200) feet, and provided further
that no accessory use shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a
lot line;
c. A private, nonprofit school approved by the State of New Jersey,
provided that said use is located on a lot of five (5) acres or more and
has direct access to a street classified as other than a local access street
in the Master Plan of Edison Township;
d. Private golf courses, provided that the lot has a minimum area of one
hundred (100) acres and that no structure or parking area is located
within one hundred (100) feet of a lot line.
§ 37-10.4 EDISON CODE § 37-11.2
AO:936
§ 37-11.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.20.020]
§ 37-11.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.20.030]
Conditional uses shall be the same as in the R-AA district, except that
planned residential development permitting single-family dwellings shall be
subject to standards and requirements set forth in subsection 37-11.1a.
§ 37-11.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.20.040]
Height, area and yard requirements shall be as specified in the Schedule of
Area, Yard and Building Regulations, Section 37-63.
§ 37-11.5. Variable Lot Size Provision. [1999 Code § 17.20.050]
In a major subdivision application to which both public water and sewer
service are to be provided, variable lot sizes may be approved by the
Planning Board. The lot sizes may be varied to the extent that the lots
may have areas of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet each
and a width of not less than eighty-five (85) feet if a sufficient number
of the remainder of the lots are increased in area so that the average
lot size will be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. The
Planning Board, in passing on such plat, shall consider the physical and
structural characteristics, including the topography of the land comprised
in the subdivision, and determine that variation in lot size will provide
a better layout of the subdivision and a better use of land for building
sites than would a uniform lot size. The subdivider shall submit a plat
map showing the development according to the requirements of the R-A
a. Accessory uses shall be the same as in the R-AA district.
b. Home-based occupations, subject to the following:
1. No exterior alteration of the residential structure results which
shows existence of home-based occupation conducted in the
residence.
2. No exterior signage shall be permitted other than as permitted in
subsection 37-62.4h.
3. No more than one (1) full-time employee, in addition to a person(s)
residing at the site, shall be employed at the site.
4. No outdoor storage of materials, equipment, goods or products
shall be permitted.
5. No sale of goods and materials to the general public shall be
permitted at the site.
6. No more than twenty (20%) percent of the habitable floor space of
the dwelling shall be used exclusively for the conduct of a homebased
occupation.
§ 37-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-11.5
AO:937
district as shown in the schedule, Section 37-63, and another plat map
showing the development as modified in accordance with this section. In no
event shall the density of development throughout the subdivision exceed
the exact number of lots that would have been permitted to be built if
such development has proceeded on the basis of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet per lot with a width of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
§ 37-11.6. Open Space Density Modification. [1999 Code
§ 17.20.060]
In order to preserve and protect natural woodlands and waterways, and
further to afford open space area available to future residents and
concurrent with residential development in a major subdivision to which
both public water and sewer service are to be provided, the lot size of one
or more lots may be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and
have a width of lot of less than one hundred (100) feet, but in no event shall
any lot be less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area and have a
width of lot of less than eighty-five (85) feet, if the following conditions and
regulations are met:
§ 37-11.7. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.20.070]
Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto, shall
be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
a. Plat Map. The subdivider shall submit a plat map showing the
development according to the requirements of the R-A district and
another plat map showing the development as modified in accordance
with this subsection.
b. Approval. If lands are proposed to be dedicated to the Township or
homeowners' association, the Planning Board shall condition final
approval upon acceptance of such land by the Township Council or
establishment of a homeowners' association, as the case may be.
c. Dedication. All open space areas of the tract being subdivided shall be
dedicated and conveyed by the owner, in fee simple absolute, by a good
and sufficient deed.
d. Application Requirement. All approvals for such major subdivisions as
permitted hereunder, together with the standards of dedication and
sanitary approval, shall be in accordance with Chapter 36, Subdivisions
and Site Plans.
e. Yard Modification. Yard depths shall be reduced by one (1) foot for each
one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
§ 37-11.5 EDISON CODE § 37-11.8
AO:938
§ 37-11.8. Sign Regulations. [1999 Code § 17.20.080]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-11.9. Planned Residential Development Option. [1999 Code
§ 17.20.090]
Any and all provisions of the Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, Chapter
36, shall constitute the collective development regulations of planned
residential development options.
a. Intent and Purpose. The planned residential development intent and
purposes are:
1. To provide for necessary educational and recreational facilities
conveniently located to such housing;
2. To encourage innovations in residential development so that the
growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety
in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and
more efficient use of open space auxiliary to such buildings;
3. To provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation,
conveniently located to each other;
4. To encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services,
private services in lieu thereof;
5. To lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways;
6. To encourage builders to incorporate land;
7. To provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout
of residential development to the particular demand for housing
and other facilities including the foregoing at the time of
development a manner consistent with the preservation of the
property values within established residential areas to insure that
the increased flexibility of substantive regulations over land
development authorized herein is subject to such administrative
standards and procedures as shall encourage the disposition of
proposals for land development.
b. Location of Planned Residential Development. The provision of this
subsection shall apply only to the RA(PRD) district wherein planned
residential development options are permitted.
c. Development Application Filing Procedure.
1. An applicant may request an informal review of application by the
Board. No fee shall be charged for the review, and no written report
from the Board or its technical or professional advisors shall be
provided.
§ 37-11.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-11.9
AO:939
2. Filing Application. The applicant shall pay all fees and file copies of
plans with the Planning Board. Plans shall be reviewed by technical
and professional advisors of the Board and report to the Board. The
Board, within forty-five (45) days of filing of the application, shall
determine by resolution whether or not the plans are complete as
per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Board, after determination that
the application is complete, shall schedule a public hearing and act
upon said application in accordance with law. All planned
residential development applications shall be made as a
simultaneous major site plan and subdivision application.
d. Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in a planned residential development
may include and shall be limited to:
1. Detached single-family dwellings and accessory structures thereto;
2. Attached single-family dwellings and accessory structures thereto.
For purposes of this section no more than one (1) dwelling shall be
located on a lot and no more than two (2) dwellings shall be
attached one to another; and further provided, that the word
"attached" means common bearing wall(s) and foundation(s) but
shall not be construed to include fencing, decks or other
architectural appurtenances as connecting structural parts;
3. Accessory uses shall be limited to customary and incidental uses
and structures to single-family dwellings; accessory uses shall not
include home offices or occupations.
e. Development Schedule.
1. Planned residential development applications shall comply with the
applicable standards hereafter and all other applicable standards
of this chapter.
2. Development Standards.
(a) Minimum acres: forty (40) acres. [The minimum required area
shall include only lands adjacent or contiguous to each other
under single or combined ownership and located entirely
within the R-A (PRD) District.]
(b) Maximum gross density: four and five-tenths (4.5) acres.
[Gross density shall be calculated by dividing the total number
of proposed lots by the total acreage of the development
application.]
(c) Minimum lot size for detached single-family dwelling: eight
thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet.
(d) Minimum lot width for single-family detached dwelling: eighty
(80) feet.
§ 37-11.9 EDISON CODE § 37-11.9
AO:940
(e) Minimum lot size for attached single-family dwellings: six
thousand (6,000) square feet.
(f) Minimum lot width for attached single-family dwellings: fiftyfive
(55) feet.
(g) Minimum/maximum percentage of single-family detached
homes to total homes: thirty-five (35%) percent/sixty-five (65%)
percent.
(h) Minimum/maximum percentage of single-family attached
homes to total homes: thirty-five (35%) percent/sixty-five (65%)
percent.
(i) Minimum percentage open space: five (5%) percent.
Minimum required open space and public area shall include
all lands, whether to be in common open space, public facility
areas or public areas. Required open space lands shall not
include yard areas of lots in private individual ownership, land
area within the right-of-way of a public or private street and
land area between walkways or sidewalks and buildings
wherein the principal use of said lands is to provide for
pedestrian traffic to and from buildings and parking lots.
f. Development Regulations for Single-Family Detached Homes.
1. The lot size and all other development standards of an adjacent
residential zone shall be the minimum standards of development of
any lot(s) created within a planned residential development which
is adjacent to a residential zone boundary.
2. No lot shall front an existing or proposed street classified as other
than a local access street in the adopted Master Plan of Edison
Township.
3. Except as required above and provided herein, the minimum
development standards for lots shall be as set for the R-B district
except that lot sizes may be varied not to exceed thirty-five (35%)
percent of total lots and that no lots shall have an area of seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or less and provided that
an equal number of lots shall exceed eight thousand five hundred
(8,500) square feet.
4. No detached accessory structures shall be permitted.
5. Floor plans and building elevations shall be submitted of all
proposed housing types.
6. Typical landscaping plans shall be required.
g. Development Regulations for Single-Family Attached Homes.
§ 37-11.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-11.9
AO:941
1. No lot proposed to be developed for an attached single-family
dwelling shall be adjacent or contiguous to a lot located in the R-A
district.
2. No more than two (2) single-family dwellings shall be attached one
to another.
3. The minimum yard-depth requirement shall be as follows:
(a) Front yard depth: twenty (20) feet from a public street right-ofway
or twenty-five (25) feet from the curb of a private street.
(b) One (1) side yard: zero.
(c) One (1) side yard: fifteen (15) feet.
(d) Rear yard: thirty-five (35) feet.
(e) Maximum percentage of lot coverage by building(s): thirty-five
(35%) percent.
4. Accessory Structures.
(a) No attached accessory structures shall have a floor area of
more than eighty (80) square feet or a height of more than ten
(10) feet.
(b) No attached accessory structure shall extend more than six (6)
feet from the side wall of the principal dwelling to which
attached, and, further, such accessory structure shall comply
with side yard requirements for the principal structure.
(c) Any attached accessory structure shall be of the same color as
the principal structure to which attached.
5. No structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height.
6. Floor plans and building elevations shall be submitted of all
proposed housing types.
7. Typical landscaping plans shall be required.
8. All attached single-family dwelling units shall be served by
individual driveways connected to a public or private street. The
driveway shall have a minimum surface area of one hundred sixty
(160) square feet and minimum width of eight (8) feet.
h. Density Modification. To encourage flexibility of housing density, design
and type intended, for a development proposed to be developed over a
period of years, deviations may be authorized from the density or
intensity of use established for the entire planned development. The
Planning Board may allow for a greater concentration of density or
intensity of land use within a section or sections of the development,
whether it be earlier or later in the development, than upon others. The
§ 37-11.9 EDISON CODE § 37-11.9
AO:942
approval of the Planning Board of a greater concentration of density or
intensity of land use for any section to be developed must be offset by a
smaller concentration in any completed prior stage, or there must be an
appropriate reservation on the remaining land by a grant of easement
or covenant in favor of the municipality.
i. Open Space Regulations.
1. In reviewing applications for a planned residential development the
Planning Board will require evidence that adequate open space in
appropriate locations will be available.
2. Open space must have safe and convenient pedestrian access.
3. The applicant must consult with the Planning Board early in the
design stage to ascertain open space requirements. Such open
space shall consist of any combination of common space, public
open space and public areas.
4. Common Open Space. The landowner shall provide for the
establishment of an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any common open space and such organization
shall be established and regulated by all applicable standards and
conditions of State statute.
j. Roadway Standards.
1. All existing roads and proposed roads to be dedicated shall be
improved and/or constructed in accordance with the Township
subdivision standards.
2. The right-of-way and pavement widths for improvement of private
ways, roads and alleys shall be determined from sound planning
and engineering standards in conformity to the estimated needs of
the full development proposed and the traffic to be generated
thereby and shall be adequate and sufficient in size, location and
design to accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading
needs and the access of fire fighting equipment and police vehicles.
Internal private roads shall have a required pavement width as
follows:
(a) Two-way traffic roads: thirty (30) feet paved width, and the
right-of-way width of said streets shall be a minimum of fifty
(50) feet.
(b) Sidewalks shall be at least three (3) feet in width. Service ways
for public service and emergency vehicles shall be no less than
fifteen (15) feet in width.
k. Development Staging. As a condition to preliminary approval of the
planned residential development plan, the Board may permit the
implementation of the plan in whole or in sections or in stages
consisting of one (1) or more sections or stages, under the sequence of
§ 37-11.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-11.9
AO:943
actions determined as a part of the planned residential development
district plan. Such sections or stages shall be:
1. Substantially functionally self-contained and self-sustaining with
regard to access, parking utilities, open spaces and similar physical
features and shall be capable of substantial occupancy, operation
and maintenance upon completion of construction and
development;
2. Properly related to other services of the community as a whole and
to those facilities and services yet to be provided in the full
execution and implementation of the planned residential
development district;
3. Provided with such temporary or permanent transitional features,
buffers or protective areas as the conditions of ownership and
maintenance may require to prevent damage or detriment to any
completed section or stage, to other sections or stages and to
adjoining properties not in the planned development. Plans and
specifications of such sections or stages are to be filed with the
Board and are to be of sufficient detail and at such scale as to fully
demonstrate the arrangement and site locations of all structures,
primary and accessory land uses, parking, landscaping, public and
private utilities and services facilities and land ownership
conditions.
l. Improvement Guarantees.
1. Before consideration of final approval or, as a condition of the
preliminary approval, the applicant shall have installed the
improvements specified as part of the conditions of preliminary
approval, or the Board shall require the posting of adequate
performance guarantees to assure the installation of the required
improvements or the conditions approved as part of the preliminary
approval.
2. Improvement. Prior to the granting of final approval, the applicant
shall have installed or shall have first post-performance guarantees
for the ultimate installation of all improvements required.
m. Enforcement and Modification of Development Plan. To further the
mutual interest of the residents and owners of the planned residential
development and of the public in the preservation of the integrity of the
plans finally approved, and to secure that modifications, if any, in the
plans shall not impair the reasonable, reliance of the residents and
owners upon the provisions of the plan, nor result in changes that
would adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and
modification of the provisions of the plan as finally approved, whether
recorded by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to
the following provisions:
§ 37-11.9 EDISON CODE § 37-11.9
AO:944
1. Enforcement by the Township of the provisions of the plans relating
to the use of land and the use, bulk and location of buildings and
structures; to the quality and location of common open space; and
to the intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run in
favor of the Township and shall be enforceable in law or in equity
by the Township without limitation of any powers or regulation
otherwise granted the Township by law.
2. Provision of the plans shall run in favor of the residents of the
planned development, but only to the extent expressly provided in
the plans and in accordance with the terms of the plans, and to that
extent the provisions, whether recorded by plat, covenant,
easement or otherwise, may be enforced at law or equity by the
residents and owners, acting individually, jointly or through an
organization designated in the plans to act on their behalf;
provided, however, that no provisions of the plans shall be implied
to exist in favor of residents and owners of the development except
as to those portions of the plans which have been finally approved
and have been recorded.
3. Modification of the Plan by the Township. All those provisions of the
plans authorized to be enforced by the Township under paragraph
m1 above may be modified, removed or released by the Township
(except grants or easements relating to the service or equipment of
a public utility), subject to the following conditions:
(a) No such modification, removal or release of the provisions of a
plan by the Township shall affect the rights of the residents and
owners of the developments to maintain and enforce those
provisions, at law or equity, as provided above.
(b) No modification, removal or release of the provisions of a plan
by the municipality shall be permitted except upon a finding by
the Board following a public hearing called and held in
accordance with law, that the same is consistent with the
efficient development and preservation of the entire
development, does not adversely affect either the enjoyment of
land abutting upon or across a street from the development or
the public interest, and is not granted solely to confer a special
benefit upon any person.
4. Modification by the Residents. Residents and owners of a
development may, to the extent and in the manner expressly
authorized by the provisions of the plan, modify, remove or release
their rights to enforce the provisions of the plan, but no such action
shall affect the right of the Township to enforce the provisions of
the plan.
n. Contents of Application. In addition to the requirements for subdivision
and site plan map submission, a planned residential development
§ 37-11.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-11.9
AO:945
§ 37-12. R-BB RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-12.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.24.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
application shall include such information as is reasonably necessary to
disclose the following:
1. The location, district and size of the site and the nature of the
landowner's interest in the land to be developed;
2. The type of land use to be allocated to parts of the site to be
developed;
3. The location and size of any open space;
4. The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures;
5. The feasibility of proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste and
stormwater, and for the provision of other utilities and services
such as water supply and solid waste disposal;
6. The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures including proposed easements or grants
for public utilities;
7. The provisions for the parking of vehicles and the location and
width of proposed streets and public ways;
8. In the case of plans which call for development over a period of
years, a schedule showing the proposed times within which
applications for final approval of all sections of the development are
intended to be filed and the developer's financial responsibility;
9. A written statement by the landowner or any other entity having
cognizable interest in the land, setting forth the reasons why, in his
or her opinion, a planned residential development would be in the
public interest and would be consistent with the municipal
statement of objectives.
a. Single-family detached house;
b. Church, synagogue or other place of worship, including parish house
and school buildings, provided that the lot has a minimum area of three
(3) acres and a width of two hundred (200) feet, and further that no
accessory use shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line;
§ 37-11.9 EDISON CODE § 37-12.1
AO:946
§ 37-12.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.24.020]
Accessory uses shall be as permitted in the RA district.
§ 37-12.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.24.030]
§ 37-12.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.24.040]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the Schedule of
Regulations, Section 37-63, except that where a lot is not served by a
c. Private nonprofit school approved by the State of New Jersey, provided
that the use is located on a lot of three (3) acres or more and has direct
access to a street classified as other than a local access street in the
Master Plan of Edison Township;
d. Private golf courses, provided that the lot has a minimum area of one
hundred (100) acres and that no structure or parking area is located
within one hundred (100) feet of a lot line.
a. Same as permitted in the R-A district;
b. Nursing home, provided that such use fronts a street classified in the
adopted Master Plan of the Township as other than a local street, and
further provided that such use shall comply with the following
standards:
1. No building so used shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot line
or street line nor closer than thirty (30) feet to any other building
on the same lot.
2. There shall be provided off-street parking of at least one (1) space
for each two (2) beds plus one (1) space for each staff member and
employee, based on the maximum number on duty at any one time.
Off-street parking areas shall be located at least thirty-three (33)
feet from any street line and at least ten (10) feet from any other lot
line and shall be suitably screened with landscaping.
3. Where appropriate to the welfare of adjoining properties, adequate
sound control measures and security control measures may be
required. These may include fencing and landscaping, as well as
additional setbacks from front lot lines.
4. The use shall comply with all State requirements.
5. Minimum site area shall be three (3) acres.
6. Maximum coverage of all buildings shall be twenty (20%) percent.
7. Maximum coverage of all buildings and pavement shall be thirtyfive
(35%) percent.
§ 37-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-12.4
AO:947
sanitary sewer facility, the minimum lot area shall be not less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet.
§ 37-12.5. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.24.060]
Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto, shall
be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
§ 37-12.6. Sign Regulations. [1999 Code § 17.24.070]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-13. R-B RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-13.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.28.010; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
§ 37-13.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.28.020; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Accessory uses shall be as permitted in the RBB district.
§ 37-13.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.28.030; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
a. Single-family detached house;
b. Church, synagogue or other place of worship, including parish house
and school buildings, provided that the lot has a minimum area of three
(3) acres and a width of two hundred (200) feet and further that no
accessory use shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line;
c. Private nonprofit school approved by the State of New Jersey, provided
that the use is located on a lot of three (3) acres or more and has direct
access to a street classified as other than a local access street in the
Master Plan of Edison Township;
d. Private golf courses, provided that the lot has a minimum area of one
hundred (100) acres and that no structure or parking area is located
within one hundred (100) feet of a lot line;
e. Planned unit development, subject to standards and requirements set
forth under subsection 37-13.6.
a. Off-Street Parking.
§ 37-12.4 EDISON CODE § 37-13.3
AO:948
§ 37-13.4. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.28.050; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Off-street parking, together with appropriate access thereto, shall be
provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
§ 37-13.5. Sign Regulations. [1999 Code § 17.28.060; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-13.6. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Standards and
Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.28.070; Ord. No. O.1941-2016; Ord.
No. O.1953-2016]
1. Parking areas located on property in common ownership in a G-B,
GB-H or LB zone shall extend no more than one hundred (100) feet
beyond the zone boundary line of the RB district and adjoining
commercial zones cited above.
2. No off-street parking space or access driveways shall be located
within ten (10) feet of an adjacent residential lot line.
3. No access driveway shall extend from the parking area within the
residential zone to a public street right-of-way also located in the
residential zone.
4. A landscaped buffer area consisting of earth berm, evergreen
plantings of no less than six (6) feet in height or any combination of
the foregoing shall be required around the entire perimeter of the
parking area.
5. No lighting shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a
residential lot line, and further, such lighting shall have a height of
no greater than twelve (12) feet.
a. Statement of Objectives.
1. It is the specific intent of this section to create a balanced
development composed of the integrated uses developed in
accordance with an overall Master Plan for the district.
2. It is recognized that the development of this zone and the
development of uses herein may take place over a long period of
time, and further that the development would be accomplished in
steps or phases. It is, nevertheless, the intent that all steps or
phases and elements of development shall be combined into one
plan or master development for the entire zone.
3. It is the intent to regulate the intensity of the permissible uses and
to afford a combination of uses to the extent that the entire zone is
§ 37-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-13.6
AO:949
developed as one (1) unit encompassing all those uses consistent
with the limitations of the area and a reasonable utilization of
the property and compatible with the Comprehensive Plan of this
Township.
b. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses within a PUD subject
to development regulations as set forth hereinafter:
1. Commercial uses similar to, but not limited to, restaurants, health
spas, indoor recreation centers, inclusive of tennis, skating,
handball and swimming facilities, indoor theaters, department
stores, drugstores, clothing and shoe sales, gift shops, banks and
delicatessens and personal service uses, not including freestanding
fast-food stores, as defined in this chapter;
2. Motel and hotels, provided that the use shall have no less than one
hundred (100) rental rooms or suites, and further provided that the
use shall include restaurant and banquet facilities, meeting and
conference rooms, and that restaurant and meeting room space
shall amount to not less than twenty (20%) percent of the total floor
area of the motel/hotel;
3. Office buildings for professional, executive, administrative and
management purposes;
4. Television and radio studios;
5. Civic, cultural, educational or religious uses;
6. Private and public golf course;
7. Mid-rise residential structure(s) of not less than six (6) stories and
no more than nine (9) stories in height;
8. Apartment and garden apartments;
9. Townhouses;
10. Single-family detached dwelling;
11. Public and semipublic facilities limited to church or other religious
facility, rescue squads and fraternal eleemosynary uses.
c. Accessory Uses: uses customary and incidental to the principal uses.
d. Conditional Uses: none.
e. Height, Area and Bulk Requirements. For a planned unit development,
the following standards are established. The standards set forth in this
subsection apply to the entire development and not to subsequent
subdivision within the overall development. Individual uses and
standards regulating the density and intensity of use are set forth under
paragraph f. below.
§ 37-13.6 EDISON CODE § 37-13.6
AO:950
1. Minimum Acreage for a PUD. The minimum land area shall be three
hundred fifty (350) acres. The minimum required area shall include
only lands adjacent or contiguous to each other under single or
combined ownership and located within the zone district specified.
A street shall not be construed to divide lands for purposes of this
section.
2. Nonresidential Use Limits.
(a) Commercial Uses. A retail service use center shall be
permitted subject to the following:
(1) No center shall have a floor area of less than twenty-five
thousand (25,000) square feet nor greater than one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
(2) A center may consist of one (1) or more structures or may
be developed as part of midrise residential structure(s). In
any event, such center shall be planned, designed and
constructed in such a fashion to function as an integrated
part of the entire planned unit development.
(b) Office and Hotel Uses.
(1) Such uses shall occupy not more than thirty (30%) percent
or sixty (60) acres, whichever the lesser, of the
developable land area of the PUD.
(2) The floor area ratio of building(s) located upon the
designed tracts to be used for office and hotel use shall not
exceed three hundred thirty-three thousandths (0.333).
3. Open Space Requirement. The minimum percent of required open
space of the total area of the tract shall be forty (40%) percent of
the entire PUD tract.
4. Residential Density Standards and Limitations.
(a) The maximum overall density of a PUD shall not exceed six (6)
dwellings per acre. The overall (gross) density shall be
calculated by the total number of proposed dwellings by the
total acreage of the PUD.
(1) The net residential density of a PUD shall not exceed
twelve and five-tenths (12.5) dwellings per acre. This net
density shall be calculated by dividing the total number of
proposed dwellings by the total developable acres
proposed for residential use in the PUD.
(2) Developable land shall include all acreage of the PUD not
classified as floodway or as upland wetland preservation
area. The delineation of floodway and upland wetland
preservation area shall be certified by New Jersey
§ 37-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-13.6
AO:951
Department of Environmental Protection and shown on a
map signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor in the
State of New Jersey.
(b) The permitted mix of the various residential uses shall be as
follows:
Percent of Total Units
Housing Type Minimum Maximum
Low-rise apartment
units
0 70
Mid-rise units 0 30
Garden apartment
units
0 50
Townhouse units 0 50
Single-family detached
units
0 50
f. Standards and Requirements for Single-Family Development in a PUD
Development. The minimum standards and requirements shall be set
forth in the R-B zone.
g. Standards and Requirements for Townhouse Development in a PUD.
The minimum standards and requirements shall be as set forth in the RB
zone, except that a net density of seven (7) townhouse units per acre
shall be permitted within a townhouse cluster in a PUD.
h. Standards and Requirements for Apartments and Garden Apartment
Development in a PUD Development. The minimum standards and
requirements shall be as set forth in the L-R zone with the following
exceptions:
1. A total of twenty-four (24) dwelling units shall be permitted in a
single structure.
2. The minimum distance between structures shall be equal to onehalf
(1/2) the total height of the adjacent structures, except that the
side to side minimum distance between buildings shall be twenty
(20) feet.
3. No continuous wall shall exceed two hundred ten (210) feet in
length. For purposes of this subsection, a "continuous wall" shall
mean any wall which is parallel to the center line of the building's
roof. A seventy-five (75) degree angle of declination of one wall to
the next wall shall be required to establish discontinuity.
4. Density. No more than ten (10) apartment units per acre shall be
permitted for two-story apartment buildings and no more than
§ 37-13.6 EDISON CODE § 37-13.6
AO:952
twenty (20) apartment units per acre shall be permitted for threestory
apartment buildings.
5. Where the PUD apartment or garden apartment component abuts
an existing utility right-of-way having a width of one hundred (100)
feet or greater, the required side yard setback may be reduced
from fifty (50) feet to forty-five (45) feet.
6. The minimum required front building setback to a private roadway
shall be ten (10) feet.
i. Standards and Requirements for Mid-Rise Residential Development in a
PUD Development. The main standards and requirements shall be as
follows:
1. No structure shall have a height of less than six (6) stories.
2. No structure shall have a height of greater than nine (9) stories.
3. The net density of a midrise residential cluster shall not exceed
forty (40) dwelling units per acre.
4. The minimum distance between structures shall be equal to onehalf
(1/2) the total height of adjacent structures.
5. No continuous wall shall exceed two hundred ten (210) feet in
length. For purposes of this subsection, a "continuous wall" shall
mean any wall which is parallel to the center line of the building's
roof. A seventy-five (75) degree angle of declination of one wall to
the next wall shall be required to establish discontinuity.
j. Affordable Housing Requirements.
The development of all multi-family residential development, of the
various permitted types, within a PUD shall comply with the following
Affordable Housing Requirements:
1. For Sale Developments:
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under none*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee
2. Rental Units:
§ 37-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-13.6
AO:953
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under none*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee
3. Pursuant to the Amended Settlement Agreement In the Matter of
Certification or Judgement of Compliance and Repose of its
Obligations Under the Fair Housing Act and Approval of its
Amended Spending Plan, Docket No. MID-L-3944-15 (the
"Settlement Agreement"), certain terms and conditions applicable
to the inclusionary development of Block 762, Lot 1A, and Block 3B,
Lot 18 in its entirety and a portion of Lot 19 (the "Properties") were
agreed to by the parties and which terms and conditions were
approved by the Court. Where the terms of the Settlement
Agreement conflict with terms of the Township Affordable Housing
Ordinance, the terms of the Settlement Agreement shall control
any development application relative to the Properties. [Ord. No.
O.1953-2016]
k. Standards and Requirements for Commercial Land Service
Development in a PUD Development. The minimum standards and
requirements shall be as follows: commercial and service uses may
occupy space within a midrise residential structure and/or be designed
and developed as separate freestanding structure(s), the standards and
requirements of the G-BH zone shall be the minimum standards and
requirements for development.
l. Standards and Requirements for Office and Hotel Use in a PUD
Development. The minimum standard and requirements shall be as set
forth in the ROL district.
m. Application Procedure.
1. The applicant shall initially submit a sketch plan for the entire
tract. The sketch shall show all informational items as required for
any major subdivision as set forth in Chapter 39, Land Use, and
further shall indicate the general location of buildings (except
single-family dwellings), parking areas and roadways as well as any
other significant site development features planned by the
applicant. The purpose of the sketch development plan are:
(a) To establish the land use plan for the site;
(b) To establish staging or phasing of site development;
§ 37-13.6 EDISON CODE § 37-13.6
AO:954
(c) To determine at the earliest possible time any off-site
improvements required as a result of the development;
(d) To determine design criteria for buffer areas, parking lot
locations, open space areas, etc., and as applicable.
2. The applicant, after approval of the overall development plan, shall
proceed with formal site plan and subdivision applications for all or
phase(s) of the development.
3. Preliminary application for development shall be made under and
in accord with all the regulations and procedures as set forth for a
major subdivision and major site plan as set forth in the land use
ordinance.
n. Other Requirements.
1. Open Storage of Materials. No open display or storage of products,
materials and equipment shall be permitted.
2. Transition Requirement. There shall be established along the line
of any side or rear lot that is contiguous to any residential district,
unless the side or rear lot line coincides with a State, Federal
highway or railroad, a buffer area at least fifty (50) feet in width,
plus five (5) feet additional width for each ten (10) foot interval or
fraction thereof of the principal building exceeding twenty-five (25)
feet in height. The buffer area shall be landscaped and fenced to
provide screening of the uses and associated activities of the lot
from adjoining residential districts.
3. Site Access. Recognizing the heavy traffic flow existing and
projected within I-287, Talmadge Road, Park Avenue area of
Edison, a connection of Talmadge Road to the Park Avenue
extension shall be required.
4. Building Separation. No office building shall be located within one
hundred (100) feet of a residential multifamily building or one-half
(1/2) the sum of the height of adjacent commercial and/or office
and residential buildings, whichever is the greater.
5. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking space shall be located
nearer than fifteen (15) feet to any street, nor closer than ten (10)
feet to any building, and provided further that complete building
perimeter parking is prohibited.
6. Signs. Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section
37-62.
o. Density Modification. To encourage flexibility of housing density, design
and type intended, for a development proposed to be developed over a
period of years, deviations may be authorized from the density or
intensity of use established for the entire planned development. The
§ 37-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-13.6
AO:955
Planning Board may allow for a greater concentration of density or
intensity of land use within a section or sections of the development,
whether it be earlier or later in the development, than upon others. The
approval of the Planning Board of a greater concentration of density or
intensity of land use for any section to be developed must be offset by a
smaller concentration in any completed prior stage or there must be an
appropriate reservation on the remaining land by a grant of easement
or covenant in favor of the municipality.
p. Open Space Regulations.
1. In reviewing applications for a PUD development, the Planning
Board will require evidence that adequate open space in
appropriate locations will be available.
2. Open space must have safe and convenient pedestrian access.
3. The applicant must consult with the Planning Board early in the
design stage to ascertain open space requirements. Such open
space shall consist of any combination of common space, public
open space and public areas.
4. Common Open Space. The landowner shall provide for the
establishment of an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any common open space and such organization
shall be established and regulated by all applicable standards and
conditions of State Statute.
q. Roadway Standards.
1. All existing roads and proposed roads to be dedicated shall be
improved and/or constructed in accordance with the Township
subdivision standards.
2. The right-of-way and pavement widths for improvement of private
ways, roads and alleys shall be determined from sound planning
and engineering standards in conformity to the estimated needs of
the full development proposed and the traffic to be generated
thereby and shall be adequate and sufficient in size, location and
design to accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading
needs and the access of fire-fighting equipment and police vehicles.
Internal private roads shall have a required pavement width as
follows:
(a) Two-way traffic roads: thirty (30) feet paved width, and the
right-of-way width of said streets shall be a minimum of fifty
(50) feet.
(b) Sidewalks shall be at least three (3) feet in width. Service ways
for public service and emergency vehicles shall be no less than
fifteen (15) feet in width.
§ 37-13.6 EDISON CODE § 37-13.6
AO:956
r. Development Staging. As a condition to preliminary approval of the
PUD development plan, the Board may permit the implementation of
the plan in whole or in sections or in stages consisting of one (1) or
more sections or stages, under the district plan. Such sections or stages
shall be:
1. Substantially functionally self-contained and self-sustaining with
regard to access, parking utilities, open spaces and similar physical
features and shall be capable of substantial occupancy, operation
and maintenance upon completion of construction and
development;
2. Property related to other services of the community as a whole and
to those facilities and services yet to be provided in the full
execution and implementation of the PUD district;
3. Provided with such temporary or permanent transitional features,
buffers or protective areas as the conditions of ownership and
maintenance may require to prevent damage or detriment to any
completed section or stage, to planned development. Plans and
specifications of such sections or stages are to be filed with the
Board and are to be of sufficient detail and at such scale as to fully
demonstrate the arrangement and site locations of all structures,
primary and accessory land uses, parking, landscaping, public and
private utilities and services facilities and land ownership
conditions.
s. Improvement Guarantees.
1. Before consideration of final approval or as a condition of the
preliminary approval, the applicant shall have installed the
improvements specified as part of the conditions of preliminary
approval, or the Board shall require the posting of adequate
performance guarantees to assure the installation of the required
improvements or the conditions approved as part of the preliminary
approval.
2. Improvement. Prior to the granting of final approval, the applicant
shall have installed or shall have first post-performance guarantees
for the ultimate installation of all improvements required.
t. Enforcement and Modification of Development Plan. To further the
mutual interest of the residents and owners of the planned residential
development and of the public in the preservation of the integrity of the
plans finally approved, and to secure that modifications, if any, in the
plans shall not impair the reasonable reliance of the residents and
owners upon the provisions of the plan nor result in changes that would
adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and modification
of the provisions of the plan as finally approved, whether recorded by
plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to the following
provisions:
§ 37-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-13.6
AO:957
1. Enforcement by the Township of the provisions of the plans relating
to the use of land and the use, bulk and location of buildings and
structures; to the quality and location of common open space; and
to the intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run in
favor of the Township and shall be enforceable in law or in equity
by the Township without limitation of any powers or regulation
otherwise granted the Township by law.
2. Provision of the plans shall run in favor of the residents of the
planned development, but only to the extent expressly provided in
the plans and in accordance with the terms of the plans and to what
extent the provisions, whether recorded by plat, covenant,
easement or otherwise, may be enforced by law or equity by the
residents and owners, acting individually, jointly or through an
organization designated in the plans to act on their behalf,
provided, however, that no provisions of the plans shall be implied
to exist in favor of residents and owners of the development except
as to those portions of the plans which have been finally approved
and have been recorded.
3. Modification of the Plan by the Township. All those provisions of the
plan authorized to be enforced by the Township above may be
modified, removed or released by the Township (except grants or
easements relating to the service or equipment of a public utility),
subject to the following conditions:
(a) No such modification, removal or release or the provisions of a
plan by the Township shall affect the rights of the residents and
owners of the developments to maintain and enforce those
provisions, at law or equity, as provided above.
(b) No modification, removal or release of the provisions of a plan
by the municipality shall be permitted except upon a finding by
the Board following a public hearing called and held in
accordance with law, that the same is consistent with the
efficient development and preservation of the entire
development, does not adversely affect either the enjoyment of
land abutting upon or across a street from the development or
the public interest and is not granted solely to confer a special
benefit upon any person.
(c) Modification by the Residents. Residents and owners of a
development may, to the extent and in the manner expressly
authorized by the provisions of the plan, modify, remove or
release their rights to enforce the provisions of the plan, but no
such action shall affect the right of the Township to enforce the
provisions of the plan.
u. Contents of Application. In addition to the requirements for subdivision
and site plan map submission and other requirements hereinabove, a
§ 37-13.6 EDISON CODE § 37-13.6
AO:958
§ 37-14. R-A-th, R-BB-th AND R-B-th RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
PUD development application shall include such information as is
reasonably necessary to disclose the following:
1. The location, district and size of the site and the nature of the
landowner's interest in the land to be developed;
2. The type of land use to be allocated to parts of the site to be
developed;
3. The location and size of any open space;
4. The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures;
5. A traffic improvement plan setting forth on- and off-site
improvements, scheduling as a function of development and
detailing of permit requirements necessary to complete;
6. The feasibility of proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste and
stormwater and for the provision of other utilities and services,
such as water supply and solid waste disposal;
7. The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or grants
for public utilities;
8. The provision for the parking of vehicles and the location and width
of proposed streets and public ways;
9. In the case of plans which call for development over a period of
years, a schedule showing the proposed times within which
application for final approval of all sections of the development are
intended to be filed and the developer's financial responsibility;
10. A written statement by the landowner(s) or any other entity having
recognizable interest in the land, setting forth the reasons why, in
his or her opinion, a PUD development would be in the public
interest and would be consistent with the municipal statement of
objectives;
11. Environment Assessment Statement. A written assessment of the
short- and long-term impacts of the proposed development shall be
prepared and filed. The statement shall detail methods and
procedures to be established to ameliorate any adverse impact
upon the environment.
§ 37-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-14.1
AO:959
§ 37-14.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.32.010; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
No building structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure
shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following uses:
Townhouse dwellings as defined in this section and as regulated hereinafter
under subsection 37-14.4.
§ 37-14.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.32.020; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Accessory uses customary and incidental to townhouse development.
§ 37-14.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.32.030; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
None.
§ 37-14.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.32.040; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified below.
a. The minimum lot size shall be twenty-five (25) acres.
b. The minimum setback distance shall be fifty (50) feet from all existing
State and County roads or any other road other than a local street as
designated upon the Master Plan of Edison Township. The minimum
setback from all other streets shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
c. The minimum setback from all side property lines shall be thirty-five
(35) feet.
d. The minimum setback from all rear property lines shall be forty-five
(45) feet.
e. Maximum Density.
1. The maximum density shall be:
(a) R-A-th: 8 units per acre.
(b) R-BB-th: 8 units per acre.
(c) R-B-th: 15 units per acre.
2. Lands proposed as public street rights-of-way shall not be included
in this calculation.
f. Maximum building coverage shall be:
1. R-A-th and R-BB-th: twenty (20%) percent.
2. R-B-th: twenty-five (25%) percent.
§ 37-14.1 EDISON CODE § 37-14.4
AO:960
§ 37-14.5. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.32.050; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto, shall
be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
§ 37-14.6. Sign Regulations. [1999 Code § 17.32.060; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-14.7. Affordable Housing Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
All new development within this district as of October 4, 2016, shall comply
with the following Affordable Housing Requirements:
g. The maximum percent of coverage by buildings and pavement,
inclusive of driveways, parking and sidewalks but not including
recreation facilities, patios or steps, shall be fifty (50%) percent for R-Ath
and R-BB-th and sixty (60%) percent for R-B-th zones.
h. The minimum width of any townhouse shall be sixteen (16) feet.
i. The minimum floor area per unit shall be seven hundred fifty (750)
square feet.
j. The maximum building height in the R-A-th, R-BB-th and R-B-th zones is
thirty (30) feet.
k. The minimum number of units per structure shall be two (2).
l. The maximum number of units per structure shall be eight (8).
m. The minimum distance between structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
n. Buffer Requirement. A buffer area consisting of existing mature trees
(six (6) inch diameter or greater) or planted landscaped area shall be
required in each district. The buffer width shall equal the required yard
depth, plus five (5) feet of buffer for each one (1) foot of building height
over twenty-five (25) feet.
a. For Sale Developments:
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under none*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
§ 37-14.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-14.7
AO:961
§ 37-15. L-R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-15.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.36.010; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee.
b. Rental Developments:
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under None*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee.
c. A project shall not be subdivided into two or more lots so as to fall
below the threshold or circumvent the set aside requirement by taking
multiple actions.
a. Single-family detached houses subject to the same development
regulations specified in the R-B district;
b. Townhouses subject to development regulations specified in the R-B-th
district;
c. Multifamily dwelling and apartment houses subject to the following
requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Size. No building which is intended or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, as a garden apartment building shall be
erected or constructed upon a lot containing an area of less than
three (3) acres; except that, if a zone boundary line passes through
any lot of three (3) acres or more with the result that the area
available for garden apartment construction is less than three
acres, such area of less three (3) acres may be approved for garden
apartment development; provided, however, that all other
regulations pertaining to the erection or construction of the garden
apartments shall be applied to and within the area permitting such
construction, except that the calculation of the number of units to
be constructed shall be based upon such acreage available for such
construction.
§ 37-14.7 EDISON CODE § 37-15.1
AO:962
2. Height. No apartment building shall have more than three (3)
habitable stories or exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
3. Minimum Space Between Buildings. The minimum distance
between buildings shall be one-half (1/2) the total height of the two
(2) buildings, except that the side to side minimum distance
between buildings shall be twenty (20) feet.
4. Density. No more than fifteen (15) apartment units per acre shall be
permitted for two-story apartment buildings and no more than
twenty-three (23) apartment units per acre shall be permitted for
three-story buildings.
5. Rooms. Each apartment unit in each apartment building shall
contain separate bedroom, separate bathroom and separate
kitchen/dining facilities. This provision shall not be interpreted to
preclude efficiency apartments.
6. Landscaping. All areas of a garden apartment development not
used for the construction of buildings, roads, accessways, parking
areas or sidewalks shall be fully landscaped. Where a garden
apartment development boundary line abuts a lot in a residential
zone, which lot is not owned by the garden apartment developer,
there shall not be cut, uprooted, destroyed or taken away any
existing trees, shrubbery or other planting within the area of
twenty (20) feet inside the boundary line of the garden
development abutting a residential lot. If no adequate trees, shrubs
or plantings exist in the twenty (20) foot area in the natural state of
the premises before development, the area shall be provided with
an adequate approved planting plan to provide a belt of screening
within the twenty (20) foot area.
7. Interior Roads. All roads and other accessways within the garden
apartment development shall be private roads, and be constructed
with pavement and curbs within the established cartways. All roads
and or drive aisles containing right-angle parking or angled
parking on one or both sides of the road shall contain drive aisles of
not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. All access roads that do
not contain angled parking shall comply with the current
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21) for the
width of the cartway inclusive of any on-street parallel parking
areas. All such construction, paving and curbing shall be completed
in accordance with the subdivision regulations of Edison Township.
All interior roads shall provide suitable access for ingress, egress
and circulation for emergency vehicles, by providing additional
width of drive aisles, adequate turning radius at corners and
appropriate delineated Fire Lanes, subject to the review by the
Edison Township Fire Department.
8. Parking. All parking shall be confined to the areas specifically
designated on the site plan for that purpose. Parking area shall be
§ 37-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-15.1
AO:963
§ 37-15.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.36.020; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Accessory uses usually incidental to the above uses, as specified below:
paved and curbed and provided with an adequate system of
stormwater drainage. No parking area (other than driveway
parking spaces located in front of a garage) may be placed closer
to a building than ten (10) feet. Parking areas may be constructed
in the front, side and rear yards, but in no event closer than ten
(10) feet to a lot line (other than driveway parking spaces located
in front of a garage).
9. Buildings.
(a) No principal building shall:
(1) Be designed for or occupied by more than twenty (20)
families;
(2) Exceed two hundred ten (210) feet in length in its longest
dimensions;
(3) Allow or contain outside television antennas. All television
antenna equipment shall be built into the building to
eliminate individual antennas being erected upon the roof.
This subsection shall not apply to a common antenna
tower.
(b) No basement apartment units shall be permitted. For purposes
of this section, a "basement unit" shall be defined as a unit
having its finished floor elevation three (3) or more feet below
the finish grade of the ground about the building.
10. Utilities. For all garden apartments, the applicant for the site plan
approval shall arrange with the serving utilities for the
underground installation of the utilities' distribution supply lines
and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of
its tariff on file with the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility
Commissioners and shall submit to the Planning Board prior to the
granting of site plan approval a written instrument from each
serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that sites which abut
existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines have theretofore been installed on any portion of the
streets involved may be supplied with electric and telephone
service from the overhead lines or extensions, but the service
connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground.
a. Noncommercial garage for exclusive use of site residents only;
§ 37-15.1 EDISON CODE § 37-15.2
AO:964
§ 37-15.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.36.030; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
§ 37-15.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.36.040; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the schedule,
Section 37-63, except as otherwise specified in this section.
§ 37-15.5. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.36.050; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Off-street parking together with appropriate access thereto, shall be
provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
§ 37-15.6. Sign Regulations. [1999 Code § 17.36.060; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
b. Noncommercial swimming pools for exclusive use of site residents only.
a. Office buildings used for professional services, business services,
management and consulting services only and subject to the following
conditions and regulations:
1. Site development shall comply with the minimum development
regulations set forth for the district. The buffer requirement set
forth in the district shall be measured from the required yard width
from existing garden apartments,
2. No retail sales of goods or merchandise shall be permitted;
b. Indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, handball courts and health clubs,
subject to the following conditions and regulations: site development
shall comply with the minimum development regulations set forth for
the district, except that such use or uses shall not occupy an area of
land of less than five (5) acres, excluding garden apartments;
c. Nursing homes, subject to the following conditions and regulations:
1. The use shall have direct access to a street other than a local
access street as classified in the adopted Master Plan of the
Township.
2. The minimum site area shall be one (1) acre.
§ 37-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-15.7
AO:965
§ 37-15.7. Affordable Housing Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1941-2016; Ord. No. O.1953-2016]
Unless otherwise set forth at subsection 37-15.7c below, all development
within this district shall comply with the following Affordable Housing
Requirements:
§ 37-16. through § 37-19. (RESERVED)
§ 37-20. P-B PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT.
a. For Sale Developments:
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under none*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee
b. Rental Units:
Total Number of Units
Minimum Percent of
Affordable Housing Units
10 and under none*
11-20 10%
21-50 15%
Over 51 20%
*Units 10 and under are subject to the development fee
c. Pursuant to the Amended Settlement Agreement In the Matter of
Certification or Judgement of Compliance and Repose of its Obligations
Under the Fair Housing Act and Approval of its Amended Spending
Plan, Docket No. MID-L-3944-15 (the "Settlement Agreement"), certain
terms and conditions applicable to the inclusionary development of
Block 762, Lot 1A, and Block 3B, Lot 18 in its entirety and a portion of
Lot 19 (the "Properties") were agreed to by the parties and which terms
and conditions were approved by the Court. Where the terms of the
Settlement Agreement conflict with terms of the Township Affordable
Housing Ordinance, the terms of the Settlement Agreement shall
control any development application relative to the Properties. [Ord.
No. O.1953-2016]
§ 37-15.7 EDISON CODE § 37-20.1
AO:966
§ 37-20.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.40.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
§ 37-20.2. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.40.020]
The following uses, whether as a main use or as an accessory use, are
strictly prohibited and shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Retail and wholesale household and business supplies;
b. Electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing and
refrigeration equipment sales and service businesses;
c. Business and professional offices, banks and funeral homes;
d. Indoor theaters, indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, handball courts
and health clubs;
e. Motels and nursing homes;
f. Newspaper offices and printing establishments;
g. Drug store, beauty shop and retail dry cleaning;
h. Clothing, furniture and appliance stores;
i. Recreational equipment, hardware and hobby shops;
j. Offices for executive or administrative personnel; scientific or research
laboratories; and experimental or computation centers;
k. Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments wherein food
and drink are consumed within the principal building. Such uses shall
not be interpreted to include and are hereby defined to exclude drive-in
restaurants or refreshment stands, commonly called snack bars, dairy
bars, hamburger stands or hot dog stands or similar uses where
customers and patrons are served food, soft drinks or ice cream
primarily for their immediate consumption outside the confines of the
building or structure in which the business is conducted;
l. Private schools conducted for profit.
a. Used car and truck sales and lots;
b. Arcades, carousels, rollercoasters, merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels,
pony riding tracks, exhibitions of wild animals and similar commercial
amusements, except in connection with a carnival or circus having
special permit from Township Council;
c. Ammunition, explosives and fireworks;
d. Heavy manufacturing;
§ 37-20.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-20.2
AO:967
§ 37-20.3. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.40.030]
Any accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to the
principal use permitted on the same lot, such as but not limited necessarily
to: maintenance and storage buildings.
§ 37-20.4. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.40.040]
None.
§ 37-20.5. Shopping Center Application Procedure. [1999 Code
§ 17.40.050]
In any P-B district, an applicant proposing the development of a shopping
center, which for purposes of this section shall mean retail sales use(s)
proposed to occupy a tract of land ten (10) acres or larger and/or proposed
building(s) of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet or larger, shall
meet the following requirements in addition to development regulations of
this zone. An applicant may apply to the Planning Board for sketch site
plan review prior to making formal application to the Board. The specified
supporting data and accompanying information shall be in accordance with
the applicable sections of this chapter.
e. Trailer or camps and mobilehome camps;
f. Private garages as a primary use of the property;
g. Fertilizer plants;
h. The processing and canning of food for wholesale distribution;
i. Drive-in restaurants as defined in this chapter, junkyards, auto
wrecking and scrap metal baling uses.
a. A preliminary site plan showing a unified arrangement of buildings, offstreet
parking, internal traffic circulation, service facilities, pedestrian
walks, loading and unloading areas, streams and topographic
information for the lot and surrounding area within two hundred (200)
feet of any lot line. The site plan shall also show the location and
arrangement of proposed lawn, trees or areas of massed shrubs.
b. The site plan shall be accompanied by preliminary architectural
sketches indicating the type of materials to be utilized for exterior walls
and space to be allocated to various uses.
c. The site plan shall be accompanied by a market analysis providing the
need for the center and carried out by an individual or firm experienced
and recognized in this field. It shall include the following:
1. Delineation of the trade area of the proposed center;
2. The existing and projected population of the trade area;
§ 37-20.2 EDISON CODE § 37-20.5
AO:968
§ 37-20.6. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.40.060]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the schedule,
Section 37-63.
§ 37-20.7. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.40.070]
3. Determination of effective buying power in the trade area;
4. The amount and percentage of buying power in the trade area
allocated to the proposed shopping center;
5. The amount and percentage of buying power in the proposed trade
area which will be expended in the existing commercial area.
d. The site plan shall be accompanied by a time schedule indicating when
the various stages of construction will be initiated after final approval.
e. The site plan shall be accompanied by a traffic study prepared by a
traffic engineer being a member of the American Society of Traffic
Engineers, indicating the impact which the center will have on
surrounding roads. It shall include the following elements:
1. Estimated peak hourly traffic to be generated by the center;
2. Assignment of estimated peak hourly traffic by percentage and
volume to surrounding roads;
3. Determination of unused capacity of surrounding roads during
peak hours;
4. Recommendations for necessary road improvements such as
acceleration and deceleration lanes and traffic control devices
recommended for public roads or highways surrounding the site.
f. Additional Shopping Center Development Regulations.
1. No parking area shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any
front lot line nor closer than ten (10) feet to the side and rear lot
line.
2. If any P-B district abuts a residential zone, fences, walls or yearround
screen plantings shall be required to shield adjacent areas
from parking lot illumination and headlights and to diminish the
visual encroachment on residential privacy and residential
neighborhood character. The Planning Board may waive the
requirement for screening if equivalent screening is provided by
parks or by topography or other natural conditions.
3. Any part of the center not used for structures, loading accessways,
parking or pedestrian walks shall be landscaped with grass, trees
or shrubs.
§ 37-20.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-20.7
AO:969
§ 37-20.8. Required Off-Street Parking and Loading. [1999 Code
§ 17.40.080]
§ 37-20.9. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.40.090]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-21. G-B AND G-BH GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
§ 37-21.1. Generally. [1999 Code § 17.44.010]
The following regulations are applicable in the G-B and G-BH general
business districts. The G-B and G-BH districts are differentiated one from
the other by lot area and yard requirements and the permitted conditional
uses.
§ 37-21.2. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.44.020; Ord. No.
O.1963-2017]
a. Open Storage of Materials. All materials and equipment shall be stored
in completely enclosed buildings. All open display of products shall be
placed no closer to any private or public thoroughfare than the distance
equal to the required front yard depth.
b. Transition Requirement. There shall be established along the line of any
side or rear lot that is contiguous to any residential district, unless the
side or rear lot line coincides with a State or Federal highway or
railroad right-of-way, a buffer of at least fifty (50) feet in width plus five
(5) feet additional width for each ten (10) foot interval or fraction
thereof of the height of the proposed building exceeding twenty-five
(25) feet. The buffer area shall be landscaped and fenced to provide
screening of the operations of the lot from adjoining residential
districts.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking area shall be located nearer
than ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line nor shall a parking area be
nearer than fifteen (15) feet to any street lot line nor nearer than five (5)
feet to any building, and further provided that complete building
perimeter parking is prohibited.
a. Retail and wholesale household and business supplies, stores, shops
and similar commercial uses selling food, apparel, clothing, household
appliances and furnishings;
b. Electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing and
refrigeration equipment sales and service businesses;
§ 37-20.7 EDISON CODE § 37-21.2
AO:970
c. Business and professional offices, banks and funeral homes;
d. Indoor theaters, indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, handball courts
and health clubs;
e. Motels, provided such use is located on a lot of three (3) acres or more
and has direct access to a street classified as other than a local access
street in the adopted Master Plan of Edison Township;
f. Newspaper offices and printing establishments;
g. Retail laundry, bakery and barbershops, beauty shops and similar
service establishments;
h. New car and truck dealership and used car and truck sales and service
wherein used car and truck sales and service are accessory to new car
and truck sales uses and outdoor display and/or storage of used cars
and trucks does not exceed thirty (30%) percent of the total outdoor
display and storage area of cars and trucks, and further provided such
uses are located on a lot of not less than one (1) acre in size and has a
width of two hundred (200) feet;
i. Offices for executive or administrative personnel; scientific or research
laboratories; experimental or computation centers;
j. The packing, fabricating, finishing or assembly of:
1. Beverages (nonalcoholic only),
2. Candy,
3. Toilet supplies, except those involving fat rendering processes,
4. Metal products,
5. Electrical appliances, fixtures or components,
6. Electrical instruments or devices;
k. Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments wherein food
and drink are consumed within the principal building. Such uses shall
not be interpreted to include and are hereby defined to exclude drive-in
restaurants or refreshment stands, commonly called snack bars, dairy
bars, hamburger stands or similar uses where customers and patrons
are served food, soft drinks or ice cream primarily for their immediate
consumption outside the confines of the building or structure in which
the business is conducted;
l. Church, synagogue or similar religious facility;
m. Fraternal clubs, including but not limited to Elks, Lions, Masons, etc.;
n. Commercial schools and institutes offering courses or training;
o. Repair shops, but not including automotive repair.
§ 37-21.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-21.2
AO:971
§ 37-21.3. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.44.030]
§ 37-21.4. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.44.040]
Any accessory use of the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
use permitted in this district, such as but not necessarily limited to:
maintenance and storage buildings.
§ 37-21.5. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.44.050; Ord. No.
O.1653-2008]
p. Fuel Only Service Station with Convenience Store:
The following requirements shall apply to this use: [Ord. No.
O.1963-2017]
1. Minimum lot size: 1.5 acres.
2. Maximum building size: 6,000 square feet.
3. Maximum number of fueling stations: Eight (8) dispensers that
includes gasoline and low-flow diesel sales, with two (2) nozzles/
hoses per dispenser.
4. Maximum number of stories: One (1), exclusive of towers,
cuppolas, or other architectural elements.
5. Maximum height for principal building: Thirty-five (35) feet,
exclusive of towers, cuppolas or other architectural elements.
6. Maximum height for fuel area canopy: Twenty-five (25) feet, with
yard setbacks consistent with Section 37-63.
7. Parking: Minimum of one (1) space reach three hundred (300)
square feet of convenience store building footprint, plus one (1)
space for each employee on the most heavily staffed shift.
Additional parking may be provided to enhance internal circulation
and eliminate stacking at driveways.
8. Signs: One (1) free standing pole sign at the driveway of each street
front with fuel pricing, maximum area shall not exceed seventy-five
(75) square feet, maximum height of twenty (20) feet, and minimum
set back of fifteen (15) feet from any street; two (2) façade signs, on
the front of the building, not to exceed twenty (20%) percent of the
front wall area; and two (2) canopy signs, located below the top of
the canopy, on the side of the canopy facing the front or side street.
a. As specified in the P-B district;
b. Commercial dog kennels;
c. Lumber yards.
§ 37-21.2 EDISON CODE § 37-21.5
AO:972
a. Conditional Uses in a GB-H Zone Only.
1. An area of land, including structures, that is used for the retail sale
and direct delivery to motor vehicles of gasoline and lubricating oil
and the making of minor repairs, but not auto body work, welding
or painting nor any repair work in the open. Such use shall be
subject to the following regulations:
(a) No part of any automobile filling station may be used for
residence or sleeping purposes except by a watchman.
(b) No part of any entrance to or exit from any filling station which
is capable of accommodating more than five (5) vehicles shall
be connected with a public street within one hundred fifty
(150) feet of any entrance or exit of a theater, auditorium,
church, hospital, school, college, institution for dependents or
children, park, playground, library, museum or other similar
place of public assembly.
(c) No part of any building used as an automobile service station
and no filling pumps, car lifts, greasing mechanisms or other
service appliances used to service or supply motor vehicles
shall be erected within fifty (50) feet of any boundary line of
any residential zone. All such car lifts and greasing
mechanisms shall be located within an enclosed building.
(d) No gasoline or oil pump and no other service appliances
installed for use in connection with any automobile service
station shall be so installed or located within thirty-five (35)
feet of any lot line.
(e) No building used as an automobile service station shall be
located within twenty-five (25) feet of any lot line.
(f) No automobile service station shall store out of doors, in a side
or front yard, wrecked, damaged or disassembled (either
whole or in part) vehicles, boats or used automotive or marine
parts, or used supplies or materials thereof. Any storage areas
located in a rear yard shall be screened so that no stored
vehicle or article shall be visible from the front, side or rear
premises or to any adjacent premises, and further provided
that no overnight parking at service stations shall be permitted
within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone.
(g) No automobile service station shall be permitted an outdoor
display storage or parking of any new or used vehicles within
the distance of the required minimum front yard, except such
temporary parking as may be necessary in connection with the
immediate servicing of customers' vehicles.
(h) All outside lighting or electrified signs on such premises shall
be so shielded as to prevent glare, whether reflected or not,
§ 37-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-21.5
AO:973
from any source detectable beyond the boundaries of the
premises and shall not obstruct site distances at intersections
nor present safety hazards to traffic.
(i) No more than three (3) vehicles for rent or lease shall be stored
at any one (1) time at a service station;
2. Car wash, subject to the following:
(a) Recognizing that the principal building used in a car wash is
generally of uniform design allowing for one (1) or two (2) bays
and office and storage areas, no such principal building, when
permitted, shall be built and used unless it has a minimum of
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and a maximum
of twenty (20%) percent of land area.
(b) Such use shall provide adequate stacking area for a minimum
of twenty-five (25) cars per bay or washing aisle. The stacking
system shall in no way hinder or impair normal traffic flow on
roads or traffic flow on adjoining property.
(c) No such use shall be located on a tract of land of less than one
(1) acre in size.
3. Drive-through Restaurants. Drive-through restaurant, with or
without drive-in or drive-through windows, or other appurtenances
designed or used to serve food to customers outside the principal
building, as part of the shopping center. The drive-through
restaurant may be located either in a building with other uses or in
a separate building. The following criteria shall be met in order to
create a drive-through restaurant:
(a) The shopping center site shall contain a minimum of twentyfive
(25) acres,
(b) The shopping center site shall have a minimum of one
thousand (1,000) feet of frontage on a major arterial State
highway,
(c) The shopping center shall have a minimum single-story gross
area of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet,
(d) The shopping center shall have a total of at least one thousand
(1,000) at-grade parking spaces.
4. Village Center. This conditional use would apply only to those
properties currently zoned G-BH which have a minimum frontage
of six hundred fifty (650) feet along the Route 27 right-of-way,
subject to compliance with all of the following additional
conditions:
§ 37-21.5 EDISON CODE § 37-21.5
AO:974
§ 37-21.6. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.44.060]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the schedule,
Section 37-63, except as otherwise specified hereinabove.
§ 37-21.7. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.44.070]
(a) Permitted uses within a "Village Center" include all permitted
uses in the G-BH zone district, excluding new and used
automobile dealerships and motels.
(b) Permitted accessory uses within a "Village Center" include all
permitted accessory uses in the G-BH zone district.
(c) All existing bulk requirements of the G-BH zone district shall
apply except as follows:
(1) The maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be increased
from 0.25 to 0.35; and
(2) The minimum required front yard setback shall be
decreased from fifty (50) feet to ten (10) feet.
(d) On-site parking shall be required at a rate of one (1) space per
two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area.
(e) Pedestrian connectivity between buildings.
b. Conditional Uses in G-B and G-BH Zones.
1. Dog kennel and veterinarian's clinic.
(a) Such use shall be located on a minimum lot area of not less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(b) No outdoor dog run shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a lot line, no animals at the site shall be kept out of doors
from dusk to dawn;
2. Drive-in restaurant, provided that:
(a) No such use shall be located on a lot of less than one (1) acre in
size.
(b) No drive-in or drive-through windows or other appurtenances
designed or used to serve food to customers outside the
principal building shall be permitted.
(c) No such use shall have a habitable floor area, as defined in the
Township Uniform Construction Code, of less than five
thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet.
§ 37-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-21.7
AO:975
§ 37-21.8. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.44.080]
§ 37-21.9. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.44.090]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-22. L-B LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
§ 37-22.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.48.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
a. Open Storage of Materials. All materials and equipment shall be stored
in completely enclosed buildings. All open display of products shall be
placed no closer to any private or public thoroughfare than the distance
equal to the required front yard.
b. Transition Requirement. There shall be established along the line of any
side or rear lot that is contiguous to any residential district, unless the
side or rear lot line coincides with a State or Federal highway, a buffer
area at least fifteen (15) feet in width plus five (5) feet additional width
for each ten (10) foot interval or fraction thereof of the height of the
principal building exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height. The buffer area
shall be landscaped and fenced to provide screening of the operations
of the lot from adjoining residential districts.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking space shall be located nearer
than five (5) feet to any front, side or rear lot line nor nearer than five
(5) feet to any building, and further provided that complete building
perimeter parking is prohibited.
a. Stores, shops and similar commercial uses selling food, apparel,
clothing, household appliances and furnishings;
b. Business and professional offices and banks;
c. Barbershops, beauty shops and similar service establishments;
d. Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments wherein food
and drink are consumed within the principal building. Such uses shall
not be interpreted to include and are hereby defined to exclude drive-in
restaurants or refreshment stands, commonly called snack bars, dairy
bars, hamburger stands or hot dog stands or similar uses where
customers and patrons are served food, soft drinks or ice cream
§ 37-21.7 EDISON CODE § 37-22.1
AO:976
§ 37-22.2. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.48.020]
The following uses, whether as a main use or as an accessory use, are
strictly prohibited and shall include but not be limited to:
§ 37-22.3. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.48.030]
Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any use permitted in this district, such as but not necessarily limited to:
equipment storage and maintenance buildings.
§ 37-22.4. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.48.040]
§ 37-22.5. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.48.050]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the schedule,
Section 37-63.
primarily for their immediate consumption outside the confines of the
building or structure in which the business is conducted;
e. Church, synagogue and similar religious facility;
f. Fraternal club or organization registered with the State of New Jersey
as a nonprofit corporation;
g. Hardware stores, bakeries, music stores, stationery stores and drug
stores.
a. As specified in the P-B district;
b. Video arcades, used-car or auto body repair uses.
a. Automobile service stations and restaurants subject to the same
requirements of the G-B district;
b. Drive-in banks, subject to the following standards:
1. All other regulations for the district in which the use is to be
located shall be complied with, except that the minimum lot area
for a drive-in bank shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
2. Recognizing the need for substantial vehicle storage area and
drive-in window lanes, in addition to normal parking and driveway
area associated with a business use, the maximum percent of
building coverage shall be twenty (20%) percent.
3. No driveway shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to the
nearest street intersection, and further, no such driveway shall
connect to a street frontage where such street frontage is located
in a residential district.
§ 37-22.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-22.6
AO:977
§ 37-22.6. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.48.060]
§ 37-22.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.48.070]
§ 37-22.8. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.48.080]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-23. through § 37-24. (RESERVED)
§ 37-25. AAR AMBOY AVENUE REVITALIZATION ZONE.
§ 37-25.1. General Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.49.010; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Due to the proposed revitalization by the Township of Edison of Amboy
Avenue between the limits of the New Jersey Turnpike and US Highway
Route 1, zoning requirements shall be incorporated in the AAR, Amboy
Avenue Revitalization Zone as herein set forth to promote and encourage
said revitalization. The purpose of the revitalization is to instill economic
development for the limits set forth herein and inject into the commercial
properties opportunities for growth and prosperity in conjunction with the
aesthetic improvements that will ensue. The zoning ordinance shall be
a. Open Storage of Materials. All materials and equipment shall be stored
in completely enclosed buildings. All open display of products shall be
placed no closer to any private or public thoroughfare than the distance
equal to the required front yard.
b. Transition Requirements. There shall be established along the line of
any side or rear lot that is contiguous to any residential district, unless
the side or rear lot line coincides with any major street, as shown on the
adopted Master Plan of Edison Township, a buffer area at least ten (10)
feet in width plus five (5) feet additional width for each ten (10) foot
interval or fraction thereof of the height of the principal building which
exceeds fifteen (15) feet in height. The buffer area shall be landscaped
and fencing provided as required to provide appropriate screening of
the operations of the lot from adjoining residential districts.
Landscaping shall provide a visual screen of no less than six (6) feet in
height, except the Board may waive this requirement if topography or
existing mature plant growth provide the visual screen stated above.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking area shall be located nearer
than five (5) feet to a front and rear property line, and further provided
that complete building perimeter parking is prohibited.
§ 37-22.6 EDISON CODE § 37-25.1
AO:978
amended to also promote and encourage pedestrian traffic so as to
conversely reduce the use of single occupancy vehicles in the subject area.
§ 37-25.2. Amboy Avenue Revitalization Zone Physical Limits. [1999
Code § 17.49.020; Ord. No. O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014;
Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
The limits of the Amboy Avenue Revitalization Zone on Amboy Avenue shall
include all parcels presently classified as L-B along both sides of Amboy
Avenue between the New Jersey Turnpike as its southeasterly terminus
and US Highway Route 1 as its northwesterly terminus. The official Edison
zoning map shall be amended to reflect the limits of the AAR Zone as herein
described.
§ 37-25.3. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.49.030; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
The permitted uses in the AAR Zone shall be as specified in the L-B District
with the following additional uses:
§ 37-25.4. Residential Uses. [1999 Code § 17.49.040; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Seventy-five (75%) percent of the gross floor area of any building in the
Amboy Avenue Revitalization Zone may be used for residential purposes.
One (1) residential unit shall be permitted on the first floor to meet ADA
standards. The construction of any residential units within any mixed-use
building shall be subject to the Affordable Housing Requirements set forth
in subsection 37-15.7 in terms of the minimum number of affordable
housing units that must be contained required.
a. Restaurants and eating establishments shall be permitted to provide
entertainment in the form of various acts which may include musicians,
comedians, magicians, diverse musical groups and other like acts of
entertainment.
b. Other establishments whose primary function is to provide
entertainment as specified in paragraph a. above which may
incidentally also serve snacks and drinks.
c. Instructional facilities such as karate schools, dance schools, art
schools, acting schools, educational schools, music schools and other
such similar uses.
In no fashion shall the form of entertainment violate the requirements
of this Code including but not limited to, Chapter 6 (Alcoholic
Beverages), Chapter 12 (Health Regulations and Licensing), Chapter
15 (Property Maintenance), Chapter 21 (Solid Waste Management),
Chapter 22 (Environmental Regulations), Section 10-7 (Indecency and
Obscenity) and Section 10-5 (Public Peace and Decency).
§ 37-25.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-25.5
AO:979
§ 37-25.5. Outdoor Tables and Chairs. [1999 Code § 17.49.050; Ord.
No. O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Restaurants and eating establishments in the Amboy Avenue Revitalization
Zone are permitted to have outdoor tables and chairs for serving food and
beverages to customers provided that a minimum four (4) feet pedestrian
pathways are not impeded to insure ADA compliance, that all fire codes are
in compliance and that no public right-of-way is encroached upon.
§ 37-25.6. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.49.060; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
The uses prohibited in the AAR Zone shall be as specified in the L-B Zone
and to also include:
§ 37-25.7. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.49.070; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
No accessory uses are permitted.
§ 37-25.8. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.49.080; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
No conditional uses are permitted.
§ 37-25.9. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.49.090; Ord. No. O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
The height, area and yard requirements as specified in the schedule of
Section 37-63, shall be modified in the following manner:
a. Service or gas stations.
b. Fast food restaurants.
c. Massage parlors.
d. Body piercing and tattoo parlors.
e. Go-go bars, strip clubs, cabarets and/or any form of adult entertainment
activities, adult entertainment materials, sales or rentals.
f. Cultural centers and churches.
g. Video arcades.
h. Automobile repair shops.
i. Banquet halls or similar uses.
a. The minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. The minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet.
§ 37-25.5 EDISON CODE § 37-25.9
AO:980
§ 37-25.10. Parking Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.49.100; Ord.
No. O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
The following parking requirements shall be incorporated into the AAR,
Amboy Avenue Revitalization Zone as herein set forth.
c. The required front yard setback shall be five (5) feet with a tolerance of
twenty-five hundredths (0.25) feet. There shall be no deviation from this
five (5) foot dimension including the tolerance without an application
for a variance to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board,
whichever has jurisdiction, for relief from this requirement.
d. The required side yard setback shall be zero (0) feet provided that the
lot line does not abut a residential district in which case the minimum
side yard requirement shall be fifteen (15) feet unless a public street
intervenes in which case the front yard requirement of five (5) foot
setback shall govern. There shall be no deviation from this zero (0) foot
dimension without an application for a variance to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board, whichever has jurisdiction, for relief
from this requirement. Where due to building orientation, lot
configuration or other condition that preclude entry to the rear of a
property for parking area access, loading/unloading, refuse collection,
public safety vehicle access or any other purpose requiring such entry,
a paved alleyway no wider than fifteen (15) feet shall be permitted
alongside or within the frontage of the building. In such cases where
the building has more than one (1) story, all additional stories shall be
constructed pursuant to governing building codes above said alleyway
with the aforementioned side yard requirements where applicable.
e. The minimum rear yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet for
parking.
f. The maximum percent of lot coverage by all buildings shall be seventy
(70%) percent.
g. The maximum percent of lot coverage by all buildings and pavement
shall be ninety-five (95%) percent.
h. The building height shall be a maximum of three (3) stories or forty (40)
feet in height whichever is the lesser.
i. Regardless of the gross floor area of any building, the maximum gross
floor area of each and any separate and individual permitted use within
that building shall be no greater than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet per story.
j. All mechanical equipment must be screened from public view.
k. All buildings must comply with all fire safety and sprinkler laws.
a. Parking and loading for the AAR Zone shall comply with the parking
standards established in Section 37-60 of the Land Use Regulations.
§ 37-25.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-25.10
AO:981
§ 37-25.11. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.49.110; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. 1887-2014016]
Open storage of materials and transition requirements shall be as specified
in the L-B Zone, subsection 37-22.6, except that the maximum buffer area
distance from a residential district shall be ten (10) feet.
§ 37-25.12. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.49.120; Ord. No. O.1870-2014;
Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
b. Parking for residential uses shall conform to RSIS Standards.
c. Future parking needs, as they become evident, shall be satisfied
through the construction of strategic parking lots on properties to be
rendered available along or in the vicinity of Amboy Avenue.
d. Location of Parking Facilities. All on-site parking facilities shall be
located in the rear yard of each property. All parking shall be prohibited
in front and side yards.
e. Contiguous Parking Lots. Buildings on individual parcels in the AAR
Zone are permitted to have contiguous on-site parking areas with free
flowing traffic between said parking areas. The areas of on-site parking
that are not contiguous shall be no closer than five (5) feet to any
property line of the parcel on which they are located. There shall be
available as necessary, access to the rear of such properties for
accessing parking areas, refuse collection, loading/unloading, entry of
public safety vehicles and other necessary functions which require such
entry.
f. Loading/Unloading Requirements.
1. On street loading/unloading shall be prohibited between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
2. All loading/unloading shall be permitted in the rear yard area only.
3. Rear yard cross-access easements shall be required as needed in
order to eventually create a system of screened and buffered
access ways to the rear of nonresidential uses fronting Amboy
Avenue. A minimum fifteen (15) foot wide cross-access easement
shall be dedicated to the municipality in the form of a deed.
Additionally, a minimum ten (10) foot wide buffer area shall be
required adjacent to all residential uses or residential zones
comprised of a five (5) foot to six (6) foot high living evergreen wall
and eight (8) foot high solid fencing to provide screening for the
abutting incompatible uses. Application for a subdivision or site
plan to either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall mandate the cross-access easement and buffer/screening
requirement.
§ 37-25.10 EDISON CODE § 37-25.13
AO:982
§ 37-25.13. Activities Requiring Special Building Design Standards.
[1999 Code § 17.49.130; Ord. No. O.1870-2014; Ord. No.
O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
The following activities regarding any of the buildings in the AAR Zone shall
render the building(s) subject to the requirements of this section:
§ 37-25.14. Facade Design Standards. [1999 Code § 17.49.140; Ord.
No. O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Since all of the existing buildings within the limits of the AAR Zone vary
considerably in age and architecture in their present state, it is
understandable that it is difficult to impose on them a rigid architectural
design standard. Although beauty and character are subjective, there shall
be an underlying design theme to the buildings and specifically to the
facades so that a sense of conformity to a time period is achieved. Variation,
creativity, uniqueness and distinction are not discouraged provided that
there is a visual flow from building to building with no evidence of abrupt
change or disruption in design or theme. Each building, although having its
own identity should complement the others in style and taste without the
look of an exact copy.
The architectural motif that is to be followed throughout the AAR Zone shall
be based on the design of the "Old Clara Barton School Building" which
is located on the southerly side of Amboy Avenue between Fourth Street
and Brower Avenue. The architectural design can be characterized as "turn
of the century." Understandably, exact historic replication is not expected,
however this building is considered the focal point of the AAR Zone and all
future building façade designs shall have its architectural flavor and sense.
a. The new construction of a primary use building on a parcel of land.
b. The addition to an existing primary use building that is fifteen (15%)
percent or more of the gross floor area of the existing building.
c. The renovation or alteration in any manner of any outer wall of a
building that faces street frontage or is considered the front of the
building that constitutes twenty-five (25%) percent or more in area of
the wall(s) being renovated.
d. The renovation or alteration in any manner of any outer wall or
combination of outer walls of a building which constitutes forty (40%)
percent or more of the aggregate area of all the outer walls of the
building.
e. The major internal renovation or alteration of a building which
constitutes fifty (50%) percent or more of the gross floor area.
§ 37-25.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-25.15
AO:983
§ 37-25.15. Characteristics of Special Building Design Standards.
[1999 Code § 17.49.150; Ord. No. O.1870-2014; Ord. No.
O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Although diversity is not prohibited in the building design characteristics,
various specific design criteria are to be followed as listed below:
§ 37-25.16. Sign Standards. [1999 Code § 17.49.160; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
When a building is subject to the requirements of subsection 37-25.14, new
signs for the building shall be installed in accordance to specific standards
as herein set forth. To maintain the desired degree of conformity with an
acceptable level of diversity, all signs shall be installed in accordance with a
style that fits the architectural standards recommended for the AAR Zone.
Other than the above standards all other sign regulations shall be pursuant
to Section 37-62.
§ 37-25.17. Site Standards. [1999 Code § 17.49.170; Ord. No.
O.1870-2014; Ord. No. O.1887-2014; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
If a building subject to the requirements of subsection 37-25.14, is also
installing site appurtenances, they shall be compatible with the streetscape
design as installed by the municipality along Amboy Avenue in the AAR
a. The prominent veneers to be used for facades and sides of buildings
facing the street shall be brick or stone. The brick colors shall be in the
brown, beige or red tones. Stone coloring shall be more flexible but
maintain a subdued color scheme in keeping with the brick tones.
b. Other veneers such as vinyl, aluminum or other man-made siding
products and wood veneer products shall be considered secondary
veneers to compliment the brick or stone. The colors of such veneers
shall be in subdued tones to blend in a compatible and aesthetic
fashion. The use of fluorescent colors is prohibited as are abrupt color
changes, even in the subdued tones, that clash visually.
c. All facades or sides of buildings facing the street shall have a décor that
prohibits for a maximum distance of fifteen (15) feet horizontally, bare
unadorned walls along each floor. These walls shall have appurtenances
either decorative or functional to satisfy the condition. Such
appurtenances shall consist of windows, doors, columns, lintels,
cornices, balconies, overhangs, awnings, arches, railings or any other
architectural items that fit the herein recommended design theme.
d. Roofs shall be of the "A" frame peak type wherever possible and include
turrets, cupolas, towers and gables to reflect the "turn of the century"
and "Victorian" attributes. Where it is necessary to install other than a
peaked roof due to structural or height restrictions, parapets, cornices,
eaves, turrets and other architectural devices that also reflect the
above stated attributes shall be utilized.
§ 37-25.15 EDISON CODE § 37-25.17
AO:984
Zone. The proposed appurtenances which include but are not limited to
landscaping, curbing, sidewalks, tree grates, benches, area lamps, trash
receptacles, and planters shall comply with the streetscape specifications of
said zone which are available at the Office of the Township Engineer.
§ 37-26. through § 37-29. (RESERVED)
§ 37-30. O-S, O-S-1 AND O-S-2 SERVICE DISTRICTS.
§ 37-30.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.52.010; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
These districts are differentiated one from the other by the schedule of
development and use. The purpose of these districts is to provide a
reasonable use of land for nonresidential purposes, but at the same time
maintain a residential presence.
§ 37-30.2. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.52.020; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
§ 37-30.3. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.52.030; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Use customary and incidental to the principal use and located within the
principal building(s).
§ 37-30.4. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.52.040; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Dwelling unit as an accessory use, subject to the following:
a. Medical and dentistry and related professional services;
b. Business and professional offices and banks;
c. In the O-S and O-S-1 districts only, barbershops, beauty shops and
similar service establishments;
d. In the O-S and O-S-1 districts only, retail sales of books, stationery
sales, arts and craft sales, antique stores, photography sales and
supplies and recreational equipment sales. In no case shall any use be
permitted which involves the sale of food, inclusive of candy, ice cream,
etc.;
e. Single-family detached dwelling.
a. The dwelling unit shall be accessory to the principal use at the site and
shall be located in the same building.
§ 37-25.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-30.4
AO:985
§ 37-30.5. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.52.050; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the schedule,
Section 37-63.
§ 37-30.6. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.52.060; Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Same as specified for the L-B district. (Editor's Note: See subsection
37-22.6)
§ 37-30.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.52.070; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Off-street parking and loading requirements are as specified in Section
37-60.
§ 37-30.8. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.52.080; Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-30.9. Architectural Regulation. [1999 Code § 17.52.090; Ord.
No. O.1941-2016]
The development character of these districts in most instances was or
is residential in appearance. Most buildings were originally constructed
as single-family homes. In this context, any new, altered or enlarged
construction shall be designed to maintain a residential appearance.
§ 37-31. R-I RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-31.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.56.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
b. A dwelling unit shall have an exterior entrance separate from that of the
principal business use at the site.
c. The inclusion of a dwelling unit as an accessory to the principle unit will
be subject to the required Affordable Housing Development Fee.
a. Offices for executive, administrative, professional and business
purposes;
b. Scientific or research laboratories, provided that all activities and
equipment associated with the principal use are housed within the
principal structure(s);
§ 37-30.4 EDISON CODE § 37-31.1
AO:986
§ 37-31.2. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.56.020]
The following uses are specifically intended to be prohibited:
§ 37-31.3. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.56.030]
Any accessory use on the same lot customary and incidental to any use
permitted in this district, such as but not limited to:
c. Fabrication and assembly of products, but not including uses which
require operation of grinders, scalers, drop drainers or for uses
involving chemical restructuring of materials;
d. Processing and printing facilities for finished products or materials;
e. Commercial recreational uses limited to tennis, racquetball and
swimming facilities.
a. Residential uses;
b. Commercial uses, except if permitted as an accessory use hereafter;
c. Hazardous use of buildings and lands as follows:
1. No building or land shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired for the purpose of
processing, manufacturing, producing or storing hazardous, toxic
or corrosive substances. This provision shall not apply to the
incidental use and limited storage of such substances in connection
with uses permitted by this chapter.
2. "Hazardous, toxic and corrosive substances" shall be defined as
those named in regulations promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and other Federal and State of
New Jersey regulatory agencies.
a. Quarters for necessary caretakers and watchmen located on the same
lot;
b. Cafeteria facilities for the sale of items to and for the personal
convenience of persons employed on the premises;
c. Showroom for the limited sale of products to employees only, provided
that:
1. It shall be limited to an area not more than one (1%) percent of the
total building area, but in no event shall the area exceed one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet,
2. It shall be an integral part of the building,
3. Sales of products to the general public may be permitted in
accordance with Township ordinances.
§ 37-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-31.4
AO:987
§ 37-31.4. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.56.040]
a. Freestanding telecommunication towers subject to the following
conditions:
1. The telecommunication towers shall meet all other zoning
regulations for freestanding towers including, but not limited to,
height and setback,
2. The height of such towers does not exceed the distance between
the tower base and any property line of a parcel which is in any
zone other than L-I or R-I zone, and
3. No such tower shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of
any school or residential dwelling;
4. Any proposed tower shall be "mono-pole," unless the applicant can
empirically demonstrate, and the approving Board agrees, that a
different type of pole is necessary for the collocation of additional
antennas on the tower or for camouflaging purposes.
5. To the greatest extent possible, no tower shall be located to be
visible from any historic district or site as duly designated by
Edison Township, the State of New Jersey and/or by the Federal
government.
6. To the greatest extent possible, no tower shall be located to be
visible from any public street or from any residential zone.
7. To the extent possible, any new tower shall be located behind
existing buildings and/or natural topographic elevations in order to
screen the tower's base from being visible from adjacent properties
and from any street right-of-way.
8. All new towers shall be camouflaged (e.g. housed in a "silo," "bell
tower," etc. or made to look like a "tree" or a non oversized
"flagpole") as may be appropriate in the context of the visibility of
the tower from different vantage points throughout the Township
and the existing land uses and vegetation in the vicinity of the
subject site.
9. The height of any proposed new supporting tower shall not exceed
one hundred fifty (150) feet unless it can be empirically
demonstrated by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the Board, that
a higher height is necessary for the proposed installation of the
antenna(s) to satisfactorily operate.
10. To the greatest extent possible, all cables shall be installed within
underground conduits.
11. No signage is permitted, unless "warning" and/or equipment
information signs are deemed necessary for safety purposes and
are specifically approved by the approving Board.
§ 37-31.4 EDISON CODE § 37-31.4
AO:988
12. Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as needed and as
specifically approved by the approving Board in no case less than
one (1) off-street parking be provided per each carrier proposed to
be located at any antenna site.
13. No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that specifically
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any
such required lighting shall be focused and shielded to the greatest
extent possible so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby
properties. The applicant shall provide to the approving Board all
applicable FAA standards regarding lighting that may apply to a
proposed tower.
14. Individual cabinets for the required electronic equipment related to
the wireless communications antenna(s) shall be permitted in
accordance with the following design criteria:
(a) Any proposed cabinet enclosing required electronic equipment
shall not be more than fifteen (15) feet in height nor more than
two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area, and only one (1)
such cabinet shall be permitted for each provider of wireless
communication services located on the site;
(b) No electronic equipment shall interfere with any public safety
communications;
(c) All of the electronic equipment shall be automated so that, to
the greatest extent possible, the need for on-site maintenance
and the commensurate need for vehicular trips to and from the
site will be minimized.
(d) All the required electronic equipment for all anticipated
communication carriers to be located on the subject site shall
be housed within a one and one-half (1 1/2) story building,
which building shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) gross
square feet in area and twenty (20) feet in height, and which
shall be designed with a single-ridge, pitched roof with a
residential or barnlike character of appearance; and
(e) The building may have one (1) light at the entrance to the
building, provided that the light is attached to the building, is
focused downward and the switch to that light is turned on
only when workers are at the building.
15. Between the location of the tower and the building enclosing
related electronic equipment and any public street or residential
dwelling unit or residential zoning district within view of the tower
and the building, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with
the following:
(a) The landscaping shall consist of a combination of existing and/
or newly planted evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of
§ 37-31.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-31.4
AO:989
§ 37-31.5. Height, Area and Bulk Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.56.050]
Height, area and bulk requirements are as specified in the Schedule of
Regulations, Section 37-63.
§ 37-31.6. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.56.060]
All uses hereafter established shall conform to the following requirements:
sufficient density to screen the view of the tower, particularly
at its base, to the maximum extent reasonably possible, and to
enhance the appearance of the building from the surrounding
residential properties and any public street;
(b) The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed
Landscape Architect who shall present testimony to the
approving Board regarding the adequacy of the plan to screen
the tower from view and to enhance the appearance of the
building; and
(c) Any newly planted evergreen trees shall be at least eight (8)
feet high spaced on ten (10) inch centers at time of planting,
and any newly planted deciduous trees shall be a minimum
caliper of three (3) inches to three and one-half (3 1/2) inches
caliper, spaced on thirty (30) inch centers at time of planting.
b. Dishes or antennas which transmit microwaves from a tower, rooftop,
water tower or other elevated location subject to the following
conditions:
1. The dishes or antennas shall meet all other zoning regulations for
dishes and antennas including, but not limited to, height and
setback,
2. The height of such dishes or antennas does not exceed the distance
between the dish or antenna base and any property line of a parcel
which is in any zone other than an L-I or R-I zone,
3. No such dish or antenna shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any school or residential dwelling.
a. Transition Requirements. There shall be established along the line of
any lot that is contiguous to any residential district, unless the side or
rear lot line coincides with a State or Federal highway or railroad rightof-
way, a buffer area at least thirty (30) feet in width which shall consist
of trees, fencing, earthen berm or any combination of the same.
b. Storage. All materials and equipment shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or shall otherwise be screened by walls, fences and
landscaping to adequately screen such materials and equipment from
view outside the boundaries of the lot.
§ 37-31.4 EDISON CODE § 37-31.6
AO:990
§ 37-31.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.56.070]
§ 37-31.8. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.56.080]
Signs shall be as specified in Section 37-62.
§ 37-32. R-I-1 RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-32.1. Purpose and Intent. [1999 Code § 17.60.010]
The purpose and intent of the R-I-1 restricted industrial district is to permit
low intensity, low traffic generating, environmentally sensitive industrial
uses which are compatible with surrounding nonindustrial uses and
protective of adjacent potable watershed lands.
§ 37-32.2. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.60.020]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
c. Where an R-I district lot abuts a residential district, the minimum yard
depth adjacent to the residential district shall be seventy (70) feet.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve,
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the side and rear yards;
provided, however, that no parking area shall be located nearer than
ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line.
a. Offices for executive, administrative, professional and business
purposes;
b. Finishing and assembly of products made from previously prepared or
refined materials and delivered to the site but not involving chemical
compounding or mixing or use of solvents, dyes or similar agents which
are classified as hazardous substances;
c. Mechanical assembly of high technology and electronic equipment;
d. Warehousing facilities for products or materials, excluding hazardous,
toxic, flammable and corrosive substances;
e. Electrical equipment and appliances, heating, ventilation, airconditioning,
plumbing and refrigeration equipment service
businesses;
f. Craftsman's or contractor's shop, such as carpentry, plumbing, welding,
electrical or machine shop;
§ 37-31.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-32.2
AO:991
§ 37-32.3. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.60.030]
The following uses are specifically intended to be prohibited:
§ 37-32.4. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.60.040]
Any accessory use on the same lot customary and incidental to any use
permitted in this district, such as but not limited to: showroom for the sale
of products, provided that no more than ten (10%) percent or one thousand
(1,000) square feet, whichever the lesser, of the gross floor area for the
entire site is used for retail sales. Such retail sales shall be accessory to a
permitted principal use within the facility. Further, such use shall be located
on a lot of no less than three (3) acres in size.
g. Indoor tennis courts, handball courts, gymnasium, health clubs,
aerobics or dance studio or similar uses;
h. Scientific or research laboratories (excluding genetically engineered
products), for nonhazardous, nontoxic, noncorrosive substances,
provided that all activities and equipment associated with the principal
use are housed within the principal structure(s);
i. Agricultural uses limited to indoor operations only, such as greenhouses
and aquaculture facilities;
j. Freezer and cold storage facilities not utilizing hazardous or toxic
refrigerants.
a. Residential uses;
b. Commercial uses, except indoor tennis courts, handball courts,
gymnasium, health clubs, aerobic or dance studios or similar uses;
c. The use, manufacturing, generation, refining, transportation,
treatment, disposal, processing, handling, transfer or storage of toxic,
hazardous, flammable or corrosive materials by any "industrial
establishment" as such term is defined in the Environmental Cleanup
Responsibility Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1K-6 et seq. and its regulations, as such
Act and its regulations may be amended front time to time;
d. Hazardous use of buildings and lands as set forth in subsection
37-3.1.2c of this chapter;
e. Professional dry-cleaning operations and similar uses;
f. Transportation facilities and truck depots;
g. Keeping or raising livestock, domesticated animals, fowl, reptiles,
amphibians or other similar type animals;
h. Any use involving underground or aboveground and outdoor storage
tanks for the storage of toxic, hazardous, flammable or corrosive
materials.
§ 37-32.2 EDISON CODE § 37-32.5
AO:992
§ 37-32.5. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.60.050]
None.
§ 37-32.6. Height, Area and Bulk Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.60.060]
Height, area and bulk requirements are as specified in the Schedule of
Regulations, Section 37-63.
§ 37-32.7. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.60.070]
All uses hereafter established shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 37-32.8. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.60.080]
a. Transition Requirements. There shall be established along the line of
any lot that is contiguous to any residential district (unless the side or
rear lot line coincides with a State or Federal highway or railroad rightof-
way) a buffer area of at least fifty (50) feet in width which shall
consist of trees, fencing, earthen, berm or any combination of the same.
b. Storage. All materials and equipment shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings.
c. Any/all storage of nonhazardous, nontoxic, nonflammable and
noncorrosive liquid material or products, whether internal or external,
shall be provided with a diked containment area with a capacity equal
to one hundred twenty (120%) percent of the capacity for the stored
volume of material, with the containment area provided with positive
drainage to a collection point served by an oil separator chamber and/or
such other control devices deemed necessary by the Township Divisions
of Health, Engineering and Fire to preclude any discharge of materials
from the storage area or containment area onto any ground surface.
Such storage and containment facilities shall comply with all applicable
Federal, State and local environmental, health, safety and fire codes,
laws, rules and regulations and shall be inspected and approved by the
Township Health Officer and Fire Subcode Official prior to use.
d. Where an R-I-1 district abuts a residential district, the minimum yard
depth adjacent to the residential district shall be seventy (70) feet.
a. Off-street parking space and loading space, together with appropriate
access thereto, shall be provided on the same lot as the building they
are intended to serve, in accordance with the standards of Section
37-60.
b. Off-street parking space and loading space may be located in the side
and rear yards, provided that no parking or loading area shall be
located nearer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line nor nearer
§ 37-32.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-32.8
AO:993
§ 37-32.9. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.60.090]
Signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 37-62.
§ 37-33. L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-33.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.64.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses or a use or building similar or equivalent:
than thirty (30) feet to any side or rear lot line when the lot line is
contiguous to any residential district.
c. All surface water from any parking in this zone shall be collected and
discharged to a stormwater transmission system approved by the
Township Division of Engineering. No surface runoff from parking areas
or loading areas shall be allowed to percolate into permeable on-site or
contiguous off-site soils.
a. Offices for executive, administrative or professional purposes;
b. Scientific or research laboratories, including incidental pilot plants in
connection therewith;
c. Manufacturing, processing, finishing, fabrication and assembly of
products subject to the limitations of subsection 37-4.14, Uses
Prohibited in All Zones, and subsection 37-33.8;
d. Warehousing-distribution facilities for products or materials but not
including truck terminals as defined herein;
e. Retail sale and warehousing-distribution facilities, provided that no
more than ten (10%) percent or two thousand (2,000) square feet,
whichever the lesser, of the gross floor area is used for retail sales.
Such retail sales shall be accessory to a permitted principal use within
the facility. Further, such use shall be located on a lot of no less than
three (3) acres in size;
f. Electrical equipment and appliances, heating, ventilating, airconditioning,
plumbing and refrigeration equipment sales and service
businesses;
g. Packaging and bottling plant;
h. Indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, handball courts and health clubs or
similar uses;
i. Newspaper and printing establishments;
j. Craftsman's or contractor's shop, such as carpentry, plumbing, welding,
electrical or machine shop;
§ 37-32.8 EDISON CODE § 37-33.1
AO:994
§ 37-33.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.64.020]
Any accessory use on the same lot customary and incidental to the principal
use on the lot, and further provided that, recognizing that occasional
inventory or stock clearance sales are necessary, four (4) such sales per
year may be permitted.
§ 37-33.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.64.030]
k. Wholesale business establishment, distribution plant, parcel delivery
establishment, cold-storage plant or food commissary.
a. Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments wherein food
and drink are consumed within the principal building, provided that
such use is located within an industrial park for which an approved
overall development plan is of record. Such uses shall not be
interpreted to include and are hereby defined to exclude drive-in
restaurants or refreshment stands, commonly called "snack bars,"
"dairy bars," "hamburger stands" or "hot dog stands" or similar uses
where customers and patrons are served food, soft drinks or ice cream
primarily for their immediate consumption outside the confines of the
building or structure in which the business is conducted;
b. Transportation facilities and truck depots, provided that the use is
individually located on a lot within an industrial park as defined herein
for which an improved overall development plan or general
development plan is of record and has Edison Township Planning Board
approval. An industrial park shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25)
acres in size and consist of not less than four (4) principal uses located
on five (5) acre minimum size lots and subject to the following: A
transportation facility or truck depot shall not include bus, truck, trailer
and/or tank, washing and cleaning facilities, new or leased vehicle
storage areas and vehicle dismantling facilities and further provided:
1. No repair or painting shall be conducted out of doors,
2. No vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored within the front yard
area,
3. No such use shall be located on a lot within two hundred (200) feet
of a residential zone, day-care facility, public park, school, church
or mosque,
4. No such use shall be included as an accessory activity to the
salvage and/or sale of used vehicles or parts thereof,
5. No such use shall engage in the activity of crushing, cutting or
general disassembly of vehicles; such activity commonly referred to
as a "salvage" or "junkyard" are prohibited by this chapter;
c. Automotive repair, inclusive of body repair, painting, and customizing,
provided that such use is located within an industrial park for which an
§ 37-33.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-33.3
AO:995
improved overall development plan is of record, and further provided
that the use complies with paragraphs 1. through 5. below:
1. No repair or painting shall be conducted out of doors,
2. No vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored within the front yard
area,
3. No such use shall be located adjacent to any residential zone,
4. No such use shall include as an accessory activity the salvage and/
or sale of used vehicles or parts thereof,
5. No such use shall engage in the activity of crushing, cutting or
general disassembly of vehicles; such activity commonly referred to
as a "salvage" or "junkyard" are prohibited by this chapter;
d. Freight yard classified as second class railroad property pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:29A-23, but not including privately owned rail siding(s),
provided that the use complies with the following:
1. No principal or accessory structure associated with such use shall
be located less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
2. A buffer consisting of earthen berm, solid fencing and plants, or
any combination of the same, shall be installed along any lot line of
a freight yard use which coincides with a residential zone boundary.
The buffer shall have an effective height of no less than ten (10)
feet and shall provide an effective noise and visual barrier of the
freight yard use to the adjacent residential zone. Existing trees of
three (3) inches or more caliper shall be incorporated into the
buffer design.
3. No maintenance, security or other access driveway shall be located
between the required buffer and an adjacent residential zone;
e. Freight yard classified as second class railroad property pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54-29A-23, provided that the use complies with the following:
1. No principal or accessory structure associated with such use shall
be located less than fifty (50) feet from the lot line of any residential
use or any residentially-zoned lot, owned by any person or entity
other than the owner of the freight yard classified as second class
railroad property.
2. A buffer consisting of earthen berm, board-on-board fencing or
equal and plants or any combination of the same shall be installed
along any lot line of a freight yard use which coincides with a zone
boundary, excepting any lot or lots that are not the subject of an
application for development. The buffer shall have an effective
height of no less than ten (10) feet and shall provide an effective
visual barrier of the freight yard use to the adjacent residential
§ 37-33.3 EDISON CODE § 37-33.3
AO:996
§ 37-33.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.64.040]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the Schedule of
Regulations, Section 37-63, except as permitted herewith:
zone. Existing trees of three (3) inches or more caliper shall be
incorporated into the buffer design.
3. No maintenance, security or other access driveway shall be located
between the required buffer and an adjacent residential zone;
f. Freestanding telecommunication towers subject to the following
conditions:
1. The telecommunication towers shall meet all other zoning
regulations for freestanding towers including, but not limited to,
height and setback,
2. The height of such towers does not exceed the distance between
the tower base and any property line of a parcel which is in any
zone other than L-I or R-I zone, and
3. No such tower shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of
any school or residential dwelling;
4. The conditions set forth in subsection 37-31.4, paragraph a4
through a15.
g. Dishes or antennas which transmit microwaves from a tower, rooftop,
water tower or other elevated location subject to the following
conditions:
1. The dishes or antennas shall meet all other zoning regulations for
dishes and antennas including, but not limited to, height and
setback.
2. The height of such dishes or antennas does not exceed the distance
between the dish or antenna base and any property line of a parcel
which is in any zone other than an L-I or R-I zone.
3. No such dish or antenna shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any school or residential dwelling.
a. Permitted Modifications--Industrial Parks.
1. An industrial park development shall be permitted in the L-I
district, provided that it shall have a total area of at least twentyfive
(25) acres. No individual use within said industrial park shall
be on a plot of land less than one (1) acre in size. Not more than
fifty (50%) percent of the total land area in the industrial park shall
be devoted to uses of individual plots of less than two (2) acres in
size. Within an industrial park, all frontages shall be a minimum of
§ 37-33.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-33.4
AO:997
one hundred fifty (150) feet; rear yards shall be a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet; and all front yard setbacks shall be a
minimum of forty (40) feet. The minimum side yard shall be twentyfive
(25) feet in width.
2. The height of building(s) and/or the number of stories may be
increased by ten (10) feet and/or one (1) story for each additional
forty thousand (40,000) square feet of lot area above the minimum
required, except that no structure shall exceed one hundred (100)
feet in height, and further provided that this modification shall not
be permitted where the structure is or is proposed to be located
within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zone boundary. This
modification shall be applicable to industrial parks.
3. Within an industrial park, commercial and personal service uses,
limited to restaurants, barber and beauty shops, clothing and drug
stores, newspaper and stationery stores, shall be permitted,
provided that such uses occupy less than one (1%) percent of the
floor area of the industrial park in which located.
b. General Development Plan Requirements for Industrial Parks.
1. Application Procedure. The applicant shall submit a general
development plan for the entire tract. The general development
plan shall set forth the amount of nonresidential floor space and the
floor area ratio for the industrial park development in its entirety,
according to a schedule which sets forth the sequence of
construction of the various sections of the development. Subject to
the provisions hereof and of other applicable law, the development
shall be developed in accordance with the general development
plan approved by the Planning Board, notwithstanding any
provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.2, or an ordinance or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto after the effective date of the approval.
The applicant shall file an application form for a general
development plan and pay applicable fees as set forth in the
subdivision and site plan ordinance of Edison Township. The
application submission shall conform to paragraph b2 below.
In making its determination regarding duration of the effect of
approval of the general development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the amount of nonresidential floor area to be constructed,
prevailing economic conditions, the timing schedule to be followed
in completing the development and the likelihood of its fulfillment,
the developer's capability of completing the proposed development
and the contents of the general development plan and any
conditions which the Planning Board attaches to the approval
thereof.
The term of the effect of the general development plan approval
shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set
forth in this subsection, except that the term of the effect of the
§ 37-33.4 EDISON CODE § 37-33.4
AO:998
approval shall not exceed twenty (20) years from the date upon
which the developer receives final approval of the first section of
the development. Upon the expiration of the initial term and for
good cause, the Planning Board may grant extensions of the term
up to the maximum term permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39.
2. Contents of General Development Plan Application. A general
development plan application shall include such information as is
reasonably necessary to disclose the following:
(a) The location and size of the site and the nature of the
landowner's interest in the land to be developed;
(b) The general land use plan at scale of one (1) inch to four
hundred (400) feet or greater indicating the tract area and
general locations of the land uses to be included in the planned
development. The amount of nonresidential floor area to be
provided and proposed land area to be devoted to
nonresidential use shall be set forth. In addition, the proposed
types of nonresidential uses to be included in the planned
development shall be set forth, and the land area to be
occupied by each proposed use shall be estimated. The density
and intensity of use of the entire planned development shall be
set forth, and a residential density and a nonresidential floor
area ratio shall be provided;
(c) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, which may include rail, heliport,
docks, terminals and facilities for pedestrian access within the
development. The general development plan shall also show
proposed improvements to the existing transportation system
outside the development. The general development plan shall
also show means of access for all emergency services. Further,
the circulation plan shall form the basis for an Official Map
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32. At time of final site plan, the
Official Map shall be filed by applicant as a part of
development application;
(d) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and
general location of any land areas to be set aside for
conservation and recreation purposes and a general
description of improvements proposed to be made thereon,
including a plan for the operation and maintenance of parks
and recreational lands;
(e) A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewage and water lines, any drainage facilities
necessitated by the physical characteristics of the site,
proposed methods for handling solid waste disposal; and a plan
for the operation and maintenance of proposed utilities;
§ 37-33.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-33.4
AO:999
(f) A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed
method of controlling and managing stormwater on the site,
including preliminary engineering estimates of stormwater
run-off quantities;
(g) An environmental inventory including a general description of
the vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology,
climate and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made
structures or features, any hazardous/toxic material and/or
contamination on the site and the probable impact of the
development on the environmental attributes of the site;
(h) A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include, but not
be limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal;
(i) A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned
development whose construction is contemplated over a period
of years, including any terms or conditions which are intended
to protect the interests of the public prior to the completion of
the development in its entirety;
(j) A plan showing all off-tract improvements and/or extensions of
municipal facilities;
(k) A road plan for total development, showing where any
proposed roads continue and/or form a roadway system
outside the site, if applicable;
(l) A preliminary plan for development shall include all items
required in the checklist for the major site plan and subdivision
application.
3. Other Requirements.
(a) Open Storage of Materials. Except in the case of marine facility
uses, no open display or storage of products, materials and
equipment shall be permitted in a required front yard area.
(b) Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and
rear yards and beneath buildings, provided, however, that no
parking space for a nonresidential use shall be located nearer
than ten (10) feet to any street curbline. Parking beneath a
building shall not be considered floor area of the building for
any purpose. Any parking proposed within a required front,
side, or rear setback area shall be screened with a dense
planting of five (5) foot to six (6) foot high evergreens placed at
seven (7) foot centers.
4. Procedure for Variation from General Development Plan. The
developer shall be required to gain the prior approval of the
Planning Board if, after approval of the general development plan,
§ 37-33.4 EDISON CODE § 37-33.4
AO:1000
the developer wishes to make any variation in the location of land
uses within the development or increases the floor area ratio of
nonresidential development in any section of the development.
5. Roadway Standards.
(a) All existing roads and proposed roads to be dedicated shall be
improved and/or constructed in accordance with the Township
standards.
(b) The right-of-way and pavement widths for improvement of
private ways, roads and alleys shall be determined from sound
planning and engineering standards in conformity with the
estimated needs of the full development proposed and the
traffic to be generated thereby and shall be adequate and
sufficient in size, location and design to accommodate the
maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and the access of
fire-fighting equipment and police vehicles. Internal private
roads shall have a required pavement width as follows:
(1) Two-way traffic roads shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36)
feet paved width;
(2) Sidewalks, if any, shall be at least four (4) feet in width.
Service ways for public service and emergency vehicles
shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet in width;
(3) Development Staging. As a condition of final approval of
the general development plan, the Board may permit the
implementation of the plan, the plan in whole or in
sections or in stages consisting of one (1) or more sections
or stages. Such sections or stages shall be:
i. Functionally self-contained and self-sustaining with
regard to access, parking utilities, open spaces and
similar physical features and shall be capable of
substantial occupancy, operation and maintenance
upon completion of construction and development,
ii. Properly related to other services of the community as
a whole and to those facilities and services yet to be
provided in full execution and implementation of the
development plan,
iii. Provide temporary or permanent transitional features,
buffers or protective areas as the conditions of
ownership and maintenance may require to prevent
damage or detriment to any completed section or
stage of development. Plans and specifications of such
sections or stages are to be filed with the Board and
are to be of such detail to demonstrate the
§ 37-33.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-33.4
AO:1001
§ 37-33.5. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.64.050]
All uses hereafter established shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 37-33.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.64.060]
§ 37-33.7. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.64.070]
Signs shall be subject to the regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-33.8. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.64.080]
arrangement of land uses, (public and private) utilities
and emergency service facilities.
(c) Overall Development Plan Requirement for Industrial Parks.
All requirements to be as specified in paragraph b5(b)(3)ii
above except as indicated below:
The term of the effect of overall development plan approval
shall not exceed ten (10) years from the date upon which the
developer receives final approval of the first section of the
development.
a. Transition requirements: same as set forth in the R-I district.
b. Storage. All materials and equipment shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or shall otherwise be screened by walls, fences and
landscaping to adequately screen such materials and equipment from
outside the boundaries of the lot.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking space shall be nearer than
fifteen (15) feet to any street lot line nor nearer than five (5) feet to the
front of a building, and further provided that complete building
perimeter parking is prohibited.
a. Tanning;
b. Stone crushing;
c. Paper pulp manufacture;
d. Cloth manufacture requiring formaldehyde or equivalent as an additive;
e. Metal manufacture of raw or recyclable materials;
f. Metal fabrication of trailers, truck bodies and cranes for lease or sale;
§ 37-33.4 EDISON CODE § 37-33.8
AO:1002
§ 37-33.9. Application for Development and Checklist. [1999 Code
§ 17.64.090]
An application for development, in accordance with subsections 37-33.1
through 37-33.8 shall be submitted with the required fees and all required
submissions set forth under the applicable checklist as established in
Schedule B and Schedule C,28 which schedule is attached to the ordinance
codified in this section and made a part of this section by reference and is
on file in the Clerk's Office for public inspection.
§ 37-33.10. Contribution Disclosure Statements. [1999 Code
§ 17.64.100]
g. Truck terminals.
a. Definitions. As used in this section:
APPLICATION CHECKLIST — Means the list of submission
requirements adopted by ordinance and provided by the Municipal
agency to a developer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
DEVELOPER — Means a developer as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, the
legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any of any land proposed
to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
PROFESSIONAL — Means any person or entity whose principals are
required to be licensed by New Jersey Law and who supplies legal
representation, expert testimony or written reports in support of an
application. Professionals shall include both any individuals supplying
the representation, testimonies or reports and the firms or entities in
which the individuals practice.
CONTRIBUTION — Means every loan, gift, subscription, advance or
transfer of money or other thing of value, including any item of real
property or personal property, tangible or intangible (but not including
services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering a
candidate, committee or organization), made to or on behalf of any
candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates committee, political
committee, continuing political committee or political party committee
and any pledge, promise or other commitment or assumption of liability
to make such transfer. For purposes of reports required under the
provisions of the ordinance, any such commitment or assumption shall
be deemed to have been a contribution upon the date when such
commitment is made or liability assumed.
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — Means a list specifying
the amount, date, and the recipient of any and all contributions made
to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, political committee, continuing political committee or
28.Editor's Note: Schedule B and Schedule C may be found at the end of this chapter.
§ 37-33.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-33.10
AO:1003
political party committee of, or pertaining to, this municipality, made
up to one (1) year prior to filing the variance application and/or during
the pendency of the application process, and required to be reported
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.
b. General Provisions.
1. Disclosure Requirements.
(a) Any application for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-70(d)
shall include in the application contribution disclosure
statements for all developers; all associates of the developers
who would be subject to disclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1 or 40:55D-48.2; and all professionals who apply
for or provide testimony, plans, or reports in support of the
variance and who have an enforceable proprietary interest in
the property or development which is the subject of the
application or whose fee in whole or part is contingent upon
the outcome of the application. Regardless of whether the
owner of the property which is the subject of the variance
application falls in any of the categories established in the
preceding sentence, the applicant shall include in the
application a contribution disclosure statement for the owner.
(b) During the pendency of the application process until final site
plan approval is granted, any applicant for a variance pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) shall amend its contribution disclosure
statements to include continuing disclosure of all contributions
within the scope of disclosure requirement of the above
subdivision.
2. Inclusion of Contribution Disclosure Statement as an Element of
the Application Checklist.
(a) An application checklist ordinance is adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 to require contribution disclosure
statement from any and all owners, developers, or
professionals applying for or providing testimony, plans, or
reports in support of any application for a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d).
(b) The municipal Board of Adjustment shall amend its application
checklist to include the contribution disclosure statement
specified in the above subdivision.
3. Availability of the Disclosure Statement. All contribution disclosure
statements shall be available in the office of the administrative
officer for review by any member of the public.
4. Admission of Contribution Disclosure Statement Prohibited. The
contents of any contribution disclosure statement required to be
filed, and any comments or statements concerning same, shall be
§ 37-33.10 EDISON CODE § 37-33.10
AO:1004
§ 37-34. ROL RESEARCH, OFFICE AND LABORATORY DISTRICT.
§ 37-34.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.68.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
§ 37-34.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.68.020]
Any accessory use on the same or on a contiguous lot customary and
incidental to any use permitted in this district, including but not limited to
parking decks and garages on a lot containing office uses of fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet or greater, convenient shops selling food, medical
supplies, stationery, dry goods and other similar products shall be
permitted, provided that such uses shall not occupy more than five (5%)
percent of the gross floor area of buildings located on the lot, and further
provided that no advertisement of such uses shall be placed so as to attract
the general public.
§ 37-34.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.68.030]
inadmissible for any purpose at any hearing of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, and furthermore this information shall not become
part of the official record before that Board on any application.
a. Offices for executive, administrative and professional purposes;
b. Educational and technical training institutions and schools, banks and
insurance offices;
c. Retail business uses limited to restaurants, clothing and shoe shops,
drug stores, variety shops, department stores, radio, television and
music shops, travel agencies, copy services, book and stationery stores,
etc., provided that only twenty (20%) percent of the total floor area of
the building(s) on a lot shall be used for retail business uses;
d. Communications offices and studios, scientific and research
laboratories;
e. Indoor theaters, tennis courts, health spas and similar commercial,
recreational uses;
f. Motel/hotel containing not less than one hundred (100) transient rental
rooms and motel/convention center.
a. Drive-in bank, provided that same is an accessory use to a principal
permitted use in the zone;
b. Enclosed and open swimming pools and health spas as an accessory use
to a motel or convention center use only.
§ 37-33.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-34.4
AO:1005
§ 37-34.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.68.040]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in Schedule A, Section
37-63 and as set in subsection 37-34.6, paragraph c.
§ 37-34.5. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.68.050]
§ 37-34.6. Required Off-Street Parking and Loading. [1999 Code
§ 17.68.060]
§ 37-34.7. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.68.070]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-35. FBZ FLEXIBLE BUSINESS ZONE.
a. Transition Requirement. There shall be established along the line of any
lot that is contiguous to any residential district, unless contiguous zone
boundary lines coincide with a Federal or State highway right-of-way or
railroad, a buffer area at least thirty (30) feet in width, plus, for each
ten (10) foot interval or fraction thereof of building height exceeding
forty-five (45) feet, an additional five (5) foot width of buffer area shall
be required.
b. Storage. All materials and equipment shall be stored in the principal
building(s) or shall otherwise be screened by walls, fences and
landscaping to adequately screen such materials and equipment from
outside the boundaries of the lot.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking space shall be nearer than
thirty (30) feet to any street lot line nor nearer than ten (10) feet to the
front of a building, and further provided that complete building
perimeter parking is prohibited.
c. Off-street parking and loading may be provided in an enclosed parking
deck or garage, above and/or below grade. The design standards in
Section 37-60 shall apply to such garage or deck insofar as is
practicable. If parking decks or garages are constructed, the lot
coverage provisions of the height, area, yard and building requirements
otherwise applicable in this district shall be as follows:
1. Maximum percent of lot coverage by building, inclusive of
accessory buildings: forty-five (45%) percent.
2. Maximum percent of lot coverage by all buildings and pavement:
eighty (80%) percent.
§ 37-34.4 EDISON CODE § 37-35.1
AO:1006
§ 37-35.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. O.1898-2015]
Any property in the FBZ Flexible Business Zone may be developed and used
for the permitted uses and in accordance with the development standards
in the zoning district in which the property is situated, and, may also be
developed and used for the permitted uses and in accordance with the
development standards for the following zoning districts:
G-B General Business District
G-BH General Business District
L-I Light Industrial District
O-S Office-Service District
O-S-1 Office-Service District
O-S-2 Office-Service District
R-I Restricted Industrial District
R-I-1 Restricted Industrial District
RRRD Raritan River Revitalization District
§ 37-35.2. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. O.1898-2015]
Any property in the Flexible Business Zone may be developed and used for
the accessory uses and in accordance with the development standards in
the zoning district in which the property is situated, or, if the property is
developed or used for the accessory uses permitted in the zoning districts
listed in subsection 37-35.1 then the accessory uses for that zoning district
are allowed.
§ 37-35.3. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. O.1898-2015]
§ 37-35.4. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. No. O.1898-2015]
a. Any property in the Flexible Business Zone may be developed and used
for the conditional uses and in accordance with the development
standards in the zoning district in which the property is situated, or, if
the property is developed or used for the accessory uses permitted in
the zoning districts listed in subsection 37-35.1 then the conditional
uses for that zoning district are allowed.
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, gasoline stations or automobile service
stations shall only be conditional uses and also subject to the following
conditions:
1. The maximum number of fuel dispensers shall not exceed eight (8).
2. Shall contain an accompanying convenience store with a minimum
of 5,000 square feet. Stand alone stations shall not be permitted.
3. The minimum distance between gasoline stations or automobile
service stations on the same side of the road shall be 3,000 feet.
§ 37-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-35.4
AO:1007
§ 37-36. through § 37-37. (RESERVED)
§ 37-38. RRRD RARITAN RIVER REVITILIZATION DISTRICT.
§ 37-38.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.70.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses or a use or building similar or equivalent:
a. The prohibited uses for any property in the Flexible Business Zone shall
be those in the zoning district in which the property is situated, or, if the
property is developed or used for the accessory uses permitted in the
zoning districts listed in subsection 37-35.1 then the prohibited uses for
that zoning district shall also be prohibited in the Flexible Business
Zone.
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, residential uses are prohibited in the
Flexible Business Zone.
a. Industrial Parks, as defined in subsection 37-3.1, consisting of not less
than four (4) principal uses and subject to supplementary zoning
regulations set forth in subsection 37-38.4a;
b. Offices for executive, administrative or professional purposes;
c. Scientific or research laboratories, including incidental pilot plants in
connection therewith;
d. Manufacturing, processing, finishing, fabrication and assembly of
products subject to the limitations of subsection 37-4.14, Uses
Prohibited in All Zones, and subsection 37-33.8;
e. Warehousing-distribution facilities for products or materials but not
including truck terminals as defined herein;
f. Retail sale and warehousing-distribution facilities, provided that no
more than ten (10%) percent or two thousand (2,000) square feet,
whichever the lesser, of the gross floor area is used for retail sales.
Such retail sales shall be accessory to a permitted principal use within
the facility. Further, such use shall be located on a lot of no less than
three (3) acres in size;
g. Electrical equipment and appliances, heating, ventilating, airconditioning,
plumbing and refrigeration equipment sales and service
businesses;
h. Packaging and bottling plant;
i. Indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, handball courts and health clubs or
similar uses;
j. Newspaper and printing establishments;
§ 37-35.4 EDISON CODE § 37-38.1
AO:1008
§ 37-38.2. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.70.020]
Any accessory use that is clearly customary and incidental to any principal
use permitted in this district use shall be permitted on the same or on a
contiguous lot, except that the following provisions and limitations shall
apply to certain accessory uses:
§ 37-38.3. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.70.030]
k. Craftsman's or contractor's shop, such as carpentry, plumbing welding,
electrical or machine shop;
l. Wholesale business establishment, distribution plant, parcel delivery
establishment, cold-storage plant or food commissary;
m. Educational and technical training institutions and schools, banks and
insurance offices;
n. Retail business uses limited to restaurants, clothing and shoe shops,
drug stores, variety shops, department stores, radio, television and
music shops, travel agencies, copy services, book and stationery stores,
etc., provided that no greater than (20%) percent of the total floor area
of the building(s) on a lot shall be used for retail business uses;
o. Communications offices and studios, scientific and research
laboratories;
p. Indoor theaters;
q. Motel/hotel containing not less than one hundred (100) transient rental
rooms and motel/convention center.
a. Above-grade parking decks and garages shall not be permitted in
conjunction with a tract containing principal building(s) having a gross
floor area less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
b. Inventory or stock clearance sales may be permitted on lots principally
devoted to a wholesale business establishment, light industrial use or
other non-retail commercial use, provided no more than four (4) such
sales shall be permitted per year.
a. In an industrial park, restaurants and other eating and drinking
establishments wherein food and drink are consumed within the
principal building, provided that such use is located within an industrial
park for which an approved overall development plan is of record. Such
uses shall not be interpreted to include and are hereby defined to
exclude drive-in restaurants or refreshment stands, commonly called
snack bars, dairy bars, hamburger stands or hot dog stands or similar
uses where customers and patrons are served food, soft drinks or ice
cream primarily for their immediate consumption outside the confines
of the building or structure in which the business is conducted;
§ 37-38.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-38.3
AO:1009
b. In an industrial park, transportation facilities and truck depots,
provided that the use is individually located on a lot within an industrial
park as defined herein for which an improved overall development plan
or general development plan is of record and has Edison Township
Planning Board approval. A transportation facility or truck depot shall
not include bus, truck, trailer and/or tank, washing and cleaning
facilities, new or leased vehicle storage areas and vehicle dismantling
facilities and further provided:
1. No repair or painting shall be conducted out of doors,
2. No vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored within the front yard
area,
3. No such use shall be located on a lot within two hundred (200) feet
of a residential zone, day-care facility, public park, school, church
or mosque,
4. No such use shall be included as an accessory activity to the
salvage and/or sale of used vehicles of parts thereof,
5. No such use shall engage in the activity of crushing, cutting or
general disassembly of vehicles; such activity commonly referred to
as a salvage or junkyard are prohibited by this chapter;
6. No such use shall be permitted in a Planned Unit Development as
specified in this section.
c. Automotive repair, inclusive of body repair, painting, and customizing,
provided that such use is located within an industrial park for which an
improved overall development plan is of record, and further provided
that the use complies with the following paragraphs of this subsection:
1. No repair or painting shall be conducted out of doors,
2. No vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored within the front yard
area,
3. No such use shall be located adjacent to any residential zone,
4. No such use shall include as an accessory activity the salvage and/
or sale of used vehicles or parts thereof,
5. No such use shall engage in the activity of crushing, cutting or
general disassembly of vehicles; such activity commonly referred to
as a salvage or junkyard are prohibited by this section;
6. No such use shall be permitted in a Planned Unit Development as
specified in this section.
d. Freight yard classified as second class railroad property pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:29A-23, but not including privately owned rail siding(s),
provided that the use complies with the following:
§ 37-38.3 EDISON CODE § 37-38.3
AO:1010
1. No principal or accessory structure associated with such use shall
be located less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
2. A buffer consisting of earthen berm, solid fencing and plants, or
any combination of the same, shall be installed along any lot line of
a freight yard use which coincides with a residential zone boundary.
The buffer shall have an effective height of no less than ten (10)
feet and shall provide an effective noise and visual barrier of the
freight yard use to the adjacent residential zone. Existing trees of
three (3) inches or more caliper shall be incorporated into the
buffer design.
3. No maintenance, security or other access driveway shall be located
between the required buffer and an adjacent residential zone;
4. No such use shall be permitted in a Planned Unit Development as
specified in this section.
e. Freight yard classified as second class railroad property pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54-29A-23, provided that the use complies with the following:
1. No principal or accessory structure associated with such use shall
be located less than fifty (50) feet from the lot line of any residential
use or any residentially-zoned lot, owned by any person or entity
other than the owner of the freight yard classified as second class
railroad property.
2. A buffer consisting of earthen berm, board-on-board fencing or
equal and plants or any combination of the same shall be installed
along any lot line of a freight yard use which coincides with a zone
boundary, excepting any lot or lots that are not the subject of an
application for development. The buffer shall have an effective
height of no less than ten (10) feet and shall provide an effective
visual barrier of the freight yard use to the adjacent residential
zone. Existing trees of three (3) inches or more caliper shall be
incorporated into the buffer design.
3. No maintenance, security or other access driveway shall be located
between the required buffer and an adjacent residential zone;
4. No such use shall be permitted in a Planned Unit Development as
specified in this section.
f. Freestanding telecommunication towers subject to the following
conditions:
1. The telecommunication towers shall meet all other zoning
regulations for freestanding towers including, but not limited to,
height and setback,
2. The height of such towers does not exceed the distance between
the tower base and any property line of a parcel which is in any
zone other than a RRRD or R-I Zone,
§ 37-38.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-38.3
AO:1011
§ 37-38.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.70.040]
3. No such tower shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of
any school or residential dwelling;
4. No such use shall be permitted in a Planned Unit Development as
specified in this section.
g. Dishes or antennas which transmit microwaves from a tower, rooftop,
water tower or other elevated location subject to the following
conditions:
1. The dishes or antennas shall meet all other zoning regulations for
dishes and antennas including, but not limited to, height and
setback.
2. The height of such dishes or antennas does not exceed the distance
between the dish or antenna base and any property line of a parcel
which is in any zone other than an L-I or R-I zone.
3. No such dish or antenna shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any school or residential dwelling.
a. Height, area and yard requirements shall be as specified for the Light
Industrial (L-I) Zone District as set forth in the Schedule of Regulations,
Section 37-63, except as permitted and modified herewith:
b. Permitted Modifications; Industrial Parks. An industrial park
development shall be permitted in the RRRD District, provided:
1. It shall have a total tract area of at least twenty-five (25) acres.
2. No individual use within said industrial park shall be on a plot of
land less than one (1) acre in size.
3. Not more than fifty (50%) percent of the total land area in the
industrial park shall be devoted to uses of individual plots of less
than two (2) acres in size.
4. All frontages shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet;
rear yards shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet; and all front
yard setbacks shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet.
5. The minimum side yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet in width.
6. The maximum height of building(s) and/or the number of stories as
specified in the Schedule of Regulations may be increased by ten
(10) feet and/or one (1) story for each additional forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of lot area above the minimum required,
except that no structure shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in
height, and further provided that this modification shall not be
permitted where the structure is or is proposed to be located within
§ 37-38.3 EDISON CODE § 37-38.4
AO:1012
§ 37-38.5. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.70.050]
All uses hereafter established shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 37-38.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.70.060]
§ 37-38.7. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.70.070]
Signs shall be subject to the regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-38.8. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.70.080; Ord. No.
O.1715-2009§ I]
five hundred (500) feet of a residential zone boundary. This
modification shall be applicable only to industrial parks.
7. Within an industrial park, commercial and personal service uses,
limited to restaurants, barber and beauty shops, clothing and drug
stores, newspaper and stationery stores, shall be permitted,
provided that such uses occupy less than five (5%) percent of the
floor area of the industrial park in which located.
a. Transition requirements: same as set forth in the R-I district.
b. Storage. All materials and equipment shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or shall otherwise be screened by walls, fences and
landscaping to adequately screen such materials and equipment from
outside the boundaries of the lot.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking space shall be nearer than
fifteen (15) feet to any street lot line nor nearer than five (5) feet to the
front of a building, and further provided that complete building
perimeter parking is prohibited.
a. Tanning;
b. Stone crushing;
c. Paper pulp manufacture;
d. Cloth manufacture requiring formaldehyde or equivalent as an additive;
e. Metal manufacture of raw or recyclable materials;
f. Metal fabrication of trailers, truck bodies and cranes for lease or sale;
g. Truck terminals.
§ 37-38.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-38.8
AO:1013
§ 37-39. E-I EDUCATIONAL-INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-39.1. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.72.010]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
h. The exhibition, demonstration, showing, distribution, solicitation or
sale by any person of sexually oriented products or obscene materials in
gatherings of one hundred (100) or more people on a parcel or parcels
of land located or operated within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
existing sexually oriented business, or any church, synagogue, temple
or other place of public worship, or any elementary or secondary school
or any school bus stop or any municipal or county playground or place
of public resort and recreation, or any hospital or any child care center,
or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any area zoned for residential
use.
For purposes of this paragraph h., the following definitions shall apply:
1. Exhibition means the sale of admission to view obscene materials.
2. Showing means to cause or allow to be seen.
3. Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal
entity.
4. Sexually oriented products means and includes, but is not limited
to, books, magazines, periodicals or other printed material or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, discs, slides
or other visual representations which depict or describe a "specific
sexual activity" or "specific anatomical area" as both of these terms
are defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6; or still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices, which show images to
one (1) person per machine at any one (1) time, and where the
images so displaced are characterized by the depiction of a
"specified sexual activity" or "specified anatomical area" as both of
these terms are defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6; or instruments, devices
or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with a
"specific sexual activity" as such term is defined in N.J.S.A. 2C-34-6.
5. Obscene material means any description, narrative account,
display, depiction of a "specified anatomical area" or "specified
sexual activity" as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6 contained in, or
consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound
recording, live performance or film, which by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality
with sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area
or activity.
§ 37-38.8 EDISON CODE § 37-39.1
AO:1014
§ 37-39.2. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.72.020]
Among others, and not by way of limitation, the following uses are intended
to be specifically prohibited in the district:
§ 37-39.3. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.72.030]
Accessory uses usually incidental to the above uses as specified below:
§ 37-39.4. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.72.040]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in Schedule A, Section
37-63.
§ 37-39.5. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.72.050]
a. Public or parochial school, nonprofit and commercial school, college,
seminary, academy or similar educational institution for academic
instruction approved by the New Jersey Board of Education;
b. Hospital (general, medical or surgical), sanatorium, medical or health
center, nursing home or similar health facility or a medical office
building;
c. Institution or home for children, the aged, the indigent or the
handicapped;
d. Professional and business offices;
e. Medical and dental offices, testing laboratories and clinics.
a. Processing of raw materials, other than necessary for experimentation
and testing purposes;
b. Commercial production of goods, products or materials, except as
would otherwise be permitted by the terms of this section;
c. Open-air testing facilities.
a. Any accessory use on the same lot customary and incidental to any use
permitted in this district, such as but not necessarily limited to:
1. Private garages;
2. Maintenance and storage buildings, except that no accessory
building used for storage of materials shall exceed two hundred
(200) square feet in size nor be located closer than one hundred
(100) feet to any residential zone boundary.
a. Transition Requirements. There shall be established along the line of
any lot that is contiguous to any residential district, unless the side or
rear lot line coincides with a State or Federal highway or railroad right-
§ 37-39.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-39.5
AO:1015
§ 37-39.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.72.060]
§ 37-39.7. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.72.070]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-40. CONDITIONAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
OVERLAY (CEI).
§ 37-40.1. Conditional Educational Institutional District Overlay.
[1999 Code § 17.74.010]
There is hereby established a Conditional Educational Institutional District
Overlay Zone (CEI) which shall apply to Block 967, Lots 1-10. In addition
to the uses permitted in the zone in which this property is located, the
property may be developed with the following conditional uses:
of-way, a buffer area at least fifteen (15) feet in width plus five (5)
additional feet in width for each ten (10) foot interval or fraction thereof
of the height of the principal building exceeding twenty-five (25) feet.
The buffer area shall consist of trees, fencing, earthen berm or any
combination of same.
b. Storage. All materials and equipment shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or shall otherwise be screened by walls, fences and
landscaping as may be determined by the Planning Board to be
adequate to appropriately screen such materials and equipment from
view outside the boundaries of the lot.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking space shall be located nearer
than ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line, nor shall the end of a
parking space be nearer than thirty (30) feet to any street lot line nor
nearer than five (5) feet to any building, and provided further that
complete building perimeter parking is prohibited.
a. Development pursuant to the uses and standards established for the E-I
Zone, however, subject to the following conditions:
1. All access to the site shall be through the adjacent E-I uses;
2. A deed restriction shall be recorded in a form acceptable to the
approving Board, which shall prohibit development in or on
delineated wetlands on the property described in Block 643FF, Lot
18, for a period of not less than ten (10) years.
§ 37-39.5 EDISON CODE § 37-40.1
AO:1016
§ 37-41. T-C TOWNSHIP CENTER DISTRICT.
§ 37-41.1. Statement of Objectives. [1999 Code § 17.76.010]
§ 37-41.2. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.76.020]
The following are permitted uses, subject to development regulations as set
forth hereinafter:
b. The approving Board for any development application in the CEI Zone
shall require that the peak rate of stormwater runoff from a site during
and after development shall not exceed the predevelopment peak of
runoff.
c. The approving Board for any development in the CEI Zone shall require
that the applicant comply with all of the transition and buffering
provisions of subsection 37-39.5a.
a. It is the specific intent of this section to create as a single balanced
development composed of the integrated uses developed in accordance
with an overall Master Plan for the district.
b. It is recognized that the development of this zone and the development
of uses herein may take place over a long period of time, and further
that the development would be accomplished in steps or phases. It is,
nevertheless, the intent that all steps or phases and elements of
development shall be combined into one plan or master development
for the entire zone.
c. The area which makes up this zone is centrally located within the
Township and abuts the central administrative and legislative facilities
of the Township and is also an area of special utility, warranting the
utmost scrutiny of its allowable uses and development, in whole and in
stages. It is the further intent to regulate the intensity of the
permissible uses and to afford a combination of uses to the extent that
the entire zone is developed as one (1) unit encompassing all those uses
consistent with the limitations of the area and a reasonable utilization
of the property and compatible with the Comprehensive Plan of this
Township.
a. Commercial uses limited to restaurants, health spas, indoor recreation
centers, inclusive of tennis, skating, handball and swimming facilities,
indoor theaters, department stores, drug stores, clothing and shoe
sales, gift shops, banks and delicatessens, not including fast food
stores, as defined in this section. Commercial uses shall not occupy
more than thirty (30%) percent of the total nonresidential floor area
planned as part of the overall development;
b. Motel and hotels, provided that such use shall have no less than one
hundred (100) rental rooms or suites, and further provided that such
use shall include restaurant and banquet facilities, meeting and
§ 37-40.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-41.2
AO:1017
§ 37-41.3. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.76.030]
Uses customary and incidental to the principal uses.
§ 37-41.4. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.76.040]
None.
§ 37-41.5. Height, Area and Bulk Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.76.050]
Height, area and bulk requirements are as specified in Schedule A, Section
37-63, and as further set forth hereinbelow. The standards set forth in this
section apply to the entire development and not to subsequent subdivision
within the overall development.
conference rooms, and that restaurant and meeting room space shall
amount to not less than twenty (20%) percent of the total floor area of
the motel/hotel;
c. Office buildings;
d. Township, administrative and executive or judicial offices, or of any
board, department or agency thereof;
e. Television and radio studios;
f. Civic, cultural, educational or religious uses;
g. Public bus stations, but not including maintenance and repair facilities.
a. The minimum land area required shall be twenty-five (25) acres. The
minimum required area shall include only lands adjacent or contiguous
to each other under single or combined ownership and located within
the zone district specified. A street shall not be construed to divide
lands for purposes of this chapter.
b. Acreage.
1. The maximum percent of total acreage permitted for commercial
uses shall be forty (40%) percent; and the minimum percentage of
total acreage permitted for office uses shall be thirty (30%)
percent; and the maximum percentage of the total acreage
permitted for residential use shall be forty (40%) percent.
2. Commercial uses shall include generally all retail and wholesale
trade businesses engaged in the sale and/or service of clothing,
household goods, appliances and furnishings. Uses commonly
known as motels, department stores, banks, theaters, barbershops
and beauty shops, delicatessens, restaurants, drug stores and
commercial recreational facilities for purposes of this subsection
shall be classified as commercial uses. Office uses shall include all
permitted nonresidential uses not classified as commercial uses.
§ 37-41.2 EDISON CODE § 37-41.5
AO:1018
§ 37-41.6. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.76.070]
c. The minimum percent of required open space of the total area of the
tract shall be twenty-five (25%) percent.
a. Open Storage of Materials. No open display or storage of products,
materials and equipment shall be permitted.
b. Transition Requirement. There shall be established along the line of any
side or rear lot that is contiguous to any residential district, unless the
side or rear lot line coincides with a State or Federal highway, a buffer
area at least fifty (50) feet in width, plus five (5) feet additional width for
each ten (10) foot interval or fraction thereof of the principal building
exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height. The buffer area shall be
landscaped and fenced to provide screening or the uses and associated
activities of the lot from adjoining residential districts.
c. Site Access. Recognizing the heavy traffic flow existing and projected
along Route 27 and Talmadge Road and the potential conflict of traffic
generated from development of this district and existing and projected
through traffic, no more than one (1) driveway connection shall be
permitted to Route 27 and to Talmadge Road, respectively.
d. Building Separation. No commercial and/or office building shall be
located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential multifamily
building or one-half (1/2) the sum of the height of adjacent commercial
and/or office and residential buildings, whichever is the greater, and
further provided that no residential building shall be located less than
seventy-five (75) feet one from the other.
e. Recreational Requirement. A mid-rise multifamily housing development
shall include both indoor and outdoor recreational facilities such as
tennis court(s), exercise room(s), jogging path(s) or equivalents.
f. Development Staging. The development of the tract shall proceed as a
mixed use development, and further provided that no building permit
shall be issued for any of the approved residential portion of the
development until building permits have been issued and construction
begun upon ten (10%) percent of the total floor area of commercial and/
or office space set forth upon the approved plan(s).
g. Application Procedure.
1. The applicant shall initially submit a sketch plan for the entire
tract. The sketch shall show all informational items as required for
any major subdivision as set forth in Chapter 39, Land Use, and
further shall indicate the general location of buildings (except
single-family dwellings), parking areas and roadways as well as any
other significant site development features planned by the
applicant. The purposes of the sketch development plan are:
(a) To establish the land use plan for the site;
§ 37-41.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-41.6
AO:1019
§ 37-41.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.76.070]
§ 37-41.8. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.76.080]
Signs shall be subject to the sign regulations of Section 37-62.
§ 37-42. U-R URBAN RENEWAL DISTRICT.
§ 37-42.1. Generally. [1999 Code § 17.80.010]
The U-R urban renewal district shall include all lands within the urban
renewal projects UR-11 and UR-61. The use, development and other
regulations shall be the standards and uses as set forth in the approved
urban renewal plan for UR-11 and UR-61. No change of plan, use or
development regulations shall be permitted unless a public hearing by
the Planning Board is held and the Mayor and Council of the Township
thereafter reviews and approves of the Planning Board decision on the plan.
§ 37-43. AHOZ AFFORDABLE HOUSING DISTRICT.
§ 37-43.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.82.010]
There is hereby created, pursuant to a settlement of litigation, an Affordable
Housing Zone (AHOZ) permitting townhouses and apartment dwellings in
(b) To establish staging or phasing of site development;
(c) To determine at the earliest possible time any off-site
improvements required as a result of the development;
(d) To determine design criteria for buffer areas, parking lot
location, open space areas, etc., and as applicable.
2. The applicant, after approval of the overall development plan, shall
proceed with formal site plan and subdivision applications for all or
phase(s) of the development.
3. Preliminary application for development shall be made under and
in accord with all the regulations and procedures as set forth for a
major subdivision and major site plan as set forth in the land use
ordinance.
a. Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve
in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
b. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side and rear
yards; provided, however, that no parking space shall be located nearer
than fifteen (15) feet to any street, nor closer than ten (10) feet to any
building, and provided further that complete building perimeter
parking is prohibited.
§ 37-41.6 EDISON CODE § 37-43.1
AO:1020
the L-I Zone. The AHOZ affects a 12.3-acre portion of Block 3-B, Lots 19
and 21 as depicted on the zoning map (the "Site"). The purpose of this
zone is to permit one hundred forty-eight (148) garden apartment units
or one hundred twenty (120) townhouse units provided that a substantial
percentage of these units are designated for and affordable for low and
moderate income households. Substantial percentage is defined as: twenty
(20%) percent of the total housing units constructed if the low and moderate
income units are for sale; or fifteen (15%) percent if the low and moderate
income units are rentals.
§ 37-43.2. COAH Compliance. [1999 Code § 17.82.020]
At least half of the low and moderate income units shall be affordable to
low income households as defined by the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH). All low and moderate income units shall conform to COAH
regulations, including, but not limited to: regulations pertaining to phasing
the construction of low and moderate income units in sequence with market
units; bedroom distribution; establishing affordable sales prices and rents;
and controls on affordability. The Township's affordable housing ordinance
will incorporate and be subject to COAH regulations.
§ 37-43.3. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.82.030]
No building, structure, premises or facility shall be used and no building,
structure or facility shall be erected or physically and structurally altered
except for the following uses:
§ 37-43.4. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.82.040]
Permitted is any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any principal use permitted in this district. Permitted
accessory uses shall consist of but not necessarily be limited to:
§ 37-43.5. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.82.050]
None.
a. Multi-family dwellings at a density of twelve (12) units per acre or ten
(10) townhouse units per acre.
a. Maintenance sheds;
b. Apartment for project superintendent;
c. Garages;
d. Recreation center and/or community service facilities;
e. Nature trails for walking and biking;
f. Tot lot.
§ 37-43.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-43.6
AO:1021
§ 37-43.6. Density. [1999 Code § 17.82.060]
Townhouses shall be permitted at a maximum density of ten (10) units per
acre and multifamily dwellings (apartment houses) shall be permitted at a
maximum density of twelve (12) units per acre within the AHOZ provided
that no more one hundred twenty (120) townhouse units or one hundred
forty-eight (148) apartment units shall be constructed on the site. Land
proposed to be included in public street right-of-way shall be considered
part of the gross tract area for the purposes of calculating density. In
addition, an accessory apartment for the sole purpose of housing the project
superintendent may be constructed above the proposed maintenance
garage, which unit shall not be considered for the purposes of calculating
density.
§ 37-43.7. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.82.070]
See Schedule A, Section 37-63, Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements.
§ 37-43.8. Off-Street Parking. [1999 Code § 17.82.080]
Off-street parking space, together with appropriate access thereto, shall be
provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve as provided
by RSIS.
§ 37-43.9. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.82.090]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-43.10. Landscaping, Interior Roads, Parking and Buildings.
[1999 Code § 17.82.100]
The following provisions of the L-R Residential District shall apply:
subsection 37-15.1, paragraphs c1, c2, c3, c4, c7, c8, c9(a)(1) through
c9(a)(4), c9(b), and c10 except that notwithstanding the L-R requirements,
internal roadways may be located in buffer areas. Where there is a conflict
between the Township Ordinance requirements and the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS), the RSIS standards shall apply.
§ 37-43.11. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.82.110]
The intent of the AHOZ is to create an inclusionary development as defined
in COAH. It is understood that the developer of this inclusionary
development is entitled to the elimination of unnecessary cost generating
standards and municipal cooperation in granting reasonable waivers and
variances that facilitate the construction of one hundred twenty (120)
townhouse units or one hundred forty-eight (148) apartment housing units.
The developer shall not be required to construct or pay for any off-site
improvements except its pro rata share of improvements authorized by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42 which are made necessary by the developer. Plaintiff
§ 37-43.6 EDISON CODE § 37-43.11
AO:1022
shall not be required to pay impact fees, development fees or linkage
fees related to this development, or to comply with the conditions in any
approval which unreasonably impede the timely commencement of the
developer's project.
§ 37-43.12. Expedited Review. [1999 Code § 17.82.120]
Inclusionary developers are also entitled to expedited treatment in
processing development applications. To that end, the following procedures
for preliminary and final approvals shall apply. Nothing herein shall prohibit
the applicant from submitting a simultaneous application for preliminary
and final approval subject to compliance with all requirements for both
approvals.
a. Preliminary and/or final plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
The plans and application materials shall be in accordance with the
Ordinance checklist requirements, subject to reasonable waiver
requests. Applications for preliminary and final approval may be
submitted simultaneously.
b. Within twenty-one (21) days following submission for preliminary and/
or final approval, the developer shall be provided with a written
determination as to whether its application is complete. So long as the
application is submitted at least twenty-one (21) days prior to a TRC
meeting, the applicant will be scheduled for the next TRC meeting for
review. If the application is not determined to be incomplete within
twenty-one (21) days of filing, it shall be deemed complete. If the
application is considered incomplete, applicant shall be notified in
writing as to the specific additional materials required.
c. Upon resubmission of incomplete items, the developer shall be
provided with a written determination regarding completeness within
fifteen (15) days.
d. Municipal reports concerning the review of a complete development
application shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of a written
determination of completeness.
e. The Planning Board shall schedule the initial public hearing for a date
not more than thirty (30) days after the date of completeness and shall
take final action on the development application within sixty (60) days
of its being deemed complete. Toward this end, the Planning Board
shall schedule public hearings and at such hearings allow at least three
(3) hours for the development application. Upon the applicant's
request, the Planning Board shall schedule sufficient meetings to take
final action within sixty (60) days. If the Planning Board fails to take
final action within ninety (90) days of the application being deemed
complete, unless the time period for action is extended in writing by the
applicant, the application shall be deemed approved.
§ 37-43.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-43.12
AO:1023
§ 37-44. AHOZ-2 AFFORDABLE HOUSING ZONE.
§ 37-44.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.83.010]
§ 37-44.2. COAH Compliance. [1999 Code § 17.83.020]
At least half of the low and moderate income units shall be affordable to
low income households as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:93, et seq., and the Fair
Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.). All low and moderate income
units shall conform to the regulations set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93, et seq.,
the Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.) and Edison Township's
Affordable Housing Ordinance. All low and moderate income units shall
be affirmatively marketed consistent with Edison Township's Affirmative
Marketing Plan.
f. The Planning Board shall adopt a written resolution setting forth its
decision on the application within thirty (30) days of the close of the
public hearing.
a. There is hereby established an Affordable Housing Zone-2 (AHOZ-2)
permitting multi-family (apartment) dwellings in a portion of the L-I
Zone as depicted on the revised Zoning Map and further described as
follows: The AHOZ-2 Zone encompasses an area shown on the Edison
Township Tax Map as Block 396, Lot 5 (formerly Block 396, Lots 5 and
7). The purpose of this zone is to permit multi-family dwellings
(apartments) at the density hereinafter described provided that a
substantial percentage of these units shall be deed restricted for
occupancy by and affordability to low and moderate income households.
Substantial percentage is defined as: twenty (20%) percent of the total
housing units constructed if the low and moderate income units are for
sale and fifteen (15%) percent if the low and moderate income units are
rentals. For any development containing both rental and for sale units,
the percentage of units designated for low and moderate income
households shall correspond to the percentages given above for each
unit type. For example, a development consisting of one hundred (100)
rental units and one hundred (100) for sale units shall have twenty (20)
for sale dwelling units set aside for low and moderate income
households and fifteen (15) rental dwelling units for low and moderate
income households.
b. Further, also permitted within the AHOZ-2 Zone shall be the retail/
commercial uses as permitted and regulated in the G-B General
Business Zone of the Township of Edison. Up to thirty-five (35%)
percent of the gross tract area, or a maximum of nine (9) acres,
whichever is greater, within the AHOZ-2 Zone may be used for retail/
commercial uses as permitted and regulated in the G-B General
Business Zone, provided that sufficient land remains to the tract to
permit its development with a total of three hundred (300) multifamily
dwelling units at a density of fourteen (14) units per gross residential
acre, as defined in subsection 37-44.7.
§ 37-43.12 EDISON CODE § 37-44.3
AO:1024
§ 37-44.3. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.83.030]
No building, structure, premises or facility shall be used and no building,
structure or facility shall be erected or physically and structurally altered
except for the following uses:
§ 37-44.4. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.83.040]
Accessory uses shall be permitted provided they are located on the same lot
with and are customarily incidental to any principal use permitted in this
district. Permitted accessory uses shall consist of, but are not necessarily
limited to:
a. A total of three hundred (300) multifamily dwellings developed at a
maximum density of fourteen (14) units per acre of gross residential
tract area, as defined in subsection 37-44.7.
b. At the option of the developer, up to forty (40%) percent of the gross
residential tract area, as defined in subsection 37-44.7 herein, may be
developed with townhouse style dwelling units at a maximum density of
ten (10) dwelling units per acre on the portion of the tract devoted to
such development, provided the density of the portion of the tract
devoted to multifamily (apartment) dwellings does not exceed fourteen
(14) units per acre and further provided that the forty-five (45)
multifamily (apartment) affordable rental units that would have derived
from the construction of the entire gross residential tract area with
multifamily (apartment) dwellings will still be constructed, regardless
of any reduction in the total number of dwelling units in the
development due to the developer's exercise of this townhouse option.
c. The balance of the tract remaining may be developed with retail/
commercial uses as permitted and regulated in the GB General
Business Zone, provided that such development shall be limited to a
maximum of thirty-five (35%) percent of the gross tract area or a
maximum of nine (9) acres, whichever is greater, in the portion of the
tract fronting on Woodbridge Avenue.
a. Maintenance sheds;
b. Apartment for Project Superintendent;
c. Garages;
d. Recreation center and/or community service facilities;
e. Nature trails for walking and biking;
f. Tot lot or similar recreational facility;
g. Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts, but not public swim or tennis clubs;
h. Signs, subject to the provisions of the Edison Township Zoning
Ordinance;
§ 37-44.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-44.4
AO:1025
§ 37-44.5. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.83.050]
Those conditional uses provided for in the GB General Business Zone of the
Township of Edison Zoning Ordinance, but only within the portion of the
tract that is permitted to be developed with GB General Business Zone uses.
§ 37-44.6. Residential Development Standards/Height, Coverage
Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.83.060]
Residential development in the AHOZ-2 Zone shall comply with the
following standards and requirements:
i. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
a. The maximum permitted density shall be fourteen (14) dwelling units
per acre of gross residential tract area, as defined in subsection 37-44.7
herein. The project shall consist of multifamily dwellings (apartments)
developed in accordance with the requirements set forth herein, unless
the developer elects the option of developing up to forty (40%) percent
of the gross residential tract area with townhouses, as permitted in
subsection 37-44.3b above, in which case the density shall be reduced
to ten (10) units per acre for that portion of the gross residential tract
area devoted to townhouses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
maximum permitted density on the balance of the gross residential
tract area shall not exceed fourteen (14) units per acre.
b. The maximum permitted impervious surface coverage on the gross
residential tract area shall be limited to fifty-five (55%) percent of the
gross residential tract area. The portion of the tract to be developed in
accordance with the G-B Zone standards shall be subject to the
impervious coverage requirements for the G-B Zone.
c. Special requirements for apartments are as follows:
1. Principal Buildings.
(a) Minimum front setback (measured from a public street R.O.W.
line) — thirty-five (35) feet.
(b) Minimum setback from an interior private road — twenty (20)
feet; and from a parking lot - ten (10) feet.
(c) Maximum side and rear yard setbacks — thirty-five (35) feet
for buildings containing apartments and twenty-five (25) feet
for buildings containing townhouses.
(d) Maximum building height — three (3) stories and forty-five (45)
feet for buildings containing apartments and two and one-half
(2 1/2) stories and thirty-five (35) feet for buildings containing
townhouses.
§ 37-44.4 EDISON CODE § 37-44.6
AO:1026
(e) Minimum distance between buildings — there shall be a
minimum distance of at least thirty-five (35) feet between the
rear and/or front facades of any two (2) buildings and a
minimum distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet between the
ends of any two (2) buildings. In all other cases, the minimum
distance between buildings shall be thirty (30) feet.
(f) Each principal building shall:
(1) Be designed for and occupied by not more than twentyfour
(24) units per building, and shall be not more than one
hundred ninety (190) feet in length in its longest
dimension, without terminating or providing a ninety (90)
degree angle, nor exceed fifty (50) feet in length without a
change in façade architecture, including at least a twentyfive
(25%) percent change in setback, facade color,
texture, design, etc., to bring about a varied composition.
(2) Contain no outside television antennas or satellite dishes.
All television antennas or satellite equipment shall be built
into the building to eliminate individual antennas from
being erected on the roof. Not more than one (1) common
antenna may be used for each building.
(3) Provide not less than three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet of
lockable storage space for each apartment unit, except
that, for the two-bedroom low and moderate income units,
four hundred fifty (450) cubic feet of lockable storage
space shall be provided, and, for the three-bedroom low
and moderate income units, five hundred sixty (560) cubic
feet of lockable storage space shall be provided. Such
lockable storage space shall be provided exclusive of the
closets and cabinets within the unit itself.
(4) Provide, in an enclosed area within each building, laundry
facilities of not less than one (1) washer and one (1) dryer
for each twelve (12) dwelling units for the exclusive use of
the occupants of the development, unless provided within
each unit. No outside clothes lines or clothes hanging
facilities or devices shall be provided or allowed.
(5) There shall be a trash area completely surrounded by a six
(6) foot high solid architectural fence or decorative
masonry wall with solid front gates. All trash shall be
stored in this area and shall not be visible above the fence.
2. Accessory Buildings and Uses. Accessory buildings shall conform to
the minimum setback requirements for the principal buildings and
shall not exceed two (2) stories and thirty (30) feet in height.
d. Ownership and Maintenance of Common Areas. Common areas of any
tract containing for sale units where said common areas are not
§ 37-44.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-44.6
AO:1027
§ 37-44.7. Density. [1999 Code § 17.83.070]
The maximum permitted residential density shall be fourteen (14) dwelling
units per acre of gross residential tract area within the AHOZ-2 Zone,
except that if the developer elects to exercise the townhouse option
permitted at subsection 37-44.3b, the maximum permitted residential
density on the portion of the gross residential tract area devoted to the
townhouse development shall be ten (10) units per acre, notwithstanding
which the maximum permitted residential density on the remaining portion
of the gross residential tract area to be devoted to multifamily (apartment)
dwellings shall not exceed fourteen (14) units per acre. Land occupied
by the cartway of and any center island(s) within the proposed access
roadway, whether such roadway is to be used exclusively by the residential
development or is to be used in common with other uses on the balance
of the tract, shall be considered part of the gross residential tract area
for the purposes of calculating density, but land proposed to be developed
with the uses permitted in the G-B Zone shall not be considered part of the
gross residential tract area. In addition, an accessory apartment for the sole
purpose of housing the project superintendent may be constructed above
any proposed maintenance garage, which unit shall not be considered for
the purposes of calculating density.
§ 37-44.8. Off-Street Parking. [1999 Code § 17.83.080]
Off-street parking spaces, together with appropriate access thereto, as
provided by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21, et
seq.) shall be provided on the same lot as and within two hundred fifty (250)
feet of the unit intended to be served.
§ 37-44.9. Signs. [1999 Code § 17.83.090]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with the applicable provisions of
the Edison Township Zoning Ordinance.
§ 37-44.10. Landscaping. [1999 Code § 17.83.100]
Landscape plans for the development of the tract shall be provided in
accordance with the following requirements:
accepted by the Township shall be deeded to a corporation, association,
individuals, or other legal entity consisting of a majority of the property
owners within the development for their use, control, management
and maintenance. All other site design standards and specifications
contained in the Development Review Ordinance of the Township of
Edison shall be complied with except as modified herein.
a. General Regulations.
1. Landscaped Area. All areas of the tract not used for construction of
buildings, roads, access ways, parking or sidewalks shall be fully
landscaped in accordance with these regulations.
§ 37-44.6 EDISON CODE § 37-44.10
AO:1028
2. Site Considerations. Natural site features such as: existing trees,
streams, rock outcropping, etc. shall be preserved wherever
possible. Whenever such natural features are absent or insufficient
or have been destroyed during the development of the site,
additional new plantings of a sufficient size, as determined by the
Planning Board shall be established to provide environmental
protection to beautify the buildings and grounds, objectionable
features created on the site.
b. Additional Regulations.
1. A minimum landscaped area twenty (20) feet wide shall be
provided along all tract boundaries, including public streets.
2. All buffers and landscaped areas shall be protected from adjacent
parking areas by curbs, or concrete, metal or wood bumpers at
least six (6) inches in height and securely anchored into the
ground. Buffer areas may be included within the required setback
areas.
3. Service areas, parking areas, transformer compounds, and other
strictly utilitarian improvements, shall be screened. In general, it is
intended that all potentially objectionable or unsightly features
within both the residential and retail/commercial portions of the
tract shall be screened from passing traffic and abutting residential
properties.
4. In the case of a repetition of building designs, as in an apartment
house development, care shall be exercised to avoid monotony in
the planting design by introducing sufficient variety in the planting
layout to lend interest and aesthetic appeal. By the same token,
excessive variety shall be avoided, and all shall be represented as a
balanced design with proper accent in the right places.
5. All street trees and on-site deciduous shade trees shall not be less
than two (2) inches in diameter measured one (1) foot above the
root crown.
6. A satisfactory amount of evergreen plant material shall be included
in the planting, as determined by the Planning Board at the time of
site plan review.
7. Areas required for buffers shall not be cleared or graded prior to
development approval.
8. A twenty-five (25) foot buffer shall be provided to any residential
zone boundary line, within which buffer no improvements shall be
made, and the property shall either be left in its natural state or
planted with evergreens to provide screening, or both, as
determined by the Planning Board.
§ 37-44.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-44.10
AO:1029
§ 37-44.11. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.83.110]
The intent of the AHOZ-2 is to create an inclusionary development as
defined by N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq., and the Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.). It is understood that the developer of this inclusionary
development is entitled to the elimination of unnecessary cost generating
standards and municipal cooperation in granting reasonable waivers and
variances that facilitate the construction of dwelling units designated for
low and moderate income households. The developer shall not be required
to construct or pay for any off-tract improvements except for a pro rata
share of off-tract improvements authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42 which are
made necessary by the development. A development fee shall be imposed
on any commercial development in the AHOZ-2 Zone but shall not apply to
the residential (inclusionary) portion of the development.
§ 37-44.12. Expedited Review. [1999 Code § 17.83.120]
Inclusionary developers are also entitled to expedited treatment in
processing development applications. To that end, the following procedures
for preliminary and final approvals shall apply. Nothing herein shall prohibit
the applicant from submitting a simultaneous application for preliminary
and final approval subject to compliance with all requirements for both
approvals.
9. Where the retail/commercial uses and activities permitted on the
tract will abut the residential uses and activities, a twenty-five (25)
foot buffer shall be established within the residential tract area and
maintained as part of the residential development.
c. Landscaped Area Required. In calculating landscaped areas, the areas
of plazas, sitting areas, pools, and fountains shall be included.
1. A minimum of twenty (20%) percent of the tract shall be devoted to
landscaped areas in addition to all required buffers; such
landscaped areas may include required recreation areas referred
to herein.
2. The Planning Board shall have the authority to determine the
distribution of landscaped areas throughout the project site.
d. Fences and Hedges. Fences and hedges shall conform to Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of Edison.
e. Recreation. Residential development within an AHOZ-2 Zone shall
provide an active and passive recreational area of at least ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. The recreational area shall include a fenced-off
toddler play lot of at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet including play equipment, swings, seesaws, etc.
a. Preliminary and/or final plans shall be submitted to the appropriate
Board. The plans and application materials shall be in accordance with
the Ordinance checklist requirements, subject to reasonable waiver
§ 37-44.10 EDISON CODE § 37-44.12
AO:1030
§ 37-45. E-1 EDUCATIONAL DISTRICT 1.
§ 37-45.1. Establishment of the E-1 Educational District 1. [Ord.
No. O.1839-2013§ 1]
requests. Applications for preliminary and final approval may be
submitted simultaneously.
b. Within twenty-eight (28) days following submission for preliminary and/
or final approval, the developer shall be provided with a written
determination as to whether its application is complete. So long as the
application is submitted at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to a TRC
meeting, the applicant will be scheduled for the next TRC meeting for
review. If the application is not determined to be incomplete within
twenty-eight (28) days of filing, it shall be deemed complete. If the
application is considered incomplete, applicant shall be notified in
writing as to the specific additional materials required.
c. Upon resubmission of incomplete items, the developer shall be
provided with a written determination regarding completeness within
fifteen (15) days.
d. Municipal reports concerning the review of a complete development
application shall be filed within twenty-eight (28) days of a written
determination of completeness, provided that nothing herein shall
prevent a substantive review from being combined within a
completeness review.
e. The Planning Board shall schedule the initial public hearing for a date
not more than thirty (30) days after the date of completeness and shall
take final action on the development application within sixty (60) days
of its being deemed complete. Toward this end, the appropriate Board
shall schedule public hearings and at such hearings allow at least three
(3) hours for the development application. Upon the applicant's
request, the appropriate Board shall schedule sufficient special
meetings to take final action within sixty (60) days. If the appropriate
Board fails to take final action within ninety (90) days of the application
being deemed complete, unless the time period for action is extended in
writing by the applicant, the application shall be deemed approved.
f. The Planning Board shall adopt a written resolution setting forth its
decision on the application within thirty (30) days of the close of the
public hearing.
a. There is hereby established an Educational District 1 Zone (E-1)
permitting educational uses as further set forth herein for proposed
new Lot 3.012 as depicted on the Proposed Subdivision Plan for Block
3-E, Lot 3.01 prepared by Control Layouts, Inc. dated November 23,
2010 as revised through June 8, 2011. The E-1 Zone encompasses a
portion of Block 3-E, Lot 3.01 as shown on the aforementioned Plan as
§ 37-44.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-45.1
AO:1031
§ 37-45.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 1]
The purpose of this zone is to permit appropriate educational related uses of
the property by the Edison Township Board of Education upon the transfer
of the property to them under the approved Redevelopment Plan pursuant
to the Base Closure Community Redevelopment and Homeless Assistance
Act of 1994, Pub. L. 103-21.
§ 37-45.3. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 1]
No land building, structure, premises or facility shall be used and no
building, structure or facility shall be erected or physically and structurally
altered except for the following uses:
proposed new Lot 3.012 which contains approximately 2.25 acres and
whose legal description is:
1. Beginning at a point, said point being located the following courses
and distances from a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of
Truman Drive (60.00 feet wide), which point is therein located
1201.46 feet Northerly from the intersection of the aforesaid
Westerly sideline of Truman Drive with the Northerly right-of-way
line of Kilmer Road (80.00 feet wide):
(a) Along a curve to the right, having a radius of 50.00 feet and an
arc length of 78.33 feet, a chord bearing of South 44 degrees
55 minutes 26 seconds West and a chord distance of 70.56 feet
to a point; thence
(b) South 89 degrees 48 minutes 17 seconds West, a distance of
400.79 feet to a point, said point being the point and place of
beginning; thence running:
(1) South 51 degrees 02 minutes 00 seconds West, a distance
of 449.23 feet to a point on the Easterly sideline of Avenue
"C" (part of Lot 2 in Block 3-E); thence
(2) Along the aforesaid Easterly sideline of Avenue "C" (part of
Lot 2 in Block 3-E), along a curve to the left, having a
radius of 3575.00 feet and an arc length of 211.51 feet, a
chord bearing of North 33 degrees 02 minutes 03 seconds
West and a chord distance of 211.48 feet to a point; thence
(3) North 51 degrees 02 minutes 00 seconds East, a distance
of 482.83 feet to a point; thence
(4) South 24 degrees 11 minutes 49 seconds East, a distance
of 217.53 feet to a point, said point being the point and
place of beginning.
a. Public school, college, seminary, academy or similar educational
institution for academic instruction approved by the New Jersey
§ 37-45.1 EDISON CODE § 37-45.3
AO:1032
§ 37-45.4. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 1]
Accessory uses shall be permitted provided they are located on the same lot
with and are customarily incidental to any principal use permitted in this
district. Permitted accessory uses shall consist of, but are not necessarily
limited to:
§ 37-45.5. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 1]
None.
§ 37-45.6. Development Standards/Height, Coverage Area and Yard
Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 1]
Development in the E-1 Zone shall comply with the standards and
requirements in subsections 37-39.4, 37-39.5, 37-39.6, and Schedule "A" to
this chapter for the E-I Educational-Institutional District Zone.
§ 37-45.7. Signs. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 1]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with the applicable provisions
of the Edison Township Zoning Ordinances and as provided for in the
Township Code.
§ 37-46. G-C GOLF COURSE—NATURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT.
§ 37-46.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.16.010]
The purpose of the G-C golf course — natural resource preservation district
is to provide standards and regulations for existing facilities existing within
the community and constituting a major and important feature and
character of the neighborhoods in which located.
§ 37-46.2. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.16.020; Ord. No.
O.1530-2006]
Golf course, as defined herein. For purposes of this section, the term "golf
course" is defined as a tract of land laid out for at least eighteen (18) holes
for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and
Department of Education, including but not limited to classrooms,
administrative offices, cafeterias, and gymnasiums.
a. Maintenance and storage buildings, except that no accessory building
used for storage of materials shall exceed two hundred (200) square
feet in size nor be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
residential zone boundary.
b. Playgrounds, recreational and athletic fields;
c. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
§ 37-45.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-46.2
AO:1033
hazards, and that may include a clubhouse, pro shop and one (1) or more
shelters.
A golf course in the G-C golf course — natural preservation district shall be
contained within a country club. For purposes of this section, a "country
club" is defined as land area and buildings containing a golf course,
recreational facilities, a clubhouse and customary accessory uses, open only
to members and their guests.
§ 37-46.3. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.16.030]
Accessory uses incidental to the above. The accessory use shall not include
business uses or buildings unrelated to the golf course.
§ 37-46.4. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.16.040]
None.
§ 37-46.5. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.16.050]
As specified in the Schedule of Regulations, Section 37-63.
§ 37-46.6. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.16.060]
As specified in Section 37-60.
§ 37-46.7. Sign Regulations. [1999 Code § 17.16.070]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-47. OSR-C OPEN SPACE/RECREATION CONSERVATION
DISTRICT.
§ 37-47.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.84.010]
The purpose of the OSR-C Zone is to preserve within the Township lands
that are identified as open space, recreational facilities or environmentally
sensitive. Placed in this zone will be public, quasi-public and other parcels
that would be inherently suitable for this zone based on their use and
purpose. Specifically, all Federal, State, County, municipal and private parks
with inherent recreational facilities shall be included in the OSR-C zone.
§ 37-47.2. Permitted Uses. [1999 Code § 17.84.020; Ord. No.
O.1670-2008§ III]
No building, structure, premises or facility shall be used and no building,
structure or facility shall be erected or physically and structurally altered
except for the following uses.
§ 37-46.2 EDISON CODE § 37-47.2
AO:1034
§ 37-47.3. Prohibited Uses. [1999 Code § 17.84.030]
Except as set forth in the conditional uses subsection of the OSR-C Zone, all
uses not specifically permitted are therefor prohibited.
§ 37-47.4. Accessory Uses. [1999 Code § 17.84.040]
Permitted is any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any principal use permitted in this district. No accessory
structure shall be larger in area than fifteen (15%) percent of the area of
the principal structure. Permitted accessory uses shall consist of but not
necessarily be limited to:
§ 37-47.5. Conditional Uses. [1999 Code § 17.84.050]
Golf courses with the following conditions and regulations: same
requirements as set forth in the G-C golf course zone in this chapter.
§ 37-47.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [1999
Code § 17.84.060]
Off-street parking, together with appropriate access thereto, shall be
provided on the same lot as the building, structure, or facility it is intended
to serve in accordance with the standards of Section 37-60 with the
additional following standards:
a. Buildings and structures to include offices, locker rooms, concession
stands and equipment storage sheds for the purpose of servicing sport
and recreational facilities such as baseball, softball, football, soccer,
tennis, swimming pools, skating rinks, dog parks and other similar
uses;
b. Buildings to house centers with related facilities for the purpose of
studying, learning, recordkeeping, and gathering information on the
wildlife, ecology and natural resources indigenous to the surrounding
area.
a. Maintenance sheds;
b. Toilet facilities;
c. Nature trails for walking and biking;
d. Observation stands;
e. Bleachers.
a. Off-street parking space may be located in the front, side or rear yards;
provided, however, that no parking shall be nearer than fifteen (15) feet
to any street right-of-way line nor nearer than five (5) feet to any side of
a building, structure or facility, and further provided that complete
building perimeter parking is prohibited.
§ 37-47.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-47.6
AO:1035
§ 37-47.7. Requirements for Signs. [1999 Code § 17.84.070]
Due to the complexity and wide spectrum of intensity and uses that can be
implemented in the OSR-C Zone, sign regulations shall be determined on an
individual basis for each parcel that requires a site plan or subdivision by
either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. The professionals
that report to either of these boards shall make recommendations regarding
the signs proposed for this zone based on the requirements of Section
37-62.
Proposed signs that are not as a result of a site plan or subdivision approval
shall be reviewed and recommendations made by the Township Planner also
based on the requirements of Section 37-62.
§ 37-47.8. Other Requirements. [1999 Code § 17.84.080]
All parcels that are in the OSR-C Zone may also be subject to limitations
as the case may be other than the development regulations set forth. They
shall be subject but not be limited to the following restrictions:
§ 37-47.9. Conservation Restriction. [1999 Code § 17.84.090]
There shall be properties within the OSR-C Zone that are of special
importance to the Municipality regarding the preservation in their natural
state, undisturbed and pristine areas of open space. A "Conservation
Restriction" shall be applied to such properties in order to protect them
from any form of change deleterious to their natural state.
Conservation Restriction means an interest in land less than fee simple
absolute, stated in the form of a right, restriction, easement, covenant, or
condition, in any deed, will or other instrument, other than a lease, executed
by or on behalf of the owner of the land, appropriate to retaining land or
water area as predominantly in their natural, scenic or wooded condition,
or for conservation of soil or wildlife, or for outdoor recreation or park use,
or as suitable habitat for fish or wildlife, to forbid or limit any or all:
b. Where a building, structure or facility has loading and unloading needs
based on use, the number of loading spaces required shall be set forth
in subsection 37-60.4b.
a. Deed restrictions;
b. Green acres regulations;
c. Restrictions as set forth by municipal, County, State or Federal
mandates;
d. Any other lawful restriction that precludes development of a subject
parcel in part or in full in accordance with the requirements set forth in
this section.
§ 37-47.6 EDISON CODE § 37-47.9
AO:1036
§ 37-48. MHP MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT.
§ 37-48.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.010]
The MHP mobile home park district recognizes existing home parks located
within the Township of Edison shall be governed by the regulations in this
section. It is the intent and purpose of this section to recognize the existing
status of the mobile home parks referenced herein. Nothing herein shall
be construed as placing new or additional requirements upon these mobile
home parks unless replaced, expanded or enlarged.
§ 37-48.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.020]
As used in this section:
MANUFACTURED HOME — Means a unit of housing which: a. consists of
one (1) or more transportable sections which are substantially constructed
off site and, if more than one (1) section, are joined together on site; b. is
built on a permanent chassis; c. is designed to be used, when connected
to utilities as a dwelling on a permanent or nonpermanent foundation;
and d. is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for
a manufactured home pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," and the standards
promulgated pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
MOBILE HOME — Means a unit of housing which: a. consists of one
(1) or more transportable sections which are substantially constructed off
site and, if more than one (1) section, are joined together on site; b. is
built on a permanent chassis; c. is designed to be used, when connected
to utilities as a dwelling on a permanent or nonpermanent foundation;
and d. is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for
a manufactured home pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing
a. Construction or placing of buildings, roads, signs, billboards or other
advertising, or other structures on or above ground;
b. Dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material as landfill, or
dumping or placing of trash, waste or unsightly or offensive materials;
c. Removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or other vegetation;
d. Excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock or
other mineral substance;
e. Surface use except for purposes permitting the land or water area to
remain predominantly in its natural condition;
f. Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation,
erosion control or soil conservation, or fish and wildlife habitat
preservation;
g. Other acts or uses detrimental to the retention of land or water areas
according to the purpose of this act.
§ 37-47.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-48.2
AO:1037
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," and the standards
promulgated pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Means one (1) of the four (4) sites designated
in this section used exclusively for the placement and occupancy of
manufactured homes and mobile homes.
§ 37-48.3. Compliance with Fire Safety Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1500-2006§ 17.85.030]
All mobile home parks in existence as of the date this section becomes
effective shall maintain their existing safety separation, outdoor hazards
and water supply for fire protection systems and/or measures (if applicable).
Manufactured home installations, sites and parks in the MHP mobile home
park district which are replaced, expanded or enlarged after the effective
date of this section shall conform to the requirements of National Fire
Protection Association Standard 501A-1997, specifically sections 4.2.1
pertaining to fire safety separation requirements, 4.3.3 pertaining to
outdoor hazards and 4.3.5 pertaining to water supplies for fire protection.
§ 37-48.4. Replacement of Existing Mobile Home. [Ord. No.
O.1500-2006§ 17.85.040]
Any portion of a manufactured home, excluding the tongue, that replaces an
existing mobile home located within a mobile home park shall not be located
closer than the distance that the mobile home to be replaced was to any
other manufactured home or community building. If the distances are less
than those stated in this section, the distances must be in accordance with
the International Residential Code, New Jersey Edition (2000), including the
required fire ratings.
§ 37-48.5. Maximum Number of Mobile Homes. [Ord. No.
O.1500-2006§ 17.85.050]
The maximum number of mobile homes for mobile home parks in the MHP
mobile home park district shall be the existing number of spaces as follows:
Mobile Home Park Number of Spaces
Edison Mobile Estates 107
Edison Terrace Mobile Home Park 88
Edison Trailer Court 43
Edison Mobile Gardens 3
§ 37-48.6. Compliance with Standards for Public Improvements.
[Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.060]
In the MHP mobile home park district, all new roadways, sidewalks, curbs
and storm drains within a mobile home park constructed after the passage
of this section must comply with Township ordinances.
§ 37-48.2 EDISON CODE § 37-48.7
AO:1038
§ 37-48.7. License Required for Mobile Home Parks; Fees and
Applications. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.070]
a. It is unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home park
within the limits of the Township unless such person shall first obtain a
license therefor.
b. Each application for such license or the annual renewal thereof shall be
filed with the Division of Licenses and Inspections. The license and
inspection fees shall be the sum of twenty ($20.00) dollars for each
trailer space, with a minimum inspection fee of one hundred ($100.00)
dollars, and the sum of fifty ($.50) cents per calendar week per
occupied trailer space. The license shall expire on June 30 of each year,
and the fees are expressly declared to be imposed for regulation and
revenues. Any present license expiring on any other date shall have the
fees prorated upon first renewal to comply with the aforesaid expiration
date. All fees hereunder shall be payable in advance, except that the
weekly fee per occupied trailer space shall be payable as hereinafter
provided.
c. Each application for a transfer of a license shall be accompanied by a
fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars, and no such transfer shall be made unless
the mobile home park shall at the time of the application be in full and
complete compliance with all the requirements of this section.
d. Each application for a license shall be in writing and in triplicate and
shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if
the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a duly verified
statement by that person that the applicant is authorized by him or her
to construct or maintain the mobile home park and to make the
application) and a map showing the exact location of the premises to be
licensed certified by a licensed New Jersey engineer. Where the owner
is an entity, the name and address of the principal(s) of the ownership
entity shall be provided. This shall include the officers of any
corporation, the members of a limited liability company, the partners of
a limited partnership and the officers of a general partnership if the
general partner is a corporate entity or a limited liability company. The
application shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of the mobile home
park plan, drawn to the same scale as the map, showing the following,
either existing or as proposed:
1. The extent and area used for mobile home park purposes;
2. Roadways and driveways;
3. Location and dimensions of mobile home spaces;
4. Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms;
5. Method and plan of sewage disposal;
§ 37-48.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-48.7
AO:1039
§ 37-48.8. Building Permit Required Prior to Installation of Mobile
Home Pad. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.080]
In the MHP mobile home park district, a building permit must be issued
prior to the installation of a new mobile home pad to ensure that the
installation of the mobile home complies with this section. The Township
Construction Official or Building Subcode Official shall inspect the new pad
site prior to concrete being poured and prior to the installation of a new
mobile home on any new pad. In accordance with the Federal Manufactured
Home, Construction and Safety Standards and the regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, any newly installed mobile home
must be tied down to the concrete pad by the owner of the mobile home
park in order to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy therefor.
§ 37-48.9. Certificate of Occupancy Required. [Ord. No.
O.1500-2006§ 17.85.090]
Occupancy of a mobile home on an existing or new mobile home pad in the
MHP mobile home park district is subject to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy by the Township Construction Official, which includes the name
of the mobile home owner, the serial number and body type of the mobile
home, and pad number or street address of the pad site.
§ 37-48.10. Fees. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.100]
For the MHP mobile home park district, the construction permit, Certificate
of Occupancy and mobile home park licensing fees shall conform with the
6. Method and plan of garbage removal;
7. Plan for water supply;
8. Plan for electrical lighting of mobile homes and the mobile home
park, including the roadways and driveways;
9. Density calculations.
e. Licenses issued under the terms of this section convey no right to erect
any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work or
any other kind of work ordinarily requiring government, municipal or
other permits.
f. It shall be the duty of the Housing Inspector or its authorized agents or
assistants, to make inspections of any mobile home park at least one (1)
time every two (2) years to make certain that this section is being fully
complied with and that the mobile home park is also in full compliance
with all the other applicable ordinances and statutes. If it is determined
that there is a violation, it shall be the duty of the officer to order the
violation corrected within a reasonable time, and, if not so corrected, it
shall be the further duty of the officer to bring formal charges against
the violator in the Municipal Court.
§ 37-48.7 EDISON CODE § 37-48.10
AO:1040
fee schedule set forth in this section and/or in the applicable Township
Codes for such items.
§ 37-48.11. Compliance Required Prior to Occupancy of Home.
[Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.110]
It shall be unlawful to park or occupy a mobile home unless it complies with
the provisions of this section.
§ 37-48.12. Emergency Occupancy of Mobile Home for Temporary
Living Quarters. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.120]
A mobile home may be occupied on an emergency basis for temporary living
quarters in any residential zone or on any existing residential dwelling lot
within the Township, provided that a permit is granted by the Township
Construction Official. A permit shall be effective for a six (6) month period
and shall not be issued unless the applicant's home is uninhabitable because
of fire or other casualty. The permit may be extended for three (3) months,
upon show of good cause, by resolution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 37-48.13. Height Limits. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.130]
No building or structure in the MHP mobile home park district shall exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as regulated by the height exception
provisions of this section.
§ 37-48.14. Water and Sewer Service. [Ord. No.
O.1500-2006§ 17.85.140]
All mobile homes in the MHP mobile home park district shall be served by
public potable water and sanitary sewer.
§ 37-48.15. Parking. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.150]
Parking requirements in the MHP mobile home park district shall maintain
but not exceed the number of spaces existing on the effective date of this
section.
§ 37-48.16. Density and Area. [Ord. No. O.1500-2006§ 17.85.160]
Any expansion of a mobile home park or a new mobile home park in the
MHP mobile home park district must comply with new density requirements
as follows:
a. There shall be no more than five (5) mobile homes per gross acre and
not more than seven (7) mobile homes in any given acre.
b. Each mobile home space shall have a minimum width of forty (40) feet,
a minimum depth of eighty (80) feet and a minimum area of five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
§ 37-48.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-48.17
AO:1041
§ 37-48.17. Accessory Structures, Sheds. [Ord. No.
O.1500-2006§ 17.85.170]
§ 37-48.18. On-Site Management Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1500-2006§ 17.85.180]
a. Except for accessory structures existing adjacent to any mobile home
park space as of the effective date of this section, no new accessory
structures shall be permitted adjacent to any mobile home park space
(other than for a stairway and landing to gain access to said mobile
home). No accessory structure existing as of the effective date of this
section (other than for stairways and landings) may be replaced or
expanded. No such landing shall be larger than four feet by eight (4 x 8)
feet in dimension.
b. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph a. above to the
contrary, the owner of a mobile or manufactured home shall have the
right to replace any weathered or damaged storage shed or to install a
storage shed adjacent to his or her mobile or manufactured home pad
provided that said storage shed shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
1. The storage shed shall be manufactured of noncombustible
materials such as steel or aluminum; and
2. The storage shed shall be placed on and anchored to a concrete pad
or slab a minimum of four (4) inches thick; and
3. The storage shed shall be less than one hundred (100) square feet
in size; and
4. The owner of the mobile or manufactured home shall have first
secured a zoning permit for a new storage shed from the Zoning
Officer of the Township.
a. In every mobile home park exceeding forty (40) mobile home spaces
there shall be an office building in which shall be located the office of
the on-site manager or superintendent of the mobile home park. A copy
of the mobile home park license required by this section shall be posted
therein, and the mobile home park register shall at all times be kept in
the office.
b. It is made the duty of the on-site manager or superintendent of the
mobile home park, together with the licensee, to:
1. Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
2. Report to the Director of the Department of Health and Human
Services all cases of persons or animals affected or suspected of
being affected with any communicable disease.
3. Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets.
§ 37-48.17 EDISON CODE § 37-48.18
AO:1042
§ 37-49. T-1 TOWNSHIP DISTRICT 1.
§ 37-49.1. Establishment of the T-1 Township District 1. [Ord. No.
O.1839-2013§ 2]
There is hereby established a Township District 1 Zone (T-1) permitting
Township uses as further set forth herein, in a portion of the L-I Zone, being
proposed new Lots 3.011, 3.013 and 3.015 as depicted on the Proposed
Subdivision Plan for Block 3-E, Lot 3.01 prepared by Control Layouts,
Inc. dated November 23, 2010 as revised through June 8, 2011. The T-1
Zone encompasses a portion of Block 3-E, Lot 3.01 as shown on the
aforementioned Plan as proposed new Lots 3.011, 3.013 and 3.015 as
follows:
4. Maintain in centrally located places one (1) fire extinguisher in
good working order for every eight (8) trailer spaces, fire
extinguishers and their location to be approved by the Division of
Fire.
5. Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises except in certain
designated areas if approved by the Division of Fire.
6. Prohibit the use of any mobile home by a number of occupants
greater than that for which it is designed to accommodate by the
manufacturer.
a. Lot 3.011, which contains approximately 7.02 acres and whose legal
description is:
BEGINNING at a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of Truman
Drive (60.00 feet wide), said point being located 858.66 feet Northerly
from the intersection of the aforesaid Westerly sideline of Truman Drive
with the Northerly right-of-way line of Kilmer Road (80.00 feet wide);
thence running:
1. North 89 degrees 57 minutes 26 seconds West, a distance of 381.65
feet to a point; thence
2. South 00 degrees 02 minutes 34 seconds West, a distance of 368.28
feet to a point; thence
3. South 69 degrees 34 minutes 17 seconds West, a distance of 195.77
feet to a point on the Easterly sideline of Avenue "C" (part of Lot 2
in Block 3-E); thence
4. Along the aforesaid Easterly sideline of Avenue "C" (part of Lot 2. in
Block 3-E), on a curve to the left, having a radius of 3746.56 feet
and an arc length of 284.02 feet, a chord bearing of North 26
degrees 17 minutes 13 seconds West and a chord distance of
283.96 feet to a point; thence
§ 37-48.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-49.1
AO:1043
5. Continuing along the aforesaid Easterly sideline of Avenue "C"
(part of Lot 2 in Block 3-E), North 28 degrees 27 minutes 32
seconds West, a distance of 39.71 feet to a point; thence
6. Continuing along the aforesaid Easterly sideline of Avenue "C"
(part of Lot 2 in Block 3-E), on a curve to the left, having a radius of
3575.00 feet and an arc length of 179.73 feet, a chord bearing of
North 29 degrees 53 minutes 57 seconds West and a chord distance
of 179.71 feet to a point; thence
7. North 51 degrees 02 minutes 00 seconds East, a distance of 449.23
feet to a point; thence
8. North 89 degrees 48 minutes 17 seconds East, a distance of 400.79
feet to a point; thence
9. Along a curve to the left, having a radius of 50.00 feet and an arc
length of 78.33 feet, a chord bearing of North 44 degrees 55
minutes 26 seconds East and a chord distance of 70.56 feet to a
point on the aforesaid Westerly sideline of Truman Drive; thence
10. Along the aforesaid Westerly sideline of Truman Drive, South 00
degrees 02 minutes 34 seconds West, a distance of 342.80 feet to a
point, said point being the point and place of BEGINNING.
b. Lot 3.013, which contains approximately 4.26 acres and whose legal
description is:
1. Beginning at a point, said point being located the following courses
and distances from a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of
Truman Drive (60.00 feet wide), which point is therein located
1201.46 feet Northerly from the intersection of the aforesaid
Westerly sideline of Truman Drive with the Northerly right-of-way
line of Kilmer Road (80.00 feet wide):
(a) Along a curve to the right, having a radius of 50.00 feet and an
arc length of 78.33 feet, a chord bearing of South 44 degrees
55 minutes 26 seconds West and a chord distance of 70.56 feet
to a point; thence
(b) South 89 degrees 48 minutes 17 seconds West, a distance of
400.79 feet to a point; thence
(c) North 24 degrees 11 minutes 49 seconds West, a distance of
217.53 feet to a point, said point being the point and place of
beginning; thence running:
(1) South 51 degrees 02 minutes 00 seconds West, a distance
of 482.83 feet to a point on the Easterly sideline of Avenue
"C" (part of Lot 2 in Block 3-E); thence
(2) Along the aforesaid Easterly sideline of Avenue "C" (part of
Lot 2 in Block 3-B), along a curve to the left, having a
§ 37-49.1 EDISON CODE § 37-49.1
AO:1044
§ 37-49.2. Purpose, Permitted and Accessory Uses and Development
Standards. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 2]
The purpose of this zone is to permit the required Township related uses
of the properties upon the transfer of these properties, being Areas 1, 2, 3,
and 5, to the Township under the approved Redevelopment Plan pursuant
to the Base Closure Community Redevelopment and Homeless Assistance
Act of 1994, Pub. L. 103-21. As the Township is not subject to its own
radius of 3575.00 feet and an arc length of 390.69 feet, a
chord bearing of North 37 degrees 51 minutes 36 seconds
West and a chord distance of 390.50 feet to a point on the
Southerly sideline of Road 2; thence
(3) Along the aforesaid Southerly sideline of Road 2, on a
curve to the right, having a radius of 2101.68 feet and an
arc length of 476.64 feet, a chord bearing of North 53
degrees 09 minutes 46 seconds East and a chord distance
of 475.62 feet to a point; thence
(4) South 38 degrees 58 minutes 00 seconds East, a distance
of 372.75 feet to a point, said point being the point and
place of beginning.
c. Lot 3.015, which contains approximately 3.64 acres and whose legal
description is:
1. Beginning at a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of Truman
Drive (60.00 feet wide), said point being located 419.80 feet
Northerly from the intersection of the aforesaid Westerly sideline of
Truman Drive with the Northerly right-of-way line of Kilmer Road
(80.00 feet wide); thence running:
(a) North 89 degrees 54 minutes 17 seconds West, a distance of
236.51 feet to a point; thence
(b) North 29 degrees 17 minutes 44 seconds West, a distance of
80.84 feet to a point; thence
(c) South 89 degrees 58 minutes 59 seconds West, a distance of
105.53 feet to a point; thence
(d) North 00 degrees 02 minutes 34 seconds East, a distance of
368.28 feet to a point; thence
(e) South 89 degrees 57 minutes 26 seconds East, a distance of
381.65 feet to a point on the aforesaid Westerly sideline of
Truman Drive; thence
(f) Along the aforesaid Westerly sideline of Truman Drive, South
00 degrees 02 minutes 34 seconds West, a distance of 438.86
feet to a point, said point being the point and place of
beginning.
§ 37-49.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-49.2
AO:1045
zoning laws there are no limitations to the permitted uses accessory uses
and development standards for any use of these properties by the Township.
The Township may also allow the use of these properties by other Townshiprelated
boards, agencies and/or authorities, and other public entities and
their related boards, agencies and/or authorities, such as those of the State
and County. However, the Township should consider the adjoining uses
when using and developing the property by the Township and/or other
public entities.
§ 37-49.3. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. O.1839-2013§ 2]
Any use pursuant to a lease granted by the Township, or other permission
granted by the Township shall be considered a conditional use in this zone,
but not including use by other Township-related boards, agencies and/or
authorities, and other public entities and their related boards, agencies
and/or authorities, such as those of the State and County. The use granted
by such lease or other permission shall comply with the regulations and
standards for such use as provided for in the applicable provisions of the
Edison Township Zoning Ordinances and in the Township Code.
§ 37-50. AHOZ-3 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DISTRICT.
§ 37-50.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
There is hereby created, pursuant to a settlement of litigation, an Affordable
Housing Zone (AHOZ) permitting townhouses and apartment dwellings in
the Zone. The AHOZ affects a 10.3±-acre property comprised of Block 38,
Lots 19 in its entirety and a portion of Block 38, Lot 18, that currently
constitutes the undeveloped portion of the Rivendell Heights project at the
time of the establishment of this section of the section, and as depicted
on the Zoning Map (the "Site"). The purpose of this zone is to permit the
construction of two hundred fifty (250) garden apartment units of which
15% or 38 units shall be affordable as follows: 14 low income; 19 moderate
income; 5 very low income; and the market rate units shall be a combination
of 40% one bedrooms and 60% two bedrooms.
§ 37-50.2. COAH Compliance. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
All low and moderate income units shall conform to COAH regulations,
including, but not limited to: regulations pertaining to phasing the
construction of low and moderate income units in sequence with market
units; bedroom distribution; establishing affordable sales prices and rents;
and controls on affordability. The Township's affordable housing ordinance
will incorporate and be subject to COAH regulations.
§ 37-49.2 EDISON CODE § 37-50.3
AO:1046
§ 37-50.3. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016; Ord. No.
O.2023-2018]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
a. Single-family detached houses subject to the same development
regulations specified in the R-B district;
b. Townhouses subject to development regulations specified in the R-B-th
district;
c. Multifamily dwelling and apartment houses subject to the following
requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Size. No building which is intended or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, as a garden apartment building shall be
erected or constructed upon a lot containing an area of less than
ten (10) acres; except that, if a zone boundary line passes through
any lot of ten (10) acres or more with the result that the area
available for garden apartment construction is less than ten (10)
acres, such area of less than ten (10) acres may be approved for
garden apartment development; provided, however, that all other
regulations pertaining to the erection or construction of the garden
apartments shall be applied to and within the area permitting such
construction, except that the calculation of the number of units to
be constructed shall be based upon such acreage available for such
construction.
2. Height. No apartment building shall have more than three (3)
habitable stories or exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
3. Minimum Space Between Buildings. The minimum distance
between buildings shall be one-half (1/2) the total average height of
the two (2) buildings, except that the side to side minimum distance
between buildings shall be twenty (20) feet.
4. Density. No more than ten (10) apartment units per acre shall be
permitted for two-story apartment buildings and no more than
twenty-five (25) apartment units per acre shall be permitted for
three-story buildings.
5. Rooms. Each apartment unit in each apartment building shall
contain separate bedroom, separate bathroom and separate
kitchen/dining facilities. This provision shall not be interpreted to
preclude efficiency apartments.
6. Landscaping. All areas of a garden apartment development not
used for the construction of buildings, roads, accessways, parking
areas or sidewalks shall be fully landscaped. Where a garden
apartment development boundary line abuts a lot in a residential
§ 37-50.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-50.3
AO:1047
zone, which lot is not owned by the garden apartment developer,
there shall not be cut, uprooted, destroyed or taken away any
existing trees, shrubbery or other planting within the area of
twenty (20) feet inside the boundary line of the garden
development abutting a residential lot. If no adequate trees, shrubs
or plantings exist in the twenty (20) foot area in the natural state of
the premises before development, the area shall be provided with
an adequate approved planting plan to provide a belt of screening
within the twenty (20) foot area.
7. Interior Roads. All roads and other accessways within the garden
apartment development shall be private roads, and be constructed
with pavement and curbs within the established cartways. All roads
and or drive aisles containing right-angle parking or angled
parking on one or both sides of the road shall contain drive aisles of
not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. All access roads that do
not contain angled parking shall comply with the current
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21) for the
width of the cartway inclusive of any on-street parallel parking
areas. All such construction, paving and curbing shall be completed
in accordance with the subdivision regulations of Edison Township.
All interior roads shall provide suitable access for ingress, egress
and circulation for emergency vehicles, by providing additional
width of drive aisles, adequate turning radius at corners and
appropriate delineated Fire Lanes, subject to the review of the
Edison Township Fire Department.
8. Parking. All parking shall be confined to the areas specifically
designated on the site plan for that purpose. Parking area shall be
paved and curbed and provided with an adequate system of
stormwater drainage. No parking area (other than driveway
parking spaces located in front of a garage) may be placed closer to
a building than ten (10) feet. Parking areas may be constructed in
the front, side and rear yards, but in no event closer than ten (10)
feet to a lot line (other than driveway parking spaces located in
front of a garage).
9. Buildings.
(a) No principal building shall:
(1) Be designed for or occupied by more than twenty (20)
families;
(2) Exceed two hundred ten (210) feet in length in its longest
dimensions;
(3) Allow or contain outside television antennas. All television
antenna equipment shall be built into the building to
eliminate individual antennas being erected upon the roof.
This subsection shall not apply to a common antenna
tower;
§ 37-50.3 EDISON CODE § 37-50.3
AO:1048
§ 37-50.4. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Accessory uses usually incidental to the above uses, as specified below:
§ 37-50.5. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
(b) No basement apartment units shall be permitted. For purposes
of this section, a "basement unit" shall be defined as a unit
having its finished floor elevation three (3) or more feet below
the finish grade of the ground about the building.
10. Utilities. For all garden apartments, the applicant for the site plan
approval shall arrange with the serving utilities for the
underground installation of the utilities' distribution supply lines
and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of
its tariff on file with the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility
Commissioners and shall submit to the Planning Board prior to the
granting of site plan approval a written instrument from each
serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that sites which abut
existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines have theretofore been installed on any portion of the
streets involved may be supplied with electric and telephone
service from the overhead lines or extensions, but the service
connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground.
a. Noncommercial garage for exclusive use of site residents only;
b. Noncommercial swimming pools and clubhouses for exclusive use of
site residents only.
a. Office buildings used for professional services, business services,
management and consulting services only and subject to the following
conditions and regulations:
1. Site development shall comply with the minimum development
regulations set forth for the district. The buffer requirement set
forth in the district shall be measured from the required yard width
from existing garden apartments,
2. No retail sales of goods or merchandise shall be permitted;
b. Indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, handball courts and health clubs,
subject to the following conditions and regulations: site development
shall comply with the minimum development regulations set forth for
the district, except that such use or uses shall not occupy an area of
land of less than five (5) acres, excluding garden apartments;
c. Nursing homes, subject to the following conditions and regulations:
§ 37-50.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-50.5
AO:1049
§ 37-50.6. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the schedule,
Section 37-63, except as otherwise specified in this section. The exceptions
to that schedule include the following:
§ 37-50.7. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Off-street parking together with appropriate access thereto, shall be
provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
§ 37-50.8. Sign Regulations. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-50.9. Affordable Housing Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Except as provided for herein, all development within this district shall
comply with the provisions of the Township's Affordable Housing Ordinance,
Ordinance No. O.1942-2016, adopted on September 28, 2016.
§ 37-51. AHOZ-4 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DISTRICT.
§ 37-51.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
There is hereby created, pursuant to a settlement of litigation, an Affordable
Housing Zone (AHOZ) permitting townhouses and apartment dwellings in
the Zone. The AHOZ affects an 11.25± -acre property comprised of Block
762, Lot 1A, as depicted on the Zoning Map (the "Site"). The purpose of
this zone is to permit the construction of two hundred twenty (220) garden
apartment units of which 15% or 33 units shall be affordable as follows: 13
low income; 16 moderate income; 4 very low income; and the market rate
units shall be a combination of 40% one bedrooms and 60% two bedrooms.
1. The use shall have direct access to a street other than a local
access street as classified in the adopted Master Plan of the
Township.
2. The minimum site area shall be one (1) acre.
a. Permitted building coverage ratio — 35%;
b. Permitted impervious coverage ratio — 75%;
c. Permitted FAR — .7.
§ 37-50.5 EDISON CODE § 37-51.2
AO:1050
§ 37-51.2. COAH Compliance. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
All low and moderate income units shall conform to COAH regulations,
including, but not limited to: regulations pertaining to phasing the
construction of low and moderate income units in sequence with market
units; bedroom distribution; establishing affordable sales prices and rents;
and controls on affordability. The Township's affordable housing ordinance
will incorporate and be subject to COAH regulations.
§ 37-51.3. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
No building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected or structurally altered except for the following
uses:
a. Single-family detached houses subject to the same development
regulations specified in the R-B district;
b. Townhouses subject to development regulations specified in the R-B-th
district;
c. Multifamily dwelling and apartment houses subject to the following
requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Size. No building which is intended or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, as a garden apartment building shall be
erected or constructed upon a lot containing an area of less than
ten (10) acres; except that, if a zone boundary line passes through
any lot of ten (10) acres or more with the result that the area
available for garden apartment construction is less than ten (10)
acres, such area of less ten (10) acres may be approved for garden
apartment development; provided, however, that all other
regulations pertaining to the erection or construction of the garden
apartments shall be applied to and within the area permitting such
construction, except that the calculation of the number of units to
be constructed shall be based upon such acreage available for such
construction.
2. Height. No apartment building shall have more than three (3)
habitable stories or exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
3. Minimum Space Between Buildings. The minimum distance
between buildings shall be one-half (1/2) the total height of the two
(2) buildings, except that the side to side minimum distance
between buildings shall be twenty (20) feet.
4. Density. No more than ten (10) apartment units per acre shall be
permitted for two-story apartment buildings and no more than
twenty-five (25) apartment units per acre shall be permitted for
three-story buildings.
§ 37-51.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-51.3
AO:1051
5. Rooms. Each apartment unit in each apartment building shall
contain separate bedroom, separate bathroom and separate
kitchen/dining facilities. This provision shall not be interpreted to
preclude efficiency apartments.
6. Landscaping. All areas of a garden apartment development not
used for the construction of buildings, roads, accessways, parking
areas or sidewalks shall be fully landscaped. Where a garden
apartment development boundary line abuts a lot in a residential
zone, which lot is not owned by the garden apartment developer,
there shall not be cut, uprooted, destroyed or taken away any
existing trees, shrubbery or other planting within the area of
twenty (20) feet inside the boundary line of the garden
development abutting a residential lot. If no adequate trees, shrubs
or plantings exist in the twenty (20) foot area in the natural state of
the premises before development, the area shall be provided with
an adequate approved planting plan to provide a belt of screening
within the twenty (20) foot area.
7. Interior Roads. All roads and other accessways within the garden
apartment development shall be private roads, and be constructed
with pavement and curbs within the established cartways. All roads
and or drive aisles containing right-angle parking or angled
parking on one or both sides of the road shall contain drive aisles of
not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. All access roads that do
not contain angled parking shall comply with the current
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21) for the
width of the cartway inclusive of any on-street parallel parking
areas. All such construction, paving and curbing shall be completed
in accordance with the subdivision regulations of Edison Township.
All interior roads shall provide suitable access for ingress, egress
and circulation for emergency vehicles, by providing additional
width of drive aisles, adequate turning radius at corners and
appropriate delineated Fire Lanes, subject to the review of the
Edison Township Fire Department.
8. Parking. All parking shall be confined to the areas specifically
designated on the site plan for that purpose. Parking area shall be
paved and curbed and provided with an adequate system of
stormwater drainage. No parking area (other than driveway
parking spaces located in front of a garage) may be placed closer to
a building than ten (10) feet. Parking areas may be constructed in
the front, side and rear yards, but in no event closer than ten (10)
feet to a lot line (other than driveway parking spaces located in
front of a garage).
9. Buildings.
(a) No principal building shall:
§ 37-51.3 EDISON CODE § 37-51.3
AO:1052
§ 37-51.4. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Accessory uses usually incidental to the above uses, as specified below:
§ 37-51.5. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
(1) Be designed for or occupied by more than twenty (20)
families;
(2) Exceed two hundred ten (210) feet in length in its longest
dimensions;
(3) Allow or contain outside television antennas. All television
antenna equipment shall be built into the building to
eliminate individual antennas being erected upon the roof.
This subsection shall not apply to a common antenna
tower;
(b) No basement apartment units shall be permitted. For purposes
of this section, a "basement unit" shall be defined as a unit
having its finished floor elevation three (3) or more feet below
the finish grade of the ground about the building.
10. Utilities. For all garden apartments, the applicant for the site plan
approval shall arrange with the serving utilities for the
underground installation of the utilities' distribution supply lines
and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of
its tariff on file with the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility
Commissioners and shall submit to the Planning Board prior to the
granting of site plan approval a written instrument from each
serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that sites which abut
existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines have theretofore been installed on any portion of the
streets involved may be supplied with electric and telephone
service from the overhead lines or extensions, but the service
connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground.
a. Noncommercial garage for exclusive use of site residents only;
b. Noncommercial swimming pools and clubhouses for exclusive use of
site residents only.
a. Office buildings used for professional services, business services,
management and consulting services only and subject to the following
conditions and regulations:
1. Site development shall comply with the minimum development
regulations set forth for the district. The buffer requirement set
§ 37-51.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-51.5
AO:1053
§ 37-51.6. Height, Area and Yard Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Height, area and yard requirements are as specified in the schedule,
Section 37-63, except as otherwise specified in this section. The exceptions
to that schedule include the following:
§ 37-51.7. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Off-street parking together with appropriate access thereto, shall be
provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve in
accordance with the standards of Section 37-60.
§ 37-51.8. Sign Regulations. [Ord. No. O.1941-2016]
Signs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 37-62.
§ 37-51.9. Affordable Housing Requirements. [Ord. No.
O.1941-2016]
Except as provided for herein, all development within this district shall
comply with the provisions of the Township's Affordable Housing Ordinance,
Ordinance No. O.1942-2016, adopted on September 28, 2016 ("Township
Affordable Housing Ordinance").
§ 37-52. through § 37-53. (RESERVED)
§ 37-54. HISTORIC PRESERVATION.
forth in the district shall be measured from the required yard width
from existing garden apartments,
2. No retail sales of goods or merchandise shall be permitted;
b. Indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, handball courts and health clubs,
subject to the following conditions and regulations: site development
shall comply with the minimum development regulations set forth for
the district, except that such use or uses shall not occupy an area of
land of less than five (5) acres, excluding garden apartments;
c. Nursing homes, subject to the following conditions and regulations:
1. The use shall have direct access to a street other than a local
access street as classified in the adopted Master Plan of the
Township.
2. The minimum site area shall be one (1) acre.
a. Permitted building coverage ratio — 35%;
b. Permitted impervious coverage ratio — 75%;
c. Permitted FAR — .7.
§ 37-51.5 EDISON CODE § 37-54.1
AO:1054
§ 37-54.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.86.010]
§ 37-54.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 17.86.020]
As used in this section:
a. The purpose of this section is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the Township through the
preservation of historic buildings, places, sites, objects, and structures
through the identification, development, restoration, and maintenance
of appropriate settings for such structures, which impart a distinct
chronographic aspect of the Township and which serve as visible
reminders of the historical and cultural heritage of the Township, State
and the Nation.
b. To accomplish this purpose, the Township has adopted this section to:
1. Safeguard the heritage of the Township by preserving resources
within the Township which reflect elements of its cultural, social,
economic and architectural history;
2. Encourage the continued use of historic buildings, places, objects,
sites and structures and to facilitate their appropriate reuse;
3. Promote appreciation of historic structures for education, pleasure
and the welfare of the local population;
4. Maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for
the historic and architecturally significant structures, buildings,
places, objects or sites within the Township;
5. Foster beautification and private reinvestments;
6. Manage change by preventing alteration or new construction not in
keeping with the historic or cultural character of the resource;
7. Discourage the unnecessary demolition, or other destruction of
historic resources;
8. Recognize the importance of individual historic buildings, places,
objects, sites, and structures by urging property owners and
tenants to maintain their properties in keeping with the
requirements and standards of this section;
9. Encourage the proper maintenance and preservation of historic
landmarks and landscapes;
10. Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity, continuity
and interest of the Township; and
11. Promote the conservation of historic buildings, places, objects,
sites, and structures and to invite voluntary compliance.
§ 37-54.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-54.2
AO:1055
ADDITION — Means an extension or increase in building size, floor area or
height.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Means the Zoning Officer.
ALTERATION — Means any change in the exterior architectural features of
any improvement or addition.
APPLICATION — Means a request to the Historic Preservation Commission
made pursuant to this section for the purposes of obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness or other action by the Commission hereunder specified.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Means the application to the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township seeking
approval of a major or minor subdivision plat, site plan, planned
development, conditional use, zoning variance, or the direction of the
issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-34 or
§ 40:55D-36.[N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-3.]
BUILDING — Means any man-made structure, its site and appurtenances
created to shelter any form of human activity.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (or C/A) — Means that document
issued by the Historic Preservation Commission required before work
commences on any landmark or any building, structure, site or object.
COMMISSION — Means the Historic Preservation Commission established
pursuant to the provision of this section.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — Means the officer in charge of granting
building or construction permits in the Township.
DEMOLITION — Means the partial or total razing, dismantling, or
destruction, whether entirely or in significant part, of any building
structure, object or site. Demolition includes the removal of a building,
structure or object from its site or the removal or destruction of the facade
or surface.
DESIGNATED PROPERTY — Means an individual building, structure, site
or object, which has been designated as having historical, architectural,
cultural, aesthetic, or other significance pursuant to the provision of this
section.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two (2)
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure
or of any mining excavation or landfill, and any change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for
which permission may be required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law.[N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-4]
HISTORIC — Means having historical, architectural, cultural, aesthetic, or
other significance as defined by the provisions of this section.
IMPROVEMENT — Means a building or other structure or any work
constituting a man-made alteration of, or addition to, any site.
§ 37-54.2 EDISON CODE § 37-54.2
AO:1056
INTEGRITY — Means that authenticity of the historic identity of a building,
structure, site, or object evidenced by the survival of the physical
characteristics that existed during its historic or prehistoric period.
INVENTORY — Means a list of historic properties determined to meet
specified criteria of significance.
LANDMARK — Means a building, structure, site, or object which has a
special character or special historical or aesthetic interest as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the Township, State
or Nation, and which has been designated as a landmark pursuant to the
provisions of this section (N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-112).
OBJECT — Means a material thing of fundamental aesthetic, cultural,
historic, scenic, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design,
moveable, yet related to a specific setting or environment.
OWNER — Means any person having a right, title, or interest in a property
so as to be legally entitled, upon obtaining such permits and other
authorization, as may be required pursuant to law to perform construction,
alteration, removal, demolition, or other work with respect to such property.
PERMIT — Means any Township approval for exterior work to be performed
on any landmark, or on any building, structure, object, or site located
within an historic preservation overlay zone, which exterior work would be
subject to public view. Said permit shall include, but not be limited to, a
building permit, a demolition permit, a permit to move, convert, relocate,
or remodel, or to change the use or occupancy of any landmark or any
building, structure, object or site.
"Permit" also includes all exterior work to be performed on fences, porches,
railings, steps, lighting, sidewalks, and any other work subject to public
view, which would alter the exterior appearance of landmarks or properties
located within a historic preservation overlay zone.
REHABILITATION — Means any repair or alteration that preserves
significant historical or architectural features.
RESTORATION — Means the historically accurate repair or replacement of
architectural features.
SITE — Means any real property, whether public or private, with or without
improvements, which is the location of a significant event or series of
events, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building,
structure, or object, or any configuration, portion, or group of the foregoing
which has been designated by the Commission as having historical,
archeological, cultural, scenic, or architectural significance pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
STRUCTURE — Means any combination of materials, other than a building,
which is affixed to a piece of property, and shall include, but not be limited
to, signs, fences, walls, and paving materials.
SURVEY — Means the survey of buildings, structures, objects, or sites
located within the Township of Edison which is conducted by the
Commission for the ascertainment of their historical, architectural,
§ 37-54.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-54.2
AO:1057
aesthetic, cultural or other significance pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
VIEW or PUBLIC VIEW — Means the area of a building, structure, site or
object seen from any point on a street or walkway that is used as a public
thoroughfare, either vehicular and/or pedestrian.
§ 37-54.3. Historic Preservation Commission. [1999 Code
§ 17.86.030]
a. There is hereby established an Historic Preservation Commission in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq. The
Commission shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2) alternates
appointed by the Mayor and shall include, in designating the category
of appointment, at least one (1) member of each of the following
classes:
1. Class A means a person who is knowledgeable in building design
and construction or architectural history; and
2. Class B means a person who is knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history; and
3. Class C means citizens of the Township who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment, except for membership
on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
Of the regular members, a total of at least one (1) less than a
majority shall be of Class A and Class B.
b. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members. At
the time of appointment of all members of the Commission, the Mayor
shall designate the regular members by class and the alternate
members as "alternate number 1" and "alternate number 2."
c. The terms of the members first appointed under this section shall be so
determined that to the greatest practical extent, the expiration of the
terms shall be distributed, in a case of regular members, evenly over
the first four (4) years after their appointment; in the case of alternative
members, evenly over the first two (2) years after their appointment;
provided that the initial terms of no regular member shall exceed four
(4) years and the initial term of no alternate member shall exceed two
(2) years. Thereafter, the term of a regular member shall be four (4)
years; and the term of an alternative member shall be two (2) years.
d. For the purpose of conducting a public meeting, four (4) members shall
constitute a quorum.
e. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term, shall be
filled within sixty (60) days for the unexpired term only.
f. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the term of any member
common to the Historic Preservation Commission and the Planning
§ 37-54.2 EDISON CODE § 37-54.3
AO:1058
§ 37-54.4. Duties of the Historic Preservation Commission. [1999
Code § 17.86.040]
Board shall be for the term of membership on the Planning Board;
and the term of any member common to the Historic Preservation
Commission and the Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of
membership on the Board of Adjustment.
g. The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect a chairman and a vice
chairman from its members and select a secretary who may or may not
be a member of the Historic Preservation Commission or a municipal
employee. The secretary shall take minutes of all meetings, which shall
be available to the public. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote, except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, alternate number 1 shall vote.
h. The Historic Preservation Commission shall establish written rules of
procedure which shall be available to the public and which shall include
an attendance rule for Commission members.
i. No member of any Historic Preservation Commission shall be permitted
to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly,
any personal or financial interest.
j. A member of the Historic Preservation Commission may, after public
hearing, if he or she requests it, be removed by the Governing Body for
cause.
a. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the responsibility to:
1. Hold a minimum of four (4) regular meetings per year.
2. Prepare and maintain a survey and inventory of historic sites of the
municipality pursuant to criteria identified in the survey report.
3. Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the master plan and on the
implication for preservation of historic sites or any other master
plan elements.
4. Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites and the
recommended capital improvement program.
5. Advise the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment on
applications for development within the historic preservation zone.
6. Advise any other officials and departments of the Township of
Edison municipal government regarding the designation and
protection of cultural resources.
§ 37-54.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-54.4
AO:1059
§ 37-54.5. Procedures for the Designation of a Landmark. [1999
Code § 17.86.050]
7. Act as a liaison on behalf of the Township of Edison municipal
government to individuals and organizations concerned with
historic preservation.
8. Provide written reports on the application of the zoning ordinance
provision concerning historic preservation.
9. Make recommendations to approve or disapprove the applications
for permits which are referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission by the Zoning Officer in accordance with this section.
10. Ensure that when a discipline is not represented on the
Commission, and the Commission considers an action which is
normally evaluated by a professional in that specific discipline, the
Commission shall attempt to solicit such professional expertise
before rendering a decision.
b. All Commissioners shall:
1. Annually attend either a conference or training workshop on
historic preservation issues.
2. Review all proposed Nation and/or State Register nomination
within its jurisdiction, following the process promulgated by the
NJDEP Historic Preservation Office in its document New Jersey's
Certified Local Government Guidelines.
a. Criteria for Designation. The Commission shall consider as worthy of
designation those buildings, structures, objects, or sites that have
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling
and association that meet one (1) or more of the following criteria:
1. That are associated with the events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
2. That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
3. That embody distinctive characteristics or a type, period, or other
method of construction; that represent the work of a master; that
possess high artistic values; or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual
distinction;
4. That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important
to prehistory or history;
5. That are otherwise of particular historic significance to the
Township of Edison by reflecting or exemplifying the broad
cultural, political, economic, or social history of the Nation, State,
region or community.
§ 37-54.4 EDISON CODE § 37-54.5
AO:1060
b. Procedures for Designation. Proposals to designate a property as
historic pursuant to this section may be made by the Township Council,
the Commission, the Planning Board or by the verified application of the
owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of the individual property to be
designated, in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Nomination Proposals. The party proposing property for
designation under this section shall prepare and submit to the
Commission a nomination report for each proposed property or
site. For individual landmark designation, the report shall include
one (1) or more photographs; the tax lot and block number of the
property as designated on the official tax map of the Township; and
a physical description and statement of significance and proposed
utilization of the site.
2. Moratorium on Applications for Alteration or Demolition During
Pendency of Designation Action. No application for a permit to
construct, alter, or demolish a structure or other feature of a
proposed landmark or property location, filed subsequent to the
date that an application has been filed or a resolution proposed to
initiate designation of the proposed landmark shall be approved by
the administrative officer or other municipal agency without review
by the Commission of such application and the granting of a C/A.
Commission review of such application shall be conducted as if the
property related to such application had already been designated
as a landmark property, and thereby are subject to the same
criteria, standard and procedures which govern similar
applications concerning properties designated as landmarks. After
the expiration of forty-five (45) days from the date of the initial
filing of the designation proposal with the Commission, the permit
application may be approved without Commission review, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Municipal Code of
the Township, if the Commission has failed to act on the
designation proposal. Commission action on the designation
proposal is expressly differentiated from a final designation by the
Township Council.
c. Notice. The Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the
proposed designation of a landmark. At least twenty (20) days prior to
the hearing the Commission shall by personal service or certified mail:
1. Notify the owner(s) of record of a property that has been proposed
for designation, that the property is being considered for such
designation and the reasons therefor;
2. Advise the owner(s) of record of the significance and consequences
of such designation, and of the rights of the owner(s) of record to
contest such designation under the provisions of this section;
3. Notify the owner(s) of record of the date, time and location of the
public hearing concerning the proposed designation; and
§ 37-54.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-54.5
AO:1061
4. Serve any notices further required by the Municipal Land Use Law.
d. Public Notice of Hearing. Public notice of the hearing shall be given at
least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township. A copy of the nomination report shall also
be made available for public inspection in the Township Clerk's office at
least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing.
e. Hearing. At a public hearing, scheduled in accordance with this section,
the Commission shall review the nomination report and accompanying
documents. Interested persons shall be entitled to comment on the
proposed nominations for designation. Those persons who intend to file
a formal protest against a proposed designation must submit their
protest in writing to the Commission in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
f. Commission Report. Upon Commission review and public hearing, the
Commission shall forward to the Township Council its report which
shall contain a statement of its recommendation and the reasons
therefor with regard to proposed designations considered at the
hearing, including a list and map of properties approved for
designation. A recommendation by the Commission can only be made
upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the authorized membership of the
Commission voting in the affirmative.
g. Referral to Planning Board. The Township Council shall refer the report
to the Planning Board, which in turn shall report to the Township
Council as soon as possible, but within thirty-five (35) days. Township
Council action on landmark designations shall be otherwise subject to
those procedures and statutes which apply to a change of a zoning
designation and the adoption, revision, or amendment of any
development regulation.
h. Final Designation. As soon as possible after its receipt of the report of
the Planning Board or the expiration of the period allowed for Planning
Board comment on designations pursuant to this section, the Township
Council shall act upon the proposed designation list and may approve,
reject, or modify by ordinance the designation recommendation made
by the Planning Board. The Township Clerk shall notify in writing the
owner of any property or site proposed for historic designation ten (10)
days in advance of the introduction of any ordinance proposing historic
designation. In the event that the Township Council votes to reject or
modify any Planning Board recommendation for a proposed
designation, the Council shall record in its minutes the reasons for not
following such recommendation. All action taken by the Council on
proposed designations shall become effective upon a favorable vote of a
majority of its full authorized membership.
i. Public Notice of Designation. Notice of designation shall be made
public by publication in the official newspaper of the Township and by
distribution to all municipal agencies reviewing development
§ 37-54.5 EDISON CODE § 37-54.5
AO:1062
§ 37-54.6. Certificate of Appropriateness. [1999 Code § 17.86.060]
application and permits. A certificate or letter of designation shall be
sent to the owner(s) of record.
j. Incorporation of Designated Landmarks into Township Records. Upon
adoption, the designation list shall be incorporated by reference into
the master plan and zoning ordinance of the Township as required by
the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law. Designated properties
shall also be noted as such on the records for those properties
maintained by the offices of the Township Tax Assessor and the
Township Clerk.
k. Amendments. Landmark designations may be amended in the same
manner as they were adopted in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
a. Certificate of Appropriateness. Where an application for development is
referred by the Zoning Officer to the Historic Preservation Commission
for review pursuant to this section, the applicant shall be required to
submit an "application for certificate of appropriateness" to the Zoning
Officer. As part of this application, the Historic Preservation
Commission may require the submission of such materials as are
reasonably required for it to make a recommendation on the
application. This application shall accompany the application for
development when it is referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission for review and must be complete in order to be considered.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall advise the applicant in
writing of the time, date and place of the meeting at which the matter
will be reviewed at least three (3) days prior to the meeting.
The Historic Preservation Commission may advise other interested
parties of the meeting and may publish notices of the meeting in the
newspaper. The applicant shall not be required to appear or to be
represented at the meeting. The applicant may appear at the meeting
and may submit additional information as he so chooses.
The applicant shall not be required to appear at or be represented at
any meeting of the commission at which the Commission will consider
the application for C/A, regardless of the ultimate findings and report
of the Commission.
As soon as possible but no later than forty-five (45) days after the
administrative officer has referred the application to the Commission,
the Commission shall return to the administrative officer its written
report granting or denying the application which report may be stated
in resolution form. The Commission shall file said report with the
administrative officer, together with the C/A if granted, within ten (10)
days of the Commission's decision on the application, and, on the same
date, shall forward a copy of the report and C/A to the applicant by
personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 37-54.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-54.6
AO:1063
§ 37-54.7. Regulated Activities. [1999 Code § 17.86.070]
If within the above forty-five (45) day period, the Commission has
denied the issuance of a C/A required for the issuance of a permit or
recommended that conditions be met prior to the issuance of a permit,
the administrative officer shall deny issuance of the permit or include
the conditions as the case may be.
Failure of the Commission to report within the forty-five (45) day period
shall be deemed to constitute a recommendation in favor of issuance of
the permit and without the recommendation of conditions to the permit.
b. Time Limit and Effect of Certificate of Appropriateness. A certificate of
appropriateness, which shall only be granted by the Zoning Officer
upon a recommendation by the Historic Preservation Commission, shall
confer upon the applicant the right that the general terms and
conditions upon which the certificate was granted shall not be changed
for one (1) year. Any certificate thereafter granted shall expire by
limitation unless the approved activity has commenced within one (1)
year of the date of the certificate. The Zoning Officer, acting on the
advice of the Historic Preservation Commission, may extend the time
period. Where other approvals or permits are required pursuant to this
section, the certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for the life of
those approvals or permits or extensions thereof.
a. Regulated Activities. For the purposes of this section, regulated
activities on an historic structure shall include the following:
1. Demolition of any historic structure.
2. Relocation of any building, structure or improvement.
3. Change in the exterior appearance of any building, structure or
improvement by addition, reconstruction, alteration, replacement
or maintenance.
4. Any addition or new construction of an improvement.
5. Replacement, changes in, or addition of signs, shutters, outdoor
displays, fences and hedges, street furniture, awnings, off-street
driveway and parking materials, or exterior lighting.
6. Installation or replacement of sidewalks, porches, fire escapes,
solar panels and satellite dish antennae.
b. Activities Not Regulated. In no instance shall the following be
considered regulated activities:
1. Changes to the interior of structures.
2. Ordinary repairs and maintenance or the exact replacement of any
existing architectural details that are otherwise permitted by law
provided this work on an historic landmark does not alter the
§ 37-54.6 EDISON CODE § 37-54.7
AO:1064
exterior appearance of the building. The following are some of the
activities which may be permitted according to this criteria:
(a) Complete identical replacement of existing windows and doors.
(b) Repair of existing windows and doors involving no change in
their design, scale or appearance. Installation of storm
windows and doors.
(c) Complete replacement of existing material with identical
material.
(d) Maintenance and repair of existing roofing material involving
no change in the design, scale or appearance of the structure.
c. Emergency Repairs. Historic Preservation Commission review shall not
be required when an historic landmark requires immediate emergency
repair to preserve the continued habitability of the landmark and/or the
health and safety or its occupants or others. Emergency repairs may be
performed in accordance with the Township codes, without the
necessity of first obtaining the Commission's review. Under such
circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such as are
necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the
historic landmark, or others, and/or to maintain the habitability of the
structure. At the Zoning Officer's discretion, a request for the
Commission's review may be made as soon as possible thereafter and
under such circumstances no further work shall be performed upon the
structure until an appropriate request for approval is made and
obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
d. Demolitions. In its review of an application for demolition of an historic
structure, the Historic Preservation Commission may recommend, and
the Zoning Officer may require, the postponement of demolition for a
period not to exceed one (1) year. The Commission shall utilize this time
period to consult with the Mayor and Council, the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or other similarly qualified
organizations to ascertain how the Township may preserve the
premises to be demolished. The Commission shall be empowered to
assist the owner in developing plans to preserve the structure when
moving or demolition thereof would be a great loss to the Township. The
Township shall be empowered to negotiate with the applicant to see if
an alternative to demolition can be found and may require the applicant
to prepare a "financial analysis" which may include any or all of the
following:
1. Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, and party from
whom purchased, including a description of the relationship,
whether business or familial, if any, between the owner and the
person from whom the property was purchased;
2. Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to
the most recent assessment;
§ 37-54.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-54.7
AO:1065
§ 37-54.8. Review Standards and Regulations. [1999 Code
§ 17.86.080]
3. For depreciable properties, a pro forma financial statement
prepared by an accountant or broker of record;
4. All appraisals obtained by the owner in connection with his
purchase or financing of the property, or during his ownership of
the property;
5. Bona fide offers of the property for sale or rent price asked, and
offers received, if any;
6. Any considerations by the owner as to profitable, adaptive uses for
the property.
e. Economic Hardship. The Commission shall study the question of
economic hardship for the applicant and shall determine whether the
site can be put to reasonable beneficial use without the approval of the
demolition application. In the case of an income-producing building, the
Commission shall also determine whether the applicant can obtain a
reasonable return from his existing building. The Commission may ask
applicants for additional information to be used in making these
determinations. All final decisions shall be made by the Zoning Officer
acting on the recommendation of the Historic Preservation
Commission.
a. In preparing a recommendation regarding a regulated activity pursuant
to this section, the Historic Preservation Commission shall consider
whether the proposed activity is reasonable and appropriate and is not
in conflict with the intent and purpose of the provisions related to
historic sites as exemplified by the following standards and regulations.
1. Regulated Activities Other than Demolitions and Removals. In
regard to an application involving any regulated activity other than
demolition or removal, the following matters shall be considered:
(a) The extent to which the proposed use of any building or
structure involved may have a negative impact on the
continued viability of the historic landmark.
(b) The extent to which the proposed activity will adversely affect
the public's view of an historic structure.
(c) The extent to which the proposed change will detract from the
architectural or historic character of the historic landmark or
from the criteria which were the basis of the designation of the
historic structure.
(d) The extent to which the proposed change will result in the loss
of old, unusual or uncommon design, craftsmanship, textures
§ 37-54.7 EDISON CODE § 37-54.8
AO:1066
or materials that cannot be reproduced or can be reproduced
only with great difficulty.
(e) The landmark's importance to the Township and the extent to
which its historic or architectural interest would be adversely
affected to the detriment of the public interest by the proposed
activity.
b. Demolitions. In regard to an application to demolish an historic
landmark, the following matters shall be considered.
1. Its historic, architectural, cultural and scenic significance in
relation to the criteria established in section I of this section.
2. Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by the
zoning ordinance.
3. Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of alternatives
to the proposal.
4. Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
5. The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
6. The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing the real estate values,
generating business, attracting tourists, attracting new residents,
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design, or
making the municipality an attractive and desirable place in which
to live.
c. Relocation. In regard to an application to move an historic structure to
a new location, the following matters shall be considered:
1. The historic loss to the site of original location;
2. The reasons for not retaining the historic structure at its present
site.
3. The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the protection of
interest and values referred to in this section.
4. If the proposed new location is within a district, visual compatibility
factors as set forth in this section.
5. The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure
itself.
§ 37-54.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-54.8
AO:1067
§ 37-54.9. Violations; Enforcement. [1999 Code § 17.86.090]
6. If it is to be removed from the Township, the proximity of the
proposed new location to the Township, including the accessibility
to the residents of the Township and other citizens.
a. Violations; Defined. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties
herein. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any person who
shall undertake any activity without approvals required by this section
shall be deemed to be in violation hereof.
b. Notice of Violations. Upon learning of the violation, the administrative
officer shall personally serve upon the owner of the property whereon
the violation is occurring a notice describing the violation in detail, and
giving the owner (10) days to abate the violation by restoring the
building, structure, or site to its condition prior to the violation. If the
owner cannot personally be served within the Township with said
notice, a copy shall be posted on the property and a copy shall be sent,
via certified mail, to the owner of record at the address listed on the
official tax records of the Township.
c. Injunctive Relief. In the event that the violation is not abated within ten
(10) days of service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the
administrative officer shall cause to be instituted any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful activity, to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure, or site, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about such premises as follows:
1. If any person shall undertake any activity requiring a permit and
report of the Commission without first having obtained approval,
he or she shall be required to immediately stop the activity, apply
for approval, and take any necessary measures to preserve the
affected premises pending such approval. If the work is denied, he
or she shall immediately restore the building, structure, object, or
site to its condition prior to any such activity. The administrative
officer is hereby authorized to seek injunctive relief regarding a
stop action or restoration in the Superior Court of New Jersey, not
less than ten (10) days after the delivery of notice pursuant to
paragraph b. hereof.
2. In the event of the threat of imminent action for which the
necessary approvals have not been granted, and which action
would permanently and adversely change a landmark or any
building, structure, object, or site the administrative officer is
empowered to apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for
injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent such actions.
§ 37-54.8 EDISON CODE § 37-54.9
AO:1068
§ 37-55. through § 37-59. (RESERVED)
§ 37-60. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
§ 37-60.1. General Provisions. [1999 Code § 17.88.010; Ord. No.
O.1796-2012]
d. Penalties. In addition to the remedies provided above, a person
convicted of a violation of this section before a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be subject to penalties as follows:
1. For each day up to ten (10) days, not more than one hundred
($100.00) dollars per day.
2. For each day between eleven (11) and twenty-five (25) days, not
more than two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars per day.
3. For each day beyond twenty-five (25) days, not more than five
hundred ($500.00) dollars per day.
a. Scope of Provisions. Off-street parking, unloading and service
requirements of this section shall apply and govern in all present and
future zoning districts within the Township. Except as provided in this
section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless
there is included with the plan for such building, improvement or use a
plot plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking,
unloading and service purposes. An occupancy permit shall not be
given unless the required off-street parking, unloading and service
facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the
approved plan.
b. Duty to Provide and Maintain Off-Street Parking and Loading. No land
shall be used or occupied, no structure shall be designed, created,
altered, used or occupied, and no use shall be operated unless off-street
parking and loading facilities are provided in at least the amount
required by this section and maintained in the manner required by this
section.
c. Parking Space Variance Payments. Any variance from the construction
of less than the minimum number of parking spaces required under
subsection 37-60.3 or any provision of the Township's zoning or land
use regulations requiring a minimum number of parking spaces shall
require payment as follows:
1 to 5 spaces $5,000 for each space
6 to 15 spaces $4,500 for each space
16 to 30 spaces $4,000 for each space
30 or more
spaces
$3,000 for each space
§ 37-54.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-60.2
AO:1069
§ 37-60.2. Plan and Design Standards. [1999 Code § 17.88.020]
a. Required Size of Parking Spaces and Access.
1. All off-street parking spaces shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide
nor less than eighteen (18) feet deep.
2. All parking spaces shall connect to an on-site driveway.
b. Provision for Proper Drainage and Maintenance. All off-street parking,
off-street loading and service facilities shall be so drained as to prevent
damage to abutting properties or public streets and shall be
constructed of materials which will assure a surface resistant to
erosion. Such drainage and materials shall be installed as required by
the engineer. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the
expense of the owners thereof in a clean, orderly and dust-free
condition.
c. Separation from Walkways and Streets. All off-street parking, off-street
loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks,
streets or alleys by curbing or other protective device.
d. Private Walks Adjacent to Business Buildings. A private walk, if
provided adjacent to a building, shall be not less than four (4) feet in
width and shall be in addition to the other requirements of this section.
e. Screen Required When Adjoining Property is Residential. Where offstreet
parking, loading or service areas are proposed to be located
closer than fifty (50) feet to a lot in any residential zoning district, or to
any lot upon which there exists a dwelling as a permitted use under
these regulations, except where a State or Federal highway or railroad
coincides or is located between the lot line and the residential district,
and where such parking, loading or service areas are not entirely
screened visually from such lot by an intervening building or structure,
there shall be provided along the lot line a continuous screen in
accordance with applicable buffer and transition requirements set forth
in this chapter. No such screen shall extend nearer to a street right-ofway
line than the established building line of the adjoining residential
lot.
f. Interior Driveway. Interior driveways shall be at least twenty-four (24)
feet wide where used with ninety (90) degree-angle parking, at least
twenty (20) feet wide where used with sixty (60) degree-angle parking
and at least eighteen (18) feet wide where used with forty-five (45)
degree-angle parking. Where there is no parking, interior driveways
shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide for one-way traffic movement and
at least twenty-two (22) feet wide for two-way traffic movement.
g. Connection to a Public Right-of-Way. Each off-street parking, loading or
service area shall be connected to a public street right-of-way by means
of a driveway.
§ 37-60.2 EDISON CODE § 37-60.2
AO:1070
h. Size of Driveways. A driveway, exclusive of curb return radii, shall be
not less than twelve (12) feet nor more than thirty-six (36) feet in width.
i. Location of Curb Cuts. At the intersection of streets, except lanes and
alleys, a curb cut shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet
from the intersection of two (2) curblines or such lines extended and
shall be set back not less than five (5) feet from the intersection of two
(2) property lines or such lines extended. Between the curb returns for
any two (2) driveways serving the same property, there shall be at least
twenty-five (25) feet of curb, except that this distance may be reduced
to as little as five (5) feet where it is demonstrated that restricted
frontage makes this necessary in order to provide not more than two (2)
adequate driveways for the property.
j. Off-Street Parking Space Within Building. Garage space or space within
buildings, in basements or on the roofs of buildings may be used to
meet the off-street parking requirements of this section, provided that
each space is designated to serve as off-street parking space.
k. Pavement Markings and Signs. Each off-street parking space shall be
clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be
provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs
shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency.
l. Lighting for Night Use. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the offstreet
parking facilities are used at night. If the parking facilities abut
residential land, the lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to
reflect or cause glare off the abutting residential land in accordance
with provisions of performance standards.
m. Required Off-Street Parking Area Not to be Reduced. No off-street
parking area shall be reduced in size or encroached upon by any
building, vehicle storage, loading or unloading space or any other use
where such reduction or encroachment will reduce the off-street
parking and loading spaces below that required by these regulations.
n. Joint Parking Facilities. The off-street parking requirements for two (2)
or more nonresidential neighboring uses of the same or different types
located on the same lot or on contiguous lots and within the same
zoning district may be satisfied by the allocation of the required number
of spaces for each use in a common parking facility, provided that the
number of off-street parking spaces is not less than the sum of
individual requirements, except that any use whose peak attendance
will be at night or on Sundays, such as churches, theaters and assembly
halls, may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on
Sundays.
o. Parking Provided on Same Lot as Main Building. Off-street parking
spaces for one-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings shall be
provided on the same lot as the main building. Off-street parking spaces
for all other uses shall be provided on the same lot as the main building
to be served by such parking unless otherwise provided for herein.
§ 37-60.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-60.2
AO:1071
§ 37-60.3. Reduction or Encroachment of Off-Street Parking Area;
Minimum Number of Spaces. [1999 Code § 17.88.030]
No off-street parking area shall be reduced in size or encroached upon by
any building, vehicle store, loading or unloading space or any other use
where such reduction or encroachment will reduce the off-street parking
and loading spaces below that required by these regulations. Minimum
space requirements for off-street parking areas; use and minimum space
requirements shall be as follows:
p. Computing Number of Employees. For the purpose of this section, the
number of employees shall be computed on the basis of the maximum
number of persons to be employed at any one time, taking into
consideration day, night and seasonal variations.
q. Fractional Spaces Required. When units of measurement determining
the number of required off-street parking spaces and off-street loading
spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to
and including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and any fraction over
one-half (1/2) shall require one (1) off-street parking or loading space.
r. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space Within a Required Setback. No
required off-street parking and loading space, including maneuvering
areas for such off-street parking and loading space, shall be established
in the area between the front building line and the street right-of-way
line in any industrial district, unless specifically permitted elsewhere in
this chapter.
s. Other Use of Off-Street Parking Space Prohibited. No off-street parking
or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or
servicing of any vehicle, equipment materials or supplies.
t. Size of Loading Berth. A loading berth shall be at least twelve (12) feet
wide with at least a fifteen (15) foot overhead clearance. The length of
the loading berth shall be such that the horizontal distance from the
front of a dock for back-in parking to the limiting boundary of the
loading and unloading area shall be not less than twice the overall
length of the longest vehicle expected to use the facility or forty-eight
(48) feet, whichever is the greater. A loading space need not be,
necessarily, a full berth but shall have a minimum plan dimension of at
least ten (10) feet overhead clearance.
a. Automobile and gasoline service station: at least one (1) space for each
gasoline island and service bay or similar service area or five (5) spaces,
whichever is greater. Further, in the instances of other retail sales of
products at the site, one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square
feet of gross floor space shall be required.
b. Automobile sales establishment: at least one (1) space for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of the building area used for such
§ 37-60.2 EDISON CODE § 37-60.3
AO:1072
purposes or one (1) space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of
lot area, whichever is greater.
c. Bowling establishment: at least three (3) spaces for each bowling lane.
If additional facilities such as a bar or restaurant are provided,
additional parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for similar uses set forth in this subsection.
d. Church, synagogue or other places of worship: at least one (1) space for
each four (4) seats or one (1) space for each four (4) person's occupancy
based upon the maximum allowed occupancy calculated from the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code, whichever is greater.
e. Commercial or Personal Service Establishments:
1. Grocery store, food market and supermarket: one (1) space per one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area.
2. Delicatessen and bakery: one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area and one (1) space for each three (3)
seats, if applicable.
3. Barbershop and beauty shop: three (3) spaces for each beautician
and barber or one (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
4. Furniture and hardware store: one (1) space for each three
hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area.
5. Other commercial or personal service uses not specifically listed
elsewhere in this subsection: one (1) space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of gross first floor area, plus one (1) space for
each three hundred (300) square feet of additional gross floor area.
f. Educational and training school or institution, nonprofit or commercial:
at least one (1) space for each one (1) employee, including teachers and
administration, plus one (1) space for each student or one (1) space for
each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of classroom, laboratory or
other space used for instructional purposes.
g. Eleemosynary or philanthropic institution: at least one (1) space for
each one (1) employee, plus such additional facilities for residents and
visitors.
h. Home-based occupation: two (2) parking spaces in addition to the
requirement for the dwelling unit, plus one (1) additional space for any
full-time employee who is not a resident of the site.
i. Hospital or nursing home: at least one (1) space for each two (2) patient
beds, plus one (1) additional space for each staff member or visiting
doctor, based on the average number of persons serving the facility.
§ 37-60.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-60.3
AO:1073
j. Industrial or manufacturing establishment: at least one (1) space for
each employee, and one (1) additional space for each vehicle used
directly in the conduct of the enterprise or one (1) space for each three
hundred (300) square feet of total floor space, whichever is greater.
k. Warehouse: one (1) space for each three thousand (3,000) square feet
of total floor area.
l. Medical, dental or chiropractic office: five (5) spaces for each
professional person occupying or using each office, plus one (1) space
for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area of office.
m. Mortuary or funeral home: at least one (1) parking space for each four
(4) seats in the chapel or one (1) space for each twenty-five (25) square
feet of area designed and used for chapel space and one (1) additional
space for each funeral vehicle.
n. Motel, auto court, motor lodge, tourist court: at least one space for each
guest or sleeping room, plus two (2) additional spaces for each ten (10)
rooms up to one hundred (100) rooms.
o. Multifamily dwelling: at least two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit
except for dwellings restricted to occupancy by a head of household
sixty-two (62) or more years of age, then one (1) space per dwelling.
p. Office building, professional building or similar use: at least one (1)
space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area,
except that medical, dental or chiropractic offices shall comply with the
minimum requirement of paragraph l.
q. One- or two-family detached dwelling: at least two (2) spaces per
dwelling unit. A paved driveway having a surface area of three hundred
fifty (350) square feet in area shall service to meet this standard.
r. Private club: at least one (1) space for one hundred (100) square feet
gross floor space or one (1) space for each three (3) memberships,
whichever is greater.
s. Recreation establishment, commercial, other than a theater, bowling
establishment, auditorium or stadium: one (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of floor area open to the general public or
members.
t. Restaurant or similar place dispensing food, drink or refreshments: at
least one (1) space for each three (3) seats provided for patron use or
one (1) space for each fifty (50) square feet of retail space, excluding
kitchen and utility rooms, whichever is greater.
u. Commercial shopping center which includes supermarket or three (3)
or more individual uses (tenants, one (1) of which is a supermarket of
twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more): six and five-tenths
(6 5/10) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor
area; commercial shopping centers of two hundred fifty thousand
§ 37-60.3 EDISON CODE § 37-60.3
AO:1074
§ 37-60.4. Requirements for Off-Street Loading. [1999 Code
§ 17.88.040]
(250,000) square feet or more of gross floor area: six (6) spaces for each
one thousand (1,000) square feet.
v. Swimming pool or natural bathing place operated by profit: at least one
(1) space for each four (4) persons within the recommended original
capacity prescribed under applicable State and local laws, ordinances
or resolutions.
w. Theater: at least one (1) space for each three (3) seats or one (1) space
for each three (3) persons permitted under the maximum occupancy
permitted by the Edison Township Uniform Construction Code.
a. Unless otherwise specified by this section, off-street loading docks,
bays and aisleways shall be permitted in side and rear yard areas.
b. Minimum off-street loading space requirements shall be as follows:
1. Industrial and wholesale operations shall demonstrate that the
following requirements can be satisfied:
Area (square feet) Number of Spaces
0—7,500 0
7,500—40,000 1
40,000—100,000 2
100,000—160,000 3
Each 90,000 above 160,000 1
2. Retail operation and all first-floor nonresidential uses with a gross
floor area of more than three thousand (3,000) square feet and less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and all wholesale and
light industrial operations with a gross floor area of less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet: one (1) loading space in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
3. Retail operation, including restaurant and dining facilities within
hotels and office buildings, with a gross usable floor area of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or more devoted to such purposes:
one (1) loading berth for every twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of floor area.
c. Waiver Provision. The Planning Board may waive up to fifty (50%)
percent of the required off-street parking spaces and/or off-street
loading for industrial, office and retail buildings if the applicant
demonstrates through submission of employment records or other
documentation that such spaces are not needed; provided, however,
that an area equal to that required for the number of spaces waived is
reserved at the site.
§ 37-60.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-61
AO:1075
§ 37-61. LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
§ 37-61.1. Definitions. [1999 Code § 17.90.010]
GLARE — Means the sensation produced by luminance within the visual
field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and
visibility.
IESNA — Means Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, an
organization that recommends standards for the lighting industry.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Means any form of artificial illuminance emanating
from a light fixture or illuminated sign that penetrates other property and
creates a nuisance, as specified in subsection 37-61.3.
OBJECTIONABLE DIRECT GLARE SOURCE — Means any direct glare
source offensively visible above a height of five (5) feet at the subject
property line.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE — Means an electrically powered illuminating
device containing a total light source of more than one thousand eight
hundred (1,800) initial lumens per fixture (this is greater than a single
one hundred (100) watt incandescent, or two (2) seventy-five (75) watt
reflectorized incandescent bulbs), which is permanently installed outdoors,
including but not limited to, devices used to illuminate any site,
architectural structure or sign.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — Means a fixture with cutoff optics that
allows no direct emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of ninety (90)
degrees above nadir (straight down at a perfect vertical), through the light
fixture's lowest light emitting part. Any structural part of the light fixture
providing this cutoff angle must be permanently affixed.
§ 37-61.2. Outdoor Lighting. [1999 Code § 17.90.020]
a. Purpose. The Township of Edison does herein find that regulation of
outdoor lighting in the Township of Edison is necessary to prevent
misdirected or excessive artificial light, caused by inappropriate or
misaligned light fixtures that produce glare, light trespass (nuisance
light) and/or unnecessary skyglow; and also that such regulation is
necessary to discourage the waste of electricity and to improve or
maintain nighttime public safety, utility and security.
b. All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter maintained other than
those serving one- and two-family dwellings, shall comply with the
requirements as specified below:
1. Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways,
roadways and parking lots, only shielded light fixtures shall be
used.
2. Where used for commercial and industrial purposes such as in
merchandise display areas, work areas, platforms, signs,
§ 37-61 EDISON CODE § 37-61.2
AO:1076
§ 37-61.3. Light Trespass (Nuisance Light). [1999 Code § 17.90.030]
All light fixtures, except street lighting and those used on one- or twofamily
dwellings, shall be designed, installed and maintained to prevent
light trespass, as specified in paragraphs a. and b. below.
architectural, landscape or sports or recreational facilities, all light
fixtures shall be equipped with automatic timing devices and
comply with the following:
(a) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or any other
objects mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform, shall use a
narrow cone beam of light that will not extend beyond the
illuminated object.
(b) Other upward directed architectural, landscape or decorative
direct light emissions shall have at least ninety (90%) percent
of their total distribution pattern within the profile of the
illuminated structure.
(c) Recreational and sports facility lighting shall be shielded
whenever possible. Such lighting shall have directional and
glare control devices, when necessary, to comply with
subsection 37-61.3.
(d) Externally illuminated signs including commercial billboard,
building identification or other similar illuminated signs, shall
comply with the following:
(1) Top mounted light fixtures shall be shielded and are
preferred.
(2) When top mounted light fixtures are not feasible,
illumination from other positioned light fixtures shall be
restricted to the sign area. Visors or other directional
control devices shall be used to keep spill light to an
absolute minimum.
(e) All other outdoor lighting shall use shielded light fixtures.
3. All floodlight type fixtures, once properly installed, shall be
permanently affixed in the approved position.
4. Foundations supporting lighting poles not installed four (4) feet
behind the curb, shall not be less than twenty-four (24) inches
above ground.
a. At a height of five (5) feet above the property line of subject property,
illuminations from light fixtures shall not exceed 0.1 foot-candles in a
vertical plane on residentially zoned property.
§ 37-61.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-61.3
AO:1077
§ 37-61.4. Illuminance and Luminance Requirements. [1999 Code
§ 17.90.040]
Illuminance and luminance requirements shall be as set forth in the current
edition of the IESNA Lighting Handbook.
§ 37-61.5. Outdoor Lighting Energy Conservation. [1999 Code
§ 17.90.050]
§ 37-61.6. Submission of Plans. [1999 Code § 17.90.060]
Plans and evidence of compliance shall include the following.
b. Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained,
shall be directed so that there will not be any objectionable direct glare
source visible from any property.
Note: Light fixtures near adjacent property may require special
shielding devices to prevent light trespass.
a. Street Lighting. Average IESNA illuminance recommendations shall not
be exceeded. IESNA average to minimum illuminance uniformity ratios
are to be used as a guide for designing safe and adequate roadway
lighting.
b. Outdoor Parking Facilities. Outdoor parking lot illuminance shall be
based on certain illuminance specifications recommended by the
IESNA, as contained in Schedule A.29
c. All other illuminance uses shall not exceed IESNA recommendations.
d. Internally illuminated signs shall not exceed IESNA luminance
recommendations.
a. All outdoor lighting not necessarily for security purposes shall be
reduced, activated by motion sensor devices or turned off during nonoperating
hours. Illuminated signs are excluded from this requirement.
b. All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive
artificial light and to maximize energy efficiency.
a. Description of outdoor light fixtures including component specifications
such as lamps, reflectors, optics, angle of cutoff, supports, poles and
include manufacturers catalog cuts.
b. Locations and descriptions of every outdoor light fixture and hours of
operation.
c. Maintained horizontal illuminance shown as foot-candles (after
depreciations).
29.Editor's Note: Schedule A of the IESNA Lighting Handbook may be found on file in the
office of the Clerk.
§ 37-61.3 EDISON CODE § 37-61.6
AO:1078
§ 37-61.7. Prohibitions. [1999 Code § 17.90.070]
Searchlights or flashing or animated signs are prohibited, other than for
a period of seven (7) days from the date of the opening of a new
establishment.
§ 37-61.8. Maintained Illuminance for Parking Lots. [1999 Code
§ 17.90.080]
1. Maximum.
2. Minimum.
3. Average, during operating and non-operating hours.
4. Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
d. Computer generated photometric grid showing foot-candles readings
every ten (10) feet and the average foot-candles.
e. Foundation details for light poles.
f. When not using IESNA recommendations, submit reasons and supply
supporting documentation.
a. Schedule.
Basic
Enhanced
Security
Horizontal Illuminance
Minimum 0.2 fc 0.5 fc
Average 1.0 fc 2.5 fc
Uniformity Ratios
Average to Minimum 5:1 5:1
Maximum to Minimum 20:1 15:1
Minimum Vertical
Illuminance
0.1 fc 0.25 fc
b. Standards.
1. Minimum horizontal illuminance shall be no lower than 0.2 fc.
2. Average horizontal illuminance shall not exceed 2.5 fc.
3. Uniformity ratios are to be used as a guide.
4. Minimum vertical illuminance shall be measured at 5.0 feet above
parking surface at the point of lowest horizontal illuminance,
excluding facing outward along boundaries.
§ 37-61.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-61.8
AO:1079
§ 37-62. SIGN REGULATIONS.
§ 37-62.1. Purpose. [1999 Code § 17.92.010]
The purpose of this section shall be to coordinate the type, placement
and scale of signs within different land use zones; to recognize the
communication requirements of all sectors of the community; to encourage
the innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and proper
maintenance; to protect public safety; to allow for special circumstances;
and to guarantee equal treatment under the law. These shall be
accomplished by regulation of the display, erection, use and maintenance of
signs. The use of signs is regulated according to zone. The placement and
scale of signs are regulated primarily by type and length of street frontage,
and surrounding conditions must also be considered. All signs hereafter
erected or maintained, except official traffic and street signs, shall conform
with the provisions of this chapter. Any signs not specifically permitted are
prohibited.
§ 37-62.2. Permits Required. [1999 Code § 17.92.020]
5. For Typical Conditions. During periods of non-use, the illuminance
of certain parking facilities should be turned off or reduced to
conserve energy. If reduced lighting is to be used only for the
purpose of property security, it is desirable that the minimum (low
Point) not be less than 0.1 hfc. Reductions should not be applied to
facilities subject to intermittent night use, such as apartments,
hospitals and active transportation areas.
6. If personal security or vandalism is a likely and/or severe problem,
an increase above the basic level may be appropriate.
7. High vehicular traffic locations should generally require the
enhanced level of illumination. Exits, entrances, internal
connecting roadways and such would be some examples.
8. Increasing the above illuminance is not likely to increase safety and
security. Variance requests for higher levels will generally be for
"retail" reasons and should not be granted unless shown to be
necessary and at an average illuminance not to exceed 3.6 footcandles.
Certain data above has been summarized from IESNA RP-20-98,
titles "Lighting for Parking Facilities."
a. It is unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter or relocate any
sign without first obtaining a permit and making payment of the
required fee.
b. Consent. No sign permit will be issued without the written consent of
the landowner or the one in control of the premises.
§ 37-61.8 EDISON CODE § 37-62.3
AO:1080
§ 37-62.3. Definitions. [1999 Code § 17.92.030; Ord. No.
O.1962-2017]
As used in this section:
ABANDONED SIGN — Means a sign which no longer identifies or advertises
a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity and/or for
which no legal owner can be found.
ADVERTISING SIGN — Means a sign which provides information in addition
to the name and address of the occupant therein or utilizes a trademark.
ANIMATED SIGN — Means a sign which has its illumination maintained at
a constant intensity at the source of such illumination, and the animation is
created by other means than the increase or decrease of the intensity at its
source.
AWNING SIGN — Means a fireproof space frame structure with translucent
flexible reinforced vinyl covering designed in awning form, but whose
principal purpose and use is signage. Such signs are internally illuminated
by fluorescent or other light sources in fixtures approved under National
Electrical Code and BOCA Code.
BILLBOARDS — See outdoor display structures.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — Means a sign whose informational content can be
changed or altered by manual or electric, electromechanical or electronic
means.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Means a sign containing directional information
about public places owned or operated by Federal, State or local
governments or their agencies; publicly or privately owned natural
phenomena or historic, cultural, scientific, educational and religions sites;
and areas of natural beauty or naturally suited to outdoor recreation; and a
sign containing directional information whose purpose it is to regulate and
control the flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
DIRECTORY SIGN — Means a freestanding sign which lists the occupants
or tenants of a site or building.
ERECT — Means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach,
create, paint, draw or in any other way bring into being or establish, but not
any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change
of an advertising message or normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign
structure.
FACADE SIGN — Means a sign attached to, painted on or erected against
the exterior wall or window of a building or an awning.
FLASHING SIGN — Means a sign the illumination of which is not kept
constant in intensity at all times when in use.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Means a sign supported by poles, columns,
uprights or foundations affixed to the ground but not attached to any part
of any building.
§ 37-62.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-62.3
AO:1081
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Means a sign which states the name or address
of the occupant therein or identifies a place or development.
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Means any illuminated sign whose
illumination is derived from an external artificial source.
MARQUEE — Means a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or
all of a building face over a public right-of-way and constructed of some
durable material such as metal, wood or plastic.
MEMORIAL SIGNS — Means historical tablets, cornerstones, memorial
plaques and emblems which do not exceed six (6) square feet in surface
area and which are installed under the auspices of public or quasi-public
bodies and religious organizations.
NAMEPLATE SIGN — Means a sign which states the name or address of the
occupant where a sign is located.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Means a sign which was erected legally, but
which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and
regulations.
OPEN HOUSE SIGN — Means the temporary "Open House" sign licensed
real estate agents may display on the day of a real estate open house
from 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., consisting of a metal "A" frame design with
maximum face size of two (2) feet by two (2) feet, which shall not be
permanently affixed to the ground or other fixed object, such as a tree or
utility pole, and shall not obstruct any sight triangles at intersections or
driveways, but shall be properly ballasted so as to remain in place and
which shall identify the real estate broker sponsoring the open house, to
include his/her address and telephone number.[Ord. No. O.1962-2017]
OUTDOOR DISPLAY STRUCTURES AND BILLBOARDS — Means a sign
which directs attention to a business, industry, profession, commodity,
service or entertainment not necessarily sold or offered upon the premises
where the sign is located.
PARAPET — Means the extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
PERSON — Means any individual, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
PROFESSIONAL SIGN — Means a sign listing only the name and profession
of each resident practitioner.
PROJECTING SIGN — Means a sign which is attached to the building wall
and extends from the face of such wall.
ROOF SIGN — Means a sign constructed or supported upon the roof of any
building or structure.
SIGN — Means any device, structure, fixture or placard using graphics,
symbols and written copy for the primary purpose of identifying, providing,
directions or advertising any establishment, product, goods or services,
provided that the display of public notices or the flag emblem or insignia of
§ 37-62.3 EDISON CODE § 37-62.3
AO:1082
a nation or political unit shall not be considered "signs" under the provisions
of this chapter.
SIGNS, DOUBLE-FACED or DOUBLE-FACED SIGNS — Means one (1) sign
painted on both sides or two (2) signs of identical size and shape attached
to each other back-to-back. Whenever there is an angle between the two (2)
sign faces, it shall be considered as two (2) separate signs.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — Means a sign in connection with special events in
the community.
STRUCTURE OF SIGN — Means any structure which supports or is capable
of supporting any sign or signs.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Means a sign which is intended to advertise
community or civic projects, real estate for sale or lease or other sale or
special event on a temporary basis.
WALL SIGN — Means a sign which is attached to or painted on the wall of
a building with the face in a place parallel to such wall and extending from
the face of such wall, the lowest portion of which sign is not higher than
the lowest portion of the roofline of the building and is not wider than the
building.
§ 37-62.4. Exempt Signs. [1999 Code § 17.92.040; Ord. No.
O.1595-2007; Ord. No. O.1654-2008§ I; Ord. No. O.1962-2017]
The following signs shall not require permits or the payment of fees but are
subject to the other provisions of this chapter:
a. Professional nameplate and home occupation signs indicating the name
and profession of the occupant of a dwelling, provided that such signs
do not exceed two (2) square feet. The signs shall not be lighted outside
of posted business hours;
b. Temporary signs inside windows of commercial establishments
covering not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of any given window
and which shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the date of the
erection, which date shall be indicated thereon in a prominent manner.
These signs shall not unreasonably obstruct light and visibility;
c. Public directional signs containing directional information about public
places owned or operated by Federal, State, County or local
governments or their agencies; publicly owned natural phenomena or
historic, cultural and educational sites;
d. Directional Signs. Directional signs for the convenience of the general
public to identify parking areas, loading zones, entrances, exits and
similar signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area;
e. Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor, then placed upon
work under construction and not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in
area, and which are to be removed within ten (10) days after the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, provided that the sign shall not
§ 37-62.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-62.4
AO:1083
exceed six (6) feet in height nor be located within fifteen (15) feet of
any lot line;
f. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and dates of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or
other durable material not to exceed six (6) square feet of surface area;
g. Any signs forbidding trespassing, hunting, fishing or trapping as
authorized by the fish and game laws, dumping and the use of all
terrain vehicles (ATV's), not to exceed two (2) square feet in area;
h. Temporary signs indicating a political preference or a political event,
for a period of sixty (60) days prior to an election or political event,
which shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the election or
political event, provided that such signs do not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in area on any one surface;
i. Name and number of plates identifying the residents on a house,
apartment or mailbox, not to exceed sixty (60) square inches;
j. Garage sale signs located on the premises only, not to exceed two (2)
square feet, and containing the date of sale, which sign shall be
removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the last day of the sale;
k. Temporary signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon
which they are situated, provided that such signs do not exceed eight
(8) square feet and which shall be removed when the purpose of the
sign is fulfilled;
l. Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals installed by the
Township, County and State for the purpose of directing and regulating
the flow of traffic;
m. Signs indicating public transportation stops when installed by the
Township or a public transportation utility;
n. Flags or emblems of religious, educational, civic or governmental
organizations flown from supports on the buildings or grounds occupied
by the organization and the American flag whenever and wherever
flown in accordance with the laws and rules promulgated by the Federal
government;
o. Lawn signs identifying residents, not exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2)
square feet in area for each side. The signs shall not contain any
advertising message and shall be nonilluminated except by a light
which is an integral part of a lamppost if used as support;
p. Signs posted by governmental agencies or pursuant to governmental
statute, order or regulation;
q. Temporary signs and posts for advertising public functions or fundraising
events for charitable or religious organizations shall be
permitted for a period of sixty (60) days prior to and during the event
§ 37-62.4 EDISON CODE § 37-62.4
AO:1084
§ 37-62.5. Nonconforming Signs. [1999 Code § 17.92.050]
§ 37-62.6. Prohibited Sign Features. [1999 Code § 17.92.060; Ord.
No. O.1962-2017]
and shall be removed within five (5) days after the event. The sign shall
be nonilluminated, not larger than twelve (12) square feet in area, not
exceeding eight (8) feet in height and may be erected flat against the
building or freestanding.
r. Signs advertising the membership recruitment for Edison Township
sponsored sports organizations. These organizations are limited to
Buddy Ball of Edison, Clara Barton American Legion No. 324, Edison
Angels Softball, Edison Boys Baseball, Father and Son American Legion
No. 435, Fords/Clara Barton Little League, Midtown Little League,
North Edison Baseball and Softball, Edison Youth Basketball, Edison
Jets Football, North Edison Shamrocks Football, Edison United Soccer
Association, Little Eagles Wrestling, North Edison Mathawks Wrestling.
These signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, may not
be more than eight (8) feet in height and must maintain a setback of ten
(10) feet from a property line. All membership recruitment signs must
be removed no later than thirty (30) days after they are posted.
s. Temporary "Open House" signs. [Ord. No. O.1962-2017]
a. Any existing sign which was legally erected and maintained may
continue to exist at its present location but shall not be altered, rebuilt,
relocated, enlarged or extended, unless the change results in a more
conforming sign, in any aspect.
b. In owner-occupied or one-tenant cases, no permit shall be issued for
any additional sign if the property contains a nonconforming sign.
c. Examples of alterations shall be, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
1. The message on a sign painted on the side of a building is changed;
2. The letters affixed to a building are removed and changed other
than for purposes of repair;
3. Any structural change is made to the supporting members, frame,
backing or lighting system.
a. No sign shall be erected, used or maintained which in any way
simulates official, directional or warning signs erected or maintained by
the State of New Jersey, by any County or municipality or by any public
utility or similar agency concerned with the protection of the public
health or safety.
b. No portion of any sign shall be located within or suspended over a
public right-of-way or pedestrian walkway, except for United
§ 37-62.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-62.6
AO:1085
Community Fund, temporary "Open House" real estate sales signs,
Edison rescue squads, hospitals and official Township functions. With
regard to temporary "Open House" real estate sales signs, the following
requirements apply: 1) temporary "Open House" real estate signs may
be displayed on the day of the open house from 11:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.; 2) temporary "Open House" real estate signs may be located
in the public right-of-way but not on or within any street, sidewalk,
sight triangle, or on any pole or tree; 3) these signs shall be metal
"A" frame design with maximum face size of two (2) feet by two (2)
feet and identify the real estate broker sponsoring the open house,
to include his/her address and telephone number on the sign; 4) the
real estate broker sponsoring the open house shall be responsible
for complying with the provisions of this subsection, particularly the
installation and removal of the sign at the designated times proved for
within this section; 5) no "Open House" sign shall be placed on private
property without prior written permission from the property owner; 6)
no balloons or other attention grabbing devices shall be attached to
any "Open House" sign; and 7) any violation of the provisions of this
subsection shall be punishable under the general violation provisions of
this Code. [Ord. No. O.1962-2017]
c. No neon sign or similar illuminated advertisement shall be of such color
or located in such a fashion as to diminish or detract in any way from
the effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar safety or warning
device.
d. The following advertisements are specifically prohibited: any
advertisement which uses a series of two (2) or more signs placed in a
line parallel to the highway, or in similar fashion, all carrying a single
advertisement message, part of which is contained on each sign.
e. No sign shall have flashing lights or exposed high intensity illumination
or exposed neon tubes or reflective material.
f. No sign may obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or
opening intended to provide light or ingress or egress to or from any
building or structure, with the exception that twenty-five (25%) percent
of any window may be occupied by a sign or signs, provided that the
sign does not unreasonably obstruct light and visibility.
g. No sign may be placed in such a position as to cause a danger to traffic
by obscuring visibility.
h. Exterior signs using moving parts or banners, spinners, flags and
pennants, with the exception of clocks and weather information.
Temporary signs in connection with special events are exempt from this
requirement.
i. Signs visible from the street using the word "stop" or "danger" or any
other word, phrase, symbol or character with the intent of simulating a
public safety warning or traffic signal.
§ 37-62.6 EDISON CODE § 37-62.6
AO:1086
§ 37-62.7. Prohibited Signs. [1999 Code § 17.92.070]
The following signs are prohibited:
§ 37-62.7A. Party Responsible. [Ord. No. O.1595-2007§ 3]
The Township of Edison shall hold the following individuals and/or entities
responsible for the posting of a prohibited sign: 1) the actual person who
placed or posted the advertisements, signs or posters; 2) the person or
entity whose name, business name, telephone number or address is
contained on the advertisements, signs, or posters as a contact person; or 3)
any individual or entity that may profit from a response to the commercial
advertisement. Each posting of a prohibited sign(s) represents a separate
and distinct offense. The Zoning Officer is permitted to contact any of
the above individuals or entities and provide twenty-four (24) hour written
notice to remove the prohibited sign(s). If, after the expiration of the twentyfour
(24) hour period the prohibited sign(s), are not removed, the Zoning
j. Roof signs on buildings, structures and vehicles.
k. Signs or advertising matter of an indecent or obscene nature.
l. Except where specifically permitted, signs advertising a product or
service not sold on the premises, signs advertising or directing
attention to another premises and any other signs unrelated to the
premises on which the sign is erected.
m. Signs placed on trees, fences, utility poles or light poles, signs attached
to other signs and signs placed upon motor vehicles which are
continuously or repeatedly parked in a conspicuous location to serve as
a sign, but nothing herein contained is intended to prohibit the
placement of signs directing traffic or identifying various locations
within a lot or parcel on light poles and utility poles erected therein.
n. Signs on vacant property advertising a proposed use without Township
Planning or Zoning Board approval.
a. Signs other than officially authorized signs tacked, pasted, painted or
otherwise attached to poles, posts, trees, fences, sidewalks or curbs;
b. No sign other than official traffic control devices or street signs shall be
erected within or encroach upon the right-of-way of any street unless
specifically authorized by other ordinances or regulations of the
Township;
c. Rotating or moving signs;
d. Except as provided for in subsection 37-62.11, freestanding or billboard
signs advertising a product or service not sold on the premises,
freestanding or billboard signs advertising or directing attention to
another premises, and any sign unrelated to the premises on which the
sign is erected.
§ 37-62.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-62.7A
AO:1087
Officer is authorized to issue summon(es) to any of the above individuals or
entities for failing to remove said sign(s).
§ 37-62.8. Administration and Filing Procedure. [1999 Code
§ 17.92.080]
§ 37-62.9. Permitted Signs in Residential Districts. [1999 Code
§ 17.92.090]
The following signs are permitted in residential districts:
a. Administration. The Building Inspector shall only issue a permit for the
erection or construction of a sign which meets the requirements of this
section and, where applicable, in accordance with site plans.
b. Filing Procedure. Applications for permits to erect or place a sign shall
be submitted on forms obtainable from the Building Inspector. Each
application shall be accompanied by plans showing the area of the sign;
its size and character; the method of illumination if any; the exact
location proposed for such sign; and in the case of an attached sign, the
proposed method of fastening such sign to the building structure, the
vertical distance between such sign and the curb and also between such
sign and the right-of-way; and the color scheme of the sign. The
application must include the name and address of the applicant, as well
as the name, address and written consent of the owner of the property,
and the name and address of the person, firm or corporation erecting
the sign or structure; furthermore the applicant must specify whether
the sign shall be an advertising sign, identification sign or directional
sign.
a. One (1) sign advertising a farm or nursery activity situated not less than
twenty (20) feet from any street or property line, not exceeding ten (10)
square feet in area on any one side and not exceeding ten (10) feet in
height;
b. One (1) sign located on the principal building and identifying any
permitted or conditional use other than a single-family detached
dwelling in a residential zone, not to exceed eight (8) square feet in
area on any one (1) surface and located not less than ten (10) feet from
any lot line and not to exceed five (5) feet in height;
c. One (1) freestanding sign to identify a permitted home-based
occupation or professional home-based office, which does not exceed
two (2) square feet in area nor exceed four (4) feet in height and is not
located less than ten (10) feet from a property line;
d. Religious institutions, hospitals, nursing homes, private schools, service
organizations and public buildings and facilities may have one (1)
freestanding informal sign or bulletin board, not more than thirty-five
(35) square feet in area, not to exceed six (6) feet in height, on each
major street bordering the property, together with incidental signs, not
§ 37-62.7A EDISON CODE § 37-62.9
AO:1088
§ 37-62.10. Signs in Commercial Districts L-B, G-B, GB-H, P-B, O-S,
O-S-1 and O-S-2. [1999 Code § 17.92.100]
to exceed four (4), necessary to provide directions or describe the use,
provided that each such sign does not exceed three (3) square feet in
area;
e. For business uses, one (1) sign flat against the building or on a single
freestanding post, such as a lawn sign, is permitted. The sign shall not
exceed three (3) square feet in area, and a freestanding sign shall not
exceed five (5) feet in height. Where more than one (1) use is conducted
on the premises, the area of the sign may be increased by two (2)
square feet for each use up to a maximum of eight (8) square feet. The
information on the sign shall be limited to the name of the occupant, his
or her business or profession and house number;
f. Farm stands for the sale of farm produce grown on the premises may
have two (2) freestanding signs, each not larger than twelve (12) square
feet in area and not exceeding eight (8) feet in height. In addition, one
(1) sign no larger than twenty (20) square feet in area may be erected
flat against the face of the farm stand or farm building where the
produce or products are sold.
g. Signs are permitted in connection with each housing or land
development, as follows:
1. At the main entrance to the development, two (2) illuminated
freestanding signs which shall state the name of the development
and no other advertising material. Each sign shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height,
2. At each entrance other than the main entrance, one (1)
nonilluminated freestanding sign not exceeding fifteen (15) square
feet in area and not more than eight (8) feet in height,
3. At the rental or sales office of the development, one (1)
freestanding illuminated sign advertising the office, not to exceed
fifteen (15) square feet in area and not more than five (5) feet in
height,
4. Real estate signs, the sole purpose of which is to direct the public
to a housing or land development; four (4) temporary freestanding
nonilluminated signs at key intersections. Each sign shall not
exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height
above ground. The sign permit shall be issued for a period of six (6)
months and shall be renewable for additional periods of six (6)
months during the period of construction.
a. Signs attached to buildings shall be permitted as follows:
1. A sign or signs attached to a main building shall not exceed one and
five-tenths (1.5) square feet in area for each one (1) foot width of
§ 37-62.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-62.10
AO:1089
the front building wall or ten (10%) percent of the front wall area,
whichever is greater.
2. No one (1) sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in
area, unless the front wall area exceeds one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet. In such case, the sign(s) shall be permitted to
increase in size by one (1) square foot for each two hundred (200)
additional square feet of front wall area, but not to exceed three
hundred (300) square feet of area for any one (1) sign.
3. Such signs shall only advertise business conducted on the
premises.
4. Such signs shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from
the building facade to which it is attached; provided, however, that
where a sign extends more than three (3) inches from the face of
the wall, the bottom edge of the sign shall be not less than eight (8)
feet from the ground nor have a vertical dimension in excess of
fifteen (15) feet.
5. No sign shall be higher than twenty (20) feet from the ground nor
project above the roofline.
6. Such sign may be internally lighted with nonglaring lights or may
be illuminated by shielded floodlights.
b. Freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be permitted per three
hundred (300) feet of street frontage.
2. No one (1) surface of any such sign shall exceed seventy-five (75)
square feet in area or one (1) square foot for each five (5) feet of
street frontage, whichever is lesser.
3. Freestanding signs shall be no higher than twenty (20) feet or the
height of the principal building, whichever is the lesser; the
maximum width of any one (1) side of the sign shall not exceed
fifteen (15) feet; the bottom of the sign shall not be closer than ten
(10) feet to the ground level, unless a planter is used.
4. A freestanding sign shall be set back at a minimum distance of
fifteen (15) feet from the front lot line or a distance equal to its
height, but in no case less than fifteen (15) feet from the front lot
line. All freestanding signs shall be located in the required front
yard.
5. Such signs may be internally lighted with nonglaring lights or may
be illuminated by shielded floodlights.
c. Shopping Centers. Freestanding signs in shopping centers shall be
permitted as follows:
§ 37-62.10 EDISON CODE § 37-62.10
AO:1090
1. One (1) freestanding sign per main driveway entrance to identify
the shopping center and the occupants therein, not to exceed two
hundred fifty (250) square feet or one (1) square foot for each five
(5) feet of street frontage, whichever is the lesser. The total area of
such signs shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet and shall
not be closer to one another than one thousand six hundred (1,600)
feet.
2. Such signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height and shall
be set back fifteen (15) from the street line, and no such sign shall
encroach upon the required side yard or rear yard setbacks.
d. Awning Signs.
1. All frames are to be manufactured from tubular or structurally
shaped steel or aluminum with finishes or coatings as required to
insure against corrosion.
2. Vinyl fabric coverings are to be fourteen (14) ounces per yard
minimum weight with certification as to tensile strength and flame
resistance to meet industry and NFPA and BOCA codes.
3. Fastenings and/or structural attachments to buildings must be only
to structural members and of sufficient size and strength to meet
BOCA standards.
4. All electrical components and/or lighting equipment is to be labeled
and rated for protected outdoor use and installed by a licensed
electrical contractor.
5. Ceilings are optional and may consist of "egg crate," mesh fabric or
solid plastic material. Removable panels or sections must be
provided to allow access for service and cleaning.
6. All awning signs which project over or above backup walls are to be
covered and weather protected with structural plastic, rustproofed
metal or aluminum.
7. Letter copy on awning signs is to be applied with manufacturerapproved
processes.
8. Awning signs may be attached to buildings or structures with the
following projections and height limitations:
(a) Minimum clearance shall be eight (8) feet unless projecting
over a vehicular right-of-way, in which case clearance must be
fourteen (14) feet six (6) inches to avoid damage by trucks or
other high vehicles.
(b) If the structure has a fringe or valance, such fringe or valance
may hang below the ceiling line no more than twelve (12)
inches.
§ 37-62.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-62.10
AO:1091
§ 37-62.11. Signs in R-I, L-I, ROL and E-I Districts. [1999 Code
§ 17.92.110]
(c) Such signs shall be limited to single-story buildings or to the
first level only of multistory buildings.
(d) Awning signs may be attached to buildings requiring property
setbacks not to exceed property lines. In the case of buildings
in shopping centers or multi-unit developments, such signs
may not exceed control curbs or safety zones unless clearance
is adequate to ensure against damage. In such installations,
drainage gutters are not required.
9. Only the copy area of awning signs shall be considered in the
square footage limitations. The remaining portion should be
considered as awning area only.
a. Attached signs: the same regulations as specified for commercial
districts.
b. Freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. No freestanding sign shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height; the
maximum width of any one (1) side of the sign shall not exceed
twenty (20) feet and the total square footage of any such sign shall
not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area or one (1) square
foot for each five (5) feet of street frontage, whichever is less. The
total area of all signs on the subject property shall not exceed five
hundred (500) square feet in area in the aggregate, and the signs
shall not be closer to one another than one thousand six hundred
(1,600) feet.
2. Such signs shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the street
line and no such sign shall encroach upon the required side yard or
rear yard setback.
3. Freestanding Signs in LI Zone.
(a) Freestanding or billboard signs advertising products or
services not sold on the premises, freestanding or billboard
signs advertising or directing your attention to another
premises, and any other sign unrelated to the premises on
which the sign is erected, shall only be permitted in the LI
zone. No such sign shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height; such
signs shall be only one-sided; and such signs shall not exceed
two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area, and no sign
permitted by this subsection shall be erected within two
thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any other sign permitted
in this subsection;
(b) No signs permitted by paragraph b1 shall encroach upon the
required front yard, rear yard or side yard setbacks.
§ 37-62.10 EDISON CODE § 37-63
AO:1092
§ 37-63. AREA, YARD AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
§ 37-63.1. Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements.
[1999 Code § 17.96.010; Ord. No. O.1485-2006; Ord. No.
O.1629-2008§§ 1—4]
Schedule A, Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements, may be
found at the end of this chapter.
§ 37-64. through § 37-65. (RESERVED)
§ 37-66. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.
§ 37-66.1. Intent. [1999 Code § 17.100.010]
Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments thereto,
there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were
lawful before adoption of this chapter but which are prohibited, regulated
or restricted under the terms of this chapter or amendment. It is the intent
of this chapter to permit any nonconformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this
chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is
further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged,
expanded or extended nor be used as grounds for adding other structures
or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
§ 37-66.2. Adjacent Nonconforming Lots in Single Ownership.
[1999 Code § 17.100.020]
If two (2) or more lots or combinations or portions of lots with continuous
frontage are in single ownership regardless of separate deeds of record, and
if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area
as established by this chapter, the land involved shall be considered to be
an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of the
parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements
established by this chapter, nor shall there be any division of the parcel.
§ 37-66.3. Nonconforming Uses of Land. [1999 Code § 17.100.030;
Ord. No. O.1952-2016]
a. Where a lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the
terms of this chapter, the same use may be continued.
b. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased, intensified,
extended to occupy a greater area of structure or land or moved in
whole or in part to a different portion of the lot or structures thereon,
provided that:
1. Repair and maintenance of any buildings wherein there exists a
nonconforming use will be permitted, provided that such
§ 37-63 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-66.3
AO:1093
§ 37-66.4. Nonconforming Structures and Their Uses. [1999 Code
§ 17.100.040]
§ 37-66.5. Nonconforming Lots. [1999 Code § 17-100.050; Ord. No.
O.1952-2016]
maintenance and repair does not in any way constitute or result in
a further expansion or intensification of a nonconforming use.
2. Minor alterations and improvements which do not constitute or
require structural changes may be made in or to a building wherein
a nonconforming use exists, provided that such nonconforming use
will not be increased, extended or enlarged thereby.
3. Nothing herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a
safe and lawful condition of any part of any building which is
nonconforming.
c. A nonconforming use changed or altered to a conforming use may not
thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
a. Structures and their uses that are nonconforming may be continued as
long as they otherwise remain lawful but shall not be enlarged,
expanded or altered except to become more in conformity with this
chapter. Any replacement of a nonconforming structure destroyed to an
extent greater than fifty (50%) percent of its assessed valuation shall
not be reconstructed except in conformity with this chapter. Changes
from one (1) nonconforming use to another are prohibited.
b. A nonconforming structure, provided that the use of same is permitted
in the district, may be enlarged, provided that the enlargement
complies with all development regulations of the district.
a. Any existing lot in a residential zone on which a residential building or
structure is located and which lot does not meet the minimum lot size or
structure violates any yard requirements may have additions to the
principal building and/or construction of an accessory building without
any appeal for variance relief, provided:
1. The number of dwelling units shall not be increased even if such
increased number of dwelling units are allowed in the zone, unless
approved by the Board of Adjustment.
2. Any existing nonconforming setbacks from streets, side lot lines or
rear lot lines shall not be made more nonconforming, but any
improvement may maintain the same nonconforming setbacks.
3. All existing and proposed improvements on the nonconforming
improved lot shall not exceed the allowable limits for maximum
building coverage or maximum lot coverage set forth in Schedule A
for the applicable zone.
§ 37-66.3 EDISON CODE § 37-66.5
AO:1094
§ 37-66.6. Abandonment of Nonconforming Uses or Structures.
[1999 Code § 17.100.050; Ord. No. O.1952-2016]
When a nonconforming use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months
or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period, the structure
and premises in combination shall be presumed to have been abandoned
and shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations
of the district in which they are located.
§ 37-67. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 37-67.1. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 17.104.010; Ord.
O.1595-2007 § 4]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Officer of the Township. In no case shall a permit be granted for the
construction or alteration of any building where the proposed construction,
alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any provision of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or his or her duly
authorized assistants to inspect any building or premises which may be
in violation of this chapter and to order, in writing, the remedying of any
conditions found to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter unless
the violation represents an immediate and/or irreparable danger to the
Township, its residents or business establishments, in which case the zoning
officer may issue an immediate summons.
§ 37-67.2. Records. [1999 Code § 17.104.020]
§ 37-67.3. Issuance of Zoning Permit. [1999 Code § 17.104.030]
A zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer before the issuance of
any building permit by any Construction Code Official.
Editor's Note: Schedule A may be found at the end of this chapter.
b. The Zoning Official is hereby authorized and empowered to issue any
necessary permits in accordance with the provisions of this section.
a. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all permits
issued and a record of all certificates of occupancy which he or she
countersigns, together with a notation of all special conditions involved.
He or she shall file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted, and
the same shall form a part of the records of his or her office.
b. The Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the Township
Council summarizing, for a period since his or her last previous report,
all zoning permits issued and certificates countersigned by him or her
and all complaints of violations and the action taken by him or her
consequently thereon.
§ 37-66.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-67.4
AO:1095
§ 37-67.4. Zoning Permit Fees. [1999 Code § 17.104.040; Ord. No.
O.1547-2007§ 3]
a. Zoning permit fees shall be as follows:
1. Minor residential alterations which do not result in any zoning bulk
violation and which do not alter the footprint of the existing
principal building; permitted residential accessory uses (such as,
but not limited to porches, pools, fences, decks, shed, garages,
carports, etc.): twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
2. Residential alterations which change, enlarge or alter the existing
building footprint: fifty ($50.00) dollars.
3. Construction of a new single-family residential dwelling: one
hundred ($100.00) dollars.
4. Construction of each new structure in a new residential multifamily
development: two hundred ($200.00) dollars.
5. Minor alterations to multifamily and/or nonresidential structures
which do not result in any zoning bulk violations and which do not
alter the footprint of the buildings; permitted multifamily and/or
nonresidential accessory uses (such as but not limited to fences,
sheds, etc.): one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
6. Alterations to multifamily and/or nonresidential structures which
change, enlarge or alter the existing building footprint: one
hundred ($100.00) dollars.
7. Construction of each new nonresidential structure: two hundred
($200.00) dollars.
8. Change of occupancy: fifty ($50.00) dollars.
9. Certificate of nonconformity: fifty ($50.00) dollars.
b. Any modification of construction permits caused by changes to
construction plans or construction field changes which necessitate
reevaluation of the project by the Zoning Official shall require a zoning
permit resubmission fee equal to fifty (50%) percent of the initial zoning
permit fee.
c. Exceptions.
1. A reduction of fifty (50%) percent of all municipal zoning permit
fees shall be granted for all low/moderate housing units being
provided by an applicant for low- and moderate-income families
consistent with the criteria established by the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing.
2. The following applicants shall submit fifty (50%) percent of the
required zoning permit fees. Any organization qualifying for
paragraph (b) below must hold a tax exempt status under the
§ 37-67.4 EDISON CODE § 37-67.4
AO:1096
§ 37-67.5. Violations; Penalties. [1999 Code § 17.104.050; Ord. No.
O.1595-2007§ 4]
Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C., Section 501(c)
or (d)):
(a) Public organizations and/or agencies;
(b) Charitable and/or philanthropic organizations;
(c) Fraternal and/or religious nonprofit organizations.
a. Any owner or agent and any person or corporation who shall violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, structurally alter,
enlarge, rebuild or move any building or buildings or any structure, or
who shall put into use any lot or land in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of
a violation. Each and every day such violation continues shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation.
b. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land or part thereof where
anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed and any architect,
builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of
any such violation shall be guilty of a separate violation.
c. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, such person or persons who violate
paragraph a. or b. above are liable, upon conviction, to the following:
1. Imprisonment in the County jail or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not
exceeding ninety (90) days;
2. (a) The Municipal Court Judge may impose a fine not to exceed
one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars per sign.
(b) In the event the Municipal Court Judge chooses to impose a
fine greater than one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00)
dollars for each sign, the violator shall be provided a thirty (30)
day period to cure or abate the condition and shall be afforded
an opportunity for a hearing before a Municipal Court Judge
for an independent determination about said violation.
Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, a
fine greater than one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00)
dollars may be imposed for each sign if the Court has not
determined otherwise or upon reinspection of the property, it is
determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed.
3. A period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days.
§ 37-67.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 37-67.5
AO:1097
Chapter 38
RIPARIAN ZONE
§ 38-1. PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY. [Ord. No. O-1770-2011 § II]
The purpose of this chapter is to designate riparian zones, and to provide
for land use regulation therein in order to protect the streams, lakes, and
other surface water bodies of the Township of Edison, Middlesex County, NJ,
and to comply with N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires municipalities to
adopt an ordinance that prevents new disturbance for projects or activities
in riparian zones as described herein. Compliance with the riparian zone
requirements of this chapter does not constitute compliance with the
riparian zone or buffer requirements imposed under any other Federal,
State or local statute, regulation or ordinance.
§ 38-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. O-1770-2011 § II]
ACID PRODUCING SOILS — Shall mean soils that contain geologic deposits
of iron sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to
oxygen from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid.
Acid producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
APPLICANT — Shall mean a person, corporation, government body or other
legal entity applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the
Construction Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by
the provisions of this chapter, and that would be located in whole or in part
within a regulated Riparian Zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
d. Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one (1)
year of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who
was fined for the previous violation shall be sentenced to an additional
fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the Court upon
a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than a minimum fine of
one hundred ($100.00) dollars or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a
violation of the ordinance but shall be calculated separately from the
fine imposed for violation of the ordinance.
e. Any person convicted of the violation of any ordinance may, in the
discretion of the Court by which he or she was convicted and in default
of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in the
County jail or place of detention provided by this municipality for any
term not exceeding ninety (90) days or be required to perform
community service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days.
§ 37-67.5 EDISON CODE § 38-2
AO:1098
those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water quality
characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
DISTURBANCE — Shall mean the placement of impervious surface, the
exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or
removing of vegetation.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — Shall mean a surface water body with definite
bed and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
LAKE, POND, or RESERVOIR — Shall mean any surface water body shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys; that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — Shall mean a surface water body that flows
continuously throughout the year in most years and shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — Shall mean the land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including
their point or origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages, or,
in the case of a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — Shall mean
a three hundred (300) foot area provided on each side of a surface water
body designated as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial
stream, intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys within
§ 38-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2
AO:1099
the associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Shall mean any perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition,
any regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or State open waters identified in a Letter of
Interpretation issued under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection Division of Land Use Regulations shall also be considered
surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — Shall mean a species
identified pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation
Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§§ 1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — Shall mean a section of water
designated as trout maintenance in the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C.
7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — Shall mean a section of water identified
as trout production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 38-3. ESTABLISHMENT AND PROTECTION OF RIPARIAN ZONES.
[Ord. No. O-1770-2011 § II]
a. Except as provided in Sections 38A-4 and 38A-5 below, riparian zones
adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be protected from avoidable
disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
1. The riparian zone shall be three hundred (300) feet wide along both
sides of any Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream
tributaries situated within the same HUC 14 watershed. At present
there are NO waters classified as Category One (C1) waters under
Township of Edison jurisdiction.
2. The riparian zone shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet wide along
both sides of the following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one (1) linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the surface
§ 38-2 EDISON CODE § 38-3
AO:1100
§ 38-4. VARIANCES. [Ord. No. O-1770-2011 § II]
To the extent allowed by the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8),
the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38), new disturbances
for projects or activities in the riparian zone established by this chapter may
be allowed through the Zoning Board of Adjustment review and approval
of a variance, provided the disturbance is proposed to be located on a
pre-existing lot (existing as of the effective date of this chapter — June
14, 2011) when there is insufficient room outside the riparian zone for
the proposed use otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning; there is
no other reasonable or prudent alternative to placement in the riparian
zone, including obtaining variances from setback or other requirements
that would allow conformance with the riparian zone requirements; and
water body for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one (1) linear mile as measured along the
length of the regulated water; and
(d) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
acid producing soils.
3. For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of fifty (50) feet
wide shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
b. If a discernible bank is not present along a surface water body, the
portion of the riparian zone outside the surface water body is measured
landward as follows:
1. Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline;
2. Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit;
3. Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as bay or inlet, the riparian zone
is measured landward of the mean high water line; and
4. Along an amorphously-shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline.
c. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site, and for
identifying the area of the riparian zone on any plan submitted to the
Township of Edison in conjunction with an application for a
construction permit, subdivision, land development, or other
improvement that requires plan submissions or permits. This initial
determination shall be subject to review and approval by the Municipal
Engineer, Governing Body, or its appointed representative, and, where
required by State regulation, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 38-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-4
AO:1101
upon proof by virtue of submission of appropriate maps, drawings, reports
and testimony, that the disturbance is:
§ 38-5. EXCEPTIONS. [Ord. No. O-1770-2011 § II]
To the extent allowed under the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38) and
subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to the extent required by those rules, the
following disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone
established by this chapter are allowed:
§ 38-6. APPEALS, CONFLICTS AND SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No.
O-1770-2011 § II]
a. Necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare;
b. To provide an environmental benefit;
c. To prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or
d. To prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, by not allowing a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
a. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
b. Linear development with no feasible alternative route;
c. Disturbance that is in accordance with a stream corridor restoration or
stream bank stabilization plan or project approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection;
d. Disturbance necessary to provide for public pedestrian access or water
dependent recreation that meets the requirements of the Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone Management rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:7E; or
e. Disturbance with no feasible alternative required for the remediation of
hazardous substances performed with New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or Federal oversight pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et seq. or the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.
a. Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone boundary
determination under this chapter may appeal to the Township Engineer
under the provisions of this chapter. The party contesting the location
§ 38-4 EDISON CODE § 38-6
AO:1102
§ 38-7. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. O-1770-2011 § II]
A prompt investigation shall be made by the Department of Planning and
Engineering of the Township of Edison, of any person or entity believed to
be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of
this chapter is discovered, a civil action in the Special Part of the Superior
Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive
or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part,
by the filing and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to preclude the right of the Township of Edison, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal
Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any
other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this chapter.
Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 38-8. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. O-1770-2011 § III]
This chapter shall take effect twenty (20) days after final adoption and
publication and approval by the Mayor in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:69A-181(b), and shall be filed with the County Planning Board after
adoption.
Chapter 39
of the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of
any such appeal.
b. Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Township
Engineer under this chapter may appeal to the Municipal Council of the
Township of Edison. The party contesting the determination or decision
shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
c. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
d. Severability.
1. Interpretation. This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or Federal law.
2. Notwithstanding that any provision of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of the chapter shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
3. The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 38-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-8
AO:1103
LAND USE
§ 39-1. SHORT TITLE. [1999 Code § 18.04.010]
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "Edison Township Land
Use Regulations."
§ 39-2. PURPOSE. [1999 Code § 18.04.020]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as amended, it is the intent and
purpose of this chapter to:
a. Encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use and
development of lands in the Township in a manner which will promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
b. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
c. Provide adequate light, air and open space;
d. Ensure that the development of Edison Township does not conflict with
the development and general welfare of its neighboring municipalities,
the County of Middlesex and the State of New Jersey as a whole;
e. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods and communities and the preservation of the
environment;
f. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies;
g. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements, in order to meet the needs of all citizens;
h. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic, while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight;
i. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
j. Promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources
and prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land;
k. Encourage planned development which incorporates the best features
of design and relates the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site;
§ 38-8 EDISON CODE § 39-2
AO:1104
§ 39-3. WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED.
§ 39-3.1. Word Meanings. [1999 Code § 18.04.030A]
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the term "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement and
the term "may" indicates a permissive action.
§ 39-3.2. Definitions. [1999 Code § 18.04.030B]
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Means the Edison Township Planning Board
Secretary.
APPLICANT — Means a developer submitting an application for
development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Means the application form and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Means the Planning Board of the Township,
unless a different agency is designated by this chapter when acting
pursuant to the authority of this chapter.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — Means the Board established in Section 39-4.
BUILDING — Means a combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a
roof.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — Means a governmental acquisition of real
property or a major construction project.
CIRCULATION — Means systems, structures and physical improvements
for the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such
means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes
and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as
terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or
transshipment points.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Means an open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. "Common open
space" may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
l. Encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
m. Encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development, with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of the land.
§ 39-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-3.2
AO:1105
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Means the form prescribed by the Township
which is designated "application for development," completely filled out
and signed by the applicant, accompanied by all required documents and
information in form and content as prescribed by the application sections
of this chapter, with sufficient copies of each to comply with this chapter,
accompanied by payment of the requisite fees.
CONDITIONAL USE — Means a use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the zoning ordinance, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL — Means development other than planned development.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — Means a composite of the Master Plan for the
physical development of Middlesex County, with the accompanying maps,
plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the County
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and N.J.S.A. 40:27-4.
DAYS — Means calendar days.
DESIGNEE — Means the person appointed by an administrative officer to
perform a specified function or duty assigned to such administrative officer
by this chapter.
DEVELOPER — Means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two (2)
or more parcels the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or
of any mining, excavation or landfill and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Means a zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulations of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto,
adopted and filed pursuant to law.
DIVISION — Means the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — Means the removal of surface water or groundwater from
land by drains, grading or other means; includes control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and the means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
ENVIRONMENT — Means soil, water and air surrounding a site.
§ 39-3.2 EDISON CODE § 39-3.2
AO:1106
EROSION — Means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice and gravity.
FINAL APPROVAL — Means the official action of the Planning Board taken
on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guarantees.
GOVERNING BODY — Means the Township Council of the Township of
Edison.
HISTORIC SITE — Means any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archeology or culture of this State
or its communities or of the nation and has been so designated pursuant to
law.
INTERESTED PARTY — Means, in a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding,
any citizen of the State of New Jersey. In the case of a civil proceeding in
any court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without the municipality, whose right to
use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter or whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under
this chapter or under any other law of this State or of the United States has
been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this
chapter.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LOT — Means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a
plat or otherwise as permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT-LINE ELIMINATION — Means a reverse subdivision.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Means any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Means any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — Means a composition of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the municipality as set forth in and
adopted pursuant to Section 39-5.
MAYOR — Means the chief executive of the Township of Edison.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Means a development plan of one (1) or more
lots which proposes new development within the scope of development
specifically permitted by ordinance as a minor site plan; does not involve
planned development, any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and contains the information
§ 39-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-3.2
AO:1107
reasonably required in order to make an informed determination as to
whether the requirements established by ordinance for approval of a minor
site plan have been met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Means a subdivision of land that does not involve
either the creation of more than three (3) lots or planned development or
any new street or the extension of any off-tract improvements.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Means the Edison Township Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Township Council, when acting pursuant
to this chapter, and any agency which is created by or responsible to one or
more municipalities when such agency is acting pursuant to this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — Means the Township of Edison.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Means a lot, the area, dimension or location
of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a
zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Means a structure, the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — Means a use or activity which was lawful prior
to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — Means the map, with changes and additions
thereto, adopted and established from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of Middlesex County pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-5.
OFF-SITE — Means located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property of which the lot is a part, which property is the subject
of a development application, or a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-TRACT — Means not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Means located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Means located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — Means any parcel or area of land and/or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that
§ 39-3.2 EDISON CODE § 39-3.2
AO:1108
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, means any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
subsections 39-12.1 through 39-12.15.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Means any security which may be accepted
by a municipality, including cash, provided, that a municipality shall not
require more than ten (10%) percent of the total performance guaranty in
cash.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — Means an area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according to
a plan as a single entity containing one (1) or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses, or
both, and any residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use
as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Means planned unit development, planned
unit residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — Means an area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according to
a plan as a single entity containing one (1) or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other
uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — Means an area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of ten (10) acres or more to be developed as
a single entity according to a plan, containing one (1) or more residential
clusters or planned unit residential developments and one (1) or more
public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios
of nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be specified in the zoning
ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Means an area with
a specified minimum contiguous acreage of five (5) acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or more
residential clusters, which area may include appropriate commercial or
public or quasi-public uses all primarily for the benefit of the residential
development.
PLANNING BOARD — Means the Edison Planning Board established
pursuant to Section 39-4.
PLAT — Means a map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Means the conferral of certain rights,
pursuant to the applicable section of Section 39-8, prior to final approval,
after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the
Planning Board and the applicant.
§ 39-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-3.2
AO:1109
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Means architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project, illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PUBLIC AREA — Means public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and
sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — Means a Master Plan, capital
improvement program or other proposal for land development adopted by
the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — Means the land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water, to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Means an open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, Board of Education, State or
County agency or other public body, for recreational or conservational uses.
QUORUM — Means the majority of the full authorized membership of a
municipal agency.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — Means an area to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan, containing residential housing units which have
a common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — Means the number of dwelling units per gross
acre of residential land area, including streets, easements and open space
portions of a development.
RESUBDIVISION — Means the further division or relocation of lot lines
of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, or the alteration of any streets or establishment
of any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
REVERSE SUBDIVISION — Means the proceeding before the appropriate
municipal agency for the purpose of securing the approval by such
municipal agency of the elimination of interior lot lines within a lot, parcel
or tract of land in order to constitute a single lot, parcel or tract of land.
SEDIMENTATION — Means the deposition of soil that has been transported
from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as
a product of erosion.
SITE PLAN — Means a development plan of one (1) or more lots on which
is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings,
drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage
§ 39-3.2 EDISON CODE § 39-3.2
AO:1110
facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, screening
devices and lighting; and any other information that may be reasonably
required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to this
chapter.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Means standards adopted by
ordinance, pursuant to Section 39-8, regulating noise levels, glare,
earthborn or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious
odors, toxic matters, explosive and inflammable matters, smoke and
airborne particles, waste discharge, screening or unsightly objects or
conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably required by
the municipality, or standards required by applicable Federal or State laws
or other municipal ordinances.
STREET — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive or other way which is an existing State, County or municipal roadway
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or which
is approved by official action as provided by this chapter or which is shown
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording
Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such
board of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulder, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within
the street lines. For purposes of this chapter, "streets" are classified as
follows:
STRUCTURE — Means a combination of materials to form a construction
for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — Means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered "subdivisions" within
the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created: divisions of land
CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAYS — Means those that are used by
heavy-duty traffic and which permit no access from abutting property.
1.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARES — Means those which are used primarily
for heavy local and through traffic.
2.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Means those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major thoroughfares, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
3.
MINOR STREETS — Means those which are used primarily for access
to the abutting properties.
4.
MARGINAL SERVICE STREETS — Means those which are parallel or
adjacent to controlled-access highways or major thoroughfares and
which provide access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
5.
§ 39-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-3.2
AO:1111
found by the Planning Board, or subdivision committee thereof appointed
by the Chair, to be for agricultural purposes, where all resulting parcels
are five (5) acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary
or intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court order; conveyances
so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument; and transfers
of title to one (1) or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels owned by the
same person or persons when such lots, tracts or parcels all conform
to the requirements of this chapter and are shown and designated as
separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map of this Township. The
term "subdivision" shall also include the terms "resubdivision" and "reverse
subdivision."
THIS CHAPTER — Refers to all sections of the Township land use ordinance,
together with those sections of Chapters 36 and 37 which have not been
specifically repealed by the enactment of this chapter, unless otherwise
specified.
VARIANCE — Means permission to depart from the literal requirements of
a zoning ordinance, which "variance" may be granted pursuant to Sections
39-4 and 39-7.
§ 39-4. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 39-4.1. Establishment; Membership. [1999 Code § 18.08.010]
There is established pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
in the Township a Planning Board of nine (9) members, consisting of the
following classes of members:
a. Class I: the Mayor.
b. Class II: one (1) of the officials of the municipality other than a member
of the Township Council, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there is a technical review committee, a member of that committee who
is also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if there are
both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the
Board of Education among the Class IV members.
c. Class III: a member of the Township Council, to be appointed by the
Township Council.
d. Class IV: the members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one (1) member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one (1) may be a member of the Board of Education. A
member of the technical review committee who is also a member of the
Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member unless there are among the Class IV members
of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the
member of the site plan committee shall be deemed to be a Class II
member of the Planning Board.
§ 39-3.2 EDISON CODE § 39-4.1
AO:1112
§ 39-4.2. Terms of Office; Vacancies; Removal; Voting. [1999 Code
§ 18.08.020]
e. Alternate Members.
1. There may be two (2) alternate members in Class IV. Alternate
members shall be appointed by the Mayor for Class IV members.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote,
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of
any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that
a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
2. The terms for alternate members shall be for two (2) years, except
that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the
terms of not more than one (1) alternate member shall expire in
one (1) year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms
of the alternate members first appointed exceed two (2) years. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only.
a. Terms.
1. The term of the Mayor shall correspond to his or her official tenure.
2. The terms of the members comprising Class II and Class III of the
Planning Board shall be for one (1) year or shall terminate at the
completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first.
3. The term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission shall be for three (3) years or shall
terminate at the completion of his term of office or as a member of
the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
4. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board
of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever
he is no longer a member of such body or at the completion of his or
her Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
5. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over
the first four (4) years after the appointment; provided, however,
that no term of any member shall exceed four (4) years, and
provided further that nothing herein shall affect the terms of any
citizen members of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue
in office until the completion of the terms for which they were
§ 39-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-4.2
AO:1113
§ 39-4.3. Organization and Staff; Adoption of Rules and
Regulations. [1999 Code § 18.08.030]
§ 39-4.4. Powers and Duties. [1999 Code § 18.08.040; Ord. No.
O.1938-2016]
The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
and shall perform the following functions and duties:
appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four (4) years, except as otherwise hereinabove provided.
b. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the
Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment as above
provided for the unexpired term. No member of the Planning Board
shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has either
directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Any member
other than a Class I member, after public hearing if he or she requests
one, may be removed by the Township Council for cause.
c. When any hearing before a Planning Board shall carry over two (2) or
more meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one (1) or
more of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which
the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence from
one (1) or more of the previous meetings; provided, however, that such
Board member has available to him or her a transcript or recording of
the meetings from which he or she was absent and certifies, in writing,
to the Board that he or she has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
a. The Planning Board shall elect a chair and a vice chair from the
members of Class IV, shall select a secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee and shall create
and fill such other offices as may be established by the rules and
regulations of the Planning Board.
b. The Planning Board may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the municipal attorney, and
experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use. In the event that an expert or consultant is
hired, the hiring shall be with the approval of the Planning Board.
c. The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the powers granted to it by this chapter.
d. The chair of the Planning Board shall appoint committees of the Board
consisting of three (3) or more members of the Board.
a. Prepare and, after public hearing, adopt and from time to time amend a
Master Plan or component parts thereof, to guide the use of lands
within the Township in a manner which protects the public health and
§ 39-4.2 EDISON CODE § 39-4.4
AO:1114
safety and promotes the general welfare and which is otherwise
consistent with the purposes of this chapter as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28;
b. Review and approve, modify or deny, with or without conditions, site
plans, subdivisions and conditional uses and, in doing so, administer the
provisions of this chapter with the provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.;
c. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by State or Federal law or regulations;
d. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process;
e. Prepare annually a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of six (6) years, and amendments thereto, and
recommend same to the Township Council;
f. Consider and report to the Township Council, within thirty-five (35)
days after referral to the Planning Board, any proposed development
regulation, revision or amendment thereto and the zoning ordinance
and any amendment or revision thereto submitted to said Board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and consider and
pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by
the Township Council pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b;
g. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25;
2. Direction, pursuant to Section 39-12, for the issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice
of a hearing on the application for the development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for the issuance
of a permit, as the case may be;
h. Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or
resolution of the Township Council, for the aid and assistance of the
Governing Body or other agencies or Township officials;
i. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of all Township ordinances
related to the powers, functions and duties generally performed by the
Planning Board, other than the zoning ordinance.
j. The Planning Board shall not grant any proposed sidewalk waiver
within a two (2) mile radius of the perimeter of any school property line.
For all other waivers, the Planning Board shall not grant any proposed
waiver unless the proposed waiver is reasonable and within the general
§ 39-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-4.4
AO:1115
§ 39-4.5. Referral Powers. [1999 Code § 18.08.050]
§ 39-4.6. Citizens' Advisory Committee. [1999 Code § 18.08.060]
The Mayor may appoint one (1) or more persons as a citizens' advisory
committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 39-5. MASTER PLAN.
purposes and intent of the Code, and/or that literal enforcement of
the Code is impractical and will exact undue hardship because of
the peculiar conditions pertaining to a certain property and can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the Township's Master
Plan and Zoning Ordinances and redevelopment plan if applicable.
[Ord. No. O.1938-2016]
a. Development Regulations. Prior to the adoption of a development
regulation, revision or amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall
make and transmit to the Township Council, within thirty-five (35) days
after referral, a report including recommendations concerning the
proposed development regulations, revision or amendment. The
Township Council, when considering the adoption of a development
regulation, revision or amendment thereto, shall review the report of
the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation
only by a vote of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall
record in its minutes the reasons for not following such
recommendations of the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board
to transmit its reports within the thirty-five (35) day period provided
herein shall relieve the Township Council from the requirements of this
subsection in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision
or amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board.
b. Other Matters. Any municipal body, including the Township Council, or
any Township department director or division manager having final
authority over the matters within its or his or her particular jurisdiction,
before taking final action on any matter before him, her or it relating to
land use and development, may refer such matter to the Planning Board
for its recommendations. Such reference shall not extend the time for
action by the referring body or official, if any is applicable, whether or
not the Planning Board has submitted its report. Whenever the
Planning Board shall make a recommendation under this subsection,
such recommendation shall be followed by the municipal body or
official unless, in the case of a municipal body, the recommendation is
rejected or modified by a majority of the full authorized membership of
such body.
§ 39-4.4 EDISON CODE § 39-5.1
AO:1116
§ 39-5.1. Preparation, Adoption and Reexamination. [1999 Code
§ 18.12.010]
The Planning Board shall prepare and, after public hearing, adopt a Master
Plan or component parts thereof, to guide the use of land within the
Township in a manner which protects the public health and safety and
promotes the general welfare. Such Master Plan shall be reexamined by the
Planning Board at periodic intervals of not more than every six (6) years.
Adequate provision for such reexaminations shall be made by the Township
Council.
§ 39-5.2. Elements. [1999 Code § 18.12.020]
The Master Plan shall generally comprise a report or statement on land
use and development proposals, with maps, diagrams and text, presenting,
where appropriate, the following elements:
a. A statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and
standards upon which the constituent proposals for the physical,
economic and social development of the municipality are based;
b. A land use plan element which takes into account the other Master Plan
elements and natural resource conditions, including but not necessarily
limited to, topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage,
floodplain areas, marshes and woodlands, and showing the existing and
proposed location, extent and intensity of development of land to be
used in the future for varying types of residential, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational, educational and other public and
private purposes or combinations of purposes, and including a
statement of the standards of population density and development
intensity recommended for the municipality;
c. A housing plan element, including but not limited to residential
standards and proposals for the construction and improvement of
housing;
d. A circulation plan element showing the location and types of facilities
for all modes of transportation required for the efficient movement of
people and goods into, about and through the municipality;
e. A utility service plan element analyzing the need for and showing the
future general location of water supply and distribution facilities,
drainage and flood control facilities, sewerage and waste treatment,
solid waste disposal and provisions for other related utilities;
f. A community facilities plan element showing the location and type of
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals,
firehouses, police stations and other related facilities, including their
relation to the surrounding areas;
g. A recreation plan element showing a comprehensive system of areas
and public sites for recreation;
§ 39-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-5.2
AO:1117
§ 39-5.3. Subplans. [1999 Code § 18.12.030]
The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and
subplan elements projected according to periods of time or staging
sequences.
§ 39-5.4. Policy Statements. [1999 Code § 18.12.040]
The Master Plan shall include specific policy statements indicating the
relationship of the proposed development of the municipality as developed
in the Master Plan to the Master Plans of contiguous municipalities, to the
Master Plan of the County in which the municipality is located and to any
comprehensive guide plan.
§ 39-6. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.
§ 39-6.1. Preparation of Program. [1999 Code § 18.16.010]
h. A conservation plan element providing for the preservation,
conservation and utilization of natural resources, including, to the
extent appropriate, open space, water, forest, soil, marshes, wetlands,
harbors, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife and other natural
resources;
i. Appendixes or separate reports containing the technical foundation for
the Master Plan and its constituent elements.
a. The Planning Board shall prepare a program of municipal capital
improvements and amendments thereto, which program shall be
prepared within one (1) year of the enactment of this chapter and which
shall be projected over a term of at least six (6) years. Such program
may encompass major projects being currently undertaken or future
projects to be undertaken with Federal, State, County and other public
funds or under Federal, State or County supervision. The first year of
such program shall, upon adoption by the Township Council, constitute
the capital budget of the Township as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43 et
seq. The program shall classify projects in regard to the urgency and
need for realization and shall recommend a time sequence for their
implementation. The program may also contain the estimated cost of
each project and indicate probable revenues, if any, as well as existing
sources of funds or the need for additional sources of funds for the
implementation and operation of each project. The program shall, as far
as possible, be based on existing information in the possession of the
departments, divisions and agencies of the Township and shall take into
account public facility needs indicated by the prospective development
shown in the Master Plan of the Township or as permitted by other
municipal land use controls.
b. In preparing the program, the Planning Board shall confer, in a manner
deemed appropriate by the Board, with the Mayor, the Chief Fiscal
Officer, other municipal officials and agencies and the school board or
§ 39-5.2 EDISON CODE § 39-6.1
AO:1118
§ 39-6.2. Adoption of Program. [1999 Code § 18.16.020]
Whenever the Planning Board has prepared a capital improvements
program pursuant to subsection 39-6.1, it shall recommend such program
to the Township Council, which council may adopt such program with any
modification approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of the Township Council and with the reasons for
the modification recorded in the minutes. Three (3) copies of the text of this
chapter are on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk and are available for
public inspection until final action is taken on the ordinance effectuating the
readoption.
§ 39-6.3. Review of Capital Projects. [1999 Code § 18.16.030]
Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of the Master
Plan, the Township Council or other public agency having jurisdiction over
the subject matter, before taking action necessitating the expenditure of
any public funds incidental to the location, character or extent of such
project, shall refer the action involving such specific project to the Planning
Board for review and recommendation in conjunction with such Master
Plan and shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until fortyfive
(45) days have elapsed after such referral without receiving such
recommendation from the Planning Board. This requirement will apply to
action by a housing, parking, highway, special district or other authority,
redevelopment agency, school board or other similar public agency, State,
County or municipal.
§ 39-7. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 39-7.1. Establishment; Membership; Terms; Voting. [1999 Code
§ 18.20.010]
boards. Any such program shall include an estimate of the displacement
of persons and establishments caused by each recommended project.
c. In addition to any of the requirements in paragraph a. above, every
municipal department, division, authority or agency shall; upon request
of the Planning Board, transmit to the board a statement of all capital
projects proposed to be undertaken by such municipal department,
division, authority or agency during the terms of the program, for study,
advice and recommendation by the Planning Board.
a. There is established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, a Zoning Board of
Adjustment, also known as the "Zoning Board" or the "Board of
Adjustment," consisting of seven (7) regular and two (2) alternate
members who shall be residents of the Township. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2."
b. The members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by
the Township Council. The terms of the members first appointed by the
§ 39-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-7.1
AO:1119
§ 39-7.2. Organization and Staff; Adoption of Rules and
Regulations. [1999 Code § 18.20.020]
Mayor under this chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest
practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first four (4) years after their appointment and, in the
case of alternate members, evenly over the first two (2) years after
their appointment. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be four
(4) years. No member may hold any elective office or position under the
Township. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. A member may, after a public hearing if he or she requests
it, be removed by the Township Council for cause. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term only.
c. When the hearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall carry
over two (2) or more meetings, a member of the Board who was absent
for one (1) or more of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the
matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or
her absence from one (1) or more of the previous meetings; provided,
however, that such Board member has available to him or her a
transcript or recording of the meetings from which he or she was
absent and certifies, in writing, to the Board that he or she has read
such transcript or listened to such recording.
d. A member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, after a public
hearing, be removed by the Township Council for cause. For the
purpose of this section, "cause" shall be defined as any reason
otherwise permitted by law or the terms of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 or the
failure of any member, without being excused by a majority of the
authorized membership of the Board, to attend and participate at
meetings of the Board for a period of eight (8) consecutive weeks, or for
four (4) consecutive regular meetings, whichever shall be of longer
duration; provided, however, that the Zoning Board may only refuse to
excuse such member with respect to those failures to attend and
participate which are not due to legitimate illness.
e. All new and existing members of the zoning board shall be required to
attend the annual two-part seminar offered by the Zoning Board
attorney on New Jersey Zoning and Planning in or about the months of
January and/or February of each year. Attendance by all new and
existing Board members shall be mandatory since such seminar will
include an update on all relevant zoning decisions from the prior year.
The failure of any Board member to attend this training seminar may
constitute "cause" for the removal of such member by the Township
Council.
a. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chair and vice chair from its
members and shall select a secretary who may or may not be a member
of the Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee.
§ 39-7.1 EDISON CODE § 39-7.2
AO:1120
§ 39-7.3. Powers and Duties. [1999 Code § 18.20.030; Ord. No.
O.1938-2016]
b. The Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel other than the municipal attorney. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
c. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations as may
be necessary to carry into effect the powers granted to it by this
chapter.
a. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by the Director of Public Works or the Zoning Officer, based
on or made in the enforcement of zoning ordinance of Edison
Township;
2. Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
requests for interpretation of the zoning map or zoning ordinance
or for decisions upon other special questions upon which such
Board is authorized to pass by the zoning ordinance;
3. Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situations or conditions of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation pursuant to the zoning
ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict application so
as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that
no variance shall be granted under this subsection to allow a
structure or use in a distinct restricted against such structure or
use, and provided further that the proposed development does not
require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board
shall review a request for a variance pursuant to subsection
39-4.4g;
4. Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use, in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3)
of the full authorized membership of the Board;
§ 39-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-7.3
AO:1121
§ 39-7.4. Appeals and Applications. [1999 Code § 18.20.040]
5. Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to
this chapter or conditional use approval pursuant to this chapter
whenever the board of adjustment is reviewing an application for
approval of a use variance pursuant to paragraph a3 above;
6. Direct the issuance of a permit, pursuant to Section 39-12, for a
building or structure not related to a street;
7. Render advisory opinions regarding the interpretation, application
and enforcement of the zoning ordinance upon request of the
Planning Board or other Township officials.
b. No variance or other relief shall be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
potential detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair
the intent and purpose of the zone plan as contained in the Master Plan
and in the zoning ordinance. Applications under this section may be
referred by the Zoning Board to any appropriate person or agency for
its report. No referral made by the Zoning Board hereunder, however,
shall extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board shall act
on any application.
c. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not grant any proposed waiver
for a sidewalk within a two (2) mile radius of the perimeter of any
school property line. For any proposed sidewalk waiver outside a two
(2) mile radius of the perimeter of any school property line and for any
other proposed waiver, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not grant
any proposed waiver unless the proposed waiver is reasonable and
within the general purposes and intent of the Code, and/or that literal
enforcement of the Code is impractical and will exact undue hardship
because of the peculiar conditions pertaining to a certain property and
can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the
Township's Master Plan and Zoning Ordinances and redevelopment
plan if applicable. [Ord. No. O.1938-2016]
a. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party
affected by any decision of the Director of Public Works or Zoning
Officer of the Township, based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days
by filing a notice of appeal with the Director of Public Works or Zoning
Officer specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all paper
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
b. A developer may file an application for development to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for action under any of its other powers, without
prior application to the administrative official.
§ 39-7.3 EDISON CODE § 39-7.4
AO:1122
§ 39-7.5. Time Limit for Decisions. [1999 Code § 18.20.050]
§ 39-7.6. Expiration of Variances. [1999 Code § 18.20.060]
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment permitting the creation or alteration of any structure or
structures or permitting a specified use of any structure or any property in
a district restricted against such use shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration or use shall have been actively commenced, as
permitted by such variance, within three (3) years from the date of adoption
of the resolution by the Zoning Board, except as otherwise provided for by
the granting authority; provided, however, that the Zoning Board is granted
the authority to grant a one-year extension, provided that the application
c. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the administrative official from whose action the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and upon due cause shown.
d. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or
modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
a. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than one
hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a complete
application for development for action by the Zoning Board under any
of its powers, pursuant to subsection 39-7.4b. Failure of the Zoning
Board to render a decision within such one hundred twenty (120) day
period or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant shall constitute either a decision favorable to the applicant or
approval of the application, as the case may be. A certificate of the
secretary of the Board of Adjustment as to the failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and such
certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the
County Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
b. Whenever review or approval of an application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 in the case of a subdivision or by
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6) in the case of a site plan, the Zoning Board shall
condition any approval that it grants upon the timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
upon approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time.
§ 39-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-7.6
AO:1123
for such extension shall give prior notice of this application requesting such
extension to those persons entitled thereto pursuant to subsections 39-12.1
through 39-12.15; provided, however, that such period of limitation herein
provided shall be tolled from the date of the appeal of the decision to any
court of competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of such
appeal or proceeding.
§ 39-8. SUBDIVISIONS AND SITE PLANS.
§ 39-8.1. Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinances. [1999 Code
§ 18.24.010]
The Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of Edison Township is contained in
Chapter 36.
§ 39-8.2. Approval of Subdivision Plat Required. [1999 Code
§ 18.24.020]
No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on the
instrument by the signature of the chair and secretary of the Planning Board
or a certificate has been issued pursuant to Sections 35, 38, 44, 48, 54 or 63
of P.L. 1975, C. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). The signatures of the chair
and secretary of the Planning Board shall not be affixed until the developer
has posted the guarantees required by this chapter. If the County Recording
Officer records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be
deemed null and void, and, upon request of the municipality, the plat shall
be expunged from the official records. Furthermore, it shall be the duty of
the County Recording Officer to notify the Planning Board, in writing, within
seven (7) days of the filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its
title, date of filing and official number.
§ 39-8.3. Requirements for Development Application. [1999 Code
§ 18.24.030]
a. Unless specifically exempted by this Code or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
all development applications shall require review and action by the
Planning Board and/or the Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
prior to development.
b. All development applications, in addition to any other requirement
provided for in this section or the Municipal Land Use Law, shall
provide the following:
1. The location, size, SMYS (specified minimum yield strength),
maximum allowable operating pressure, location class, as defined
by the United States Department of Transportation in the State of
New Jersey, and operating hoop stress in percentage of specified
minimum yield strength of all pipelines located upon the subject
property and as surveyed by a professional land surveyor licensed
in the State of New Jersey;
§ 39-7.6 EDISON CODE § 39-8.3
AO:1124
§ 39-8.4. Time Periods for Site Plan Approvals. [1999 Code
§ 18.24.040]
§ 39-8.5. Time Periods for Subdivision Approvals. [1999 Code
§ 18.24.050]
2. The location of all on-site pipeline easements and rights-of-way;
3. The approximate location, based upon approximate field
measurements supplied by the respective owner, and the size,
operating pressure, location class, as defined by the United States
Department of Transportation in the State of New Jersey, and
operating hoop stress in percentage of specified minimum yield
strength of all off-site pipelines within seventy-five (75) feet of the
subject property;
4. The approximate location of all off-site pipeline easements and
rights-of-way within seventy-five (75) feet of the subject property as
depicted on Township tax maps or other documents accepted by
the approving board;
5. Cross sections and profiles of the pipeline in areas of disturbance
within seventy-five (75) feet of the pipeline, showing existing and
proposed conditions and improvements.
a. An application for development shall be deemed to be a complete
application unless, within forty-five (45) days from the date of
submission of such application for development, the applicant is
notified, in writing, that the application is incomplete and stating
reasons therefor. A development application requiring a variance shall
grant the Planning Board ninety-five (95) days for review and decision
from the date of the completed application.
b. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of the complete
application for a site plan of ten (10) acres of land or less or ten (10)
dwelling units or fewer, the Planning Board shall grant or deny site plan
approval within forty-five (45) days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Upon
the submission of a complete application for a site plan of more than ten
(10) acres or more than ten (10) dwelling units, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny approval within ninety-five (95) days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted approval of the site plan.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within forty-five (45) days of the date of submission of a
complete application to the administrative officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the municipal
agency to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor
subdivision approval, and a certificate shall be issued by the
§ 39-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-8.5
AO:1125
administrative officer upon the applicant's request. Such certificate
shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence
of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats. Minor
subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final subdivision approval
by the Planning Board, provided that the Planning Board shall condition
such approval upon terms ensuring the provision of improvements
pursuant to Township ordinances.
b. County Planning Board Approval. Whenever review or approval of the
application by the County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.3, the Municipal Planning Board shall condition any approval
that it grants upon the timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or upon approval by the
County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
c. Approval of Minor Subdivisions. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of municipal
approval unless and within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et
seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is
filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer, the municipal
Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed
accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the chairperson and
the secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the application for
development for a proposed minor subdivision, the Planning Board may
be permitted, by ordinance, to accept a plat not in conformity with the
Map Filing Act, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., provided that if the developer
chooses to file the minor subdivision, as provided herein, by plat rather
than by deed, such plat shall conform with the provisions of said Act.
d. Zoning Requirements. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor
subdivision approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of
two (2) years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided that
the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided in this section.
e. Procedure for Preliminary Subdivision Approval. An application for
development shall be deemed to be a complete application unless,
within forty-five (45) days from the date of submission of such
application for development, the applicant is notified, in writing, that
the application is incomplete and stating the reasons therefor.
f. Upon the submission of a complete application for a subdivision of ten
(10) or fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval
within forty-five (45) days of the date of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon the
submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more than ten
(10) lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval within ninety-
§ 39-8.5 EDISON CODE § 39-8.5
AO:1126
§ 39-8.6. Time Periods for Final Approval. [1999 Code § 18.24.060]
§ 39-8.7. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [1999 Code § 18.24.070]
five (95) days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have granted approval of the subdivision.
a. Final approval shall be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days
after the submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant, and such certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
b. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 in the case of a subdivision or by
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 in the case of a site plan, the municipal Planning
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon the timely receipt
of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or upon approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.
a. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48 or of a site plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 shall, except
as provided in subsection 39-8.5d, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size, yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements
peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to this chapter, except that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the municipality from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety;
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case
may be;
3. That the applicant may apply for and the planning board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one (1) year, but not to exceed a total extension of two (2)
§ 39-8.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-8.7
AO:1127
§ 39-8.8. Effect of Final Approval. [1999 Code § 18.24.080]
years, provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
b. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of fifty (50) acres
or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
paragraphs a1, a2 and a3 for such period of time longer than three (3)
years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development, provided that if the design standards have been revised,
such revised standards may govern.
a. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period of two (2) years after the date of final approval,
provided that, in the case of a major subdivision, the rights conferred by
this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the
time period prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval and, in the case of
a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-54, the Planning Board may extend such period of protection
for extensions of one (1) year, but not to exceed three (3) extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions, the granting of final approval
terminates the time period of preliminary approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49, for the section granted final approval.
b. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit development
or planned unit residential development or residential cluster of fifty
(50) acres or more or a conventional subdivision or site plan for one
hundred fifty (150) acres or more, the Planning Board may grant the
rights referred to in paragraph a. for such period of time longer than
two (2) years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The
developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
§ 39-8.7 EDISON CODE § 39-8.8
AO:1128
§ 39-8.9. Fees; Guarantees and Releases; Off-Tract Improvements;
Inspections. [1999 Code § 18.24.0190]
The fee schedule for development, guarantees and releases, off-tract
improvements and inspections shall be as set forth in subsection 39-12.18
through subsection 39-12.23.
§ 39-9. (RESERVED)
§ 39-10. (RESERVED)30
§ 39-11. (RESERVED)
§ 39-12. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 39-12.1. Applicability to Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [1999 Code § 18.28.010]
Unless otherwise expressly set forth in any particular section of this
chapter, all provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to the Planning
Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment and, when acting pursuant to any
authority conferred upon it by this chapter, also to the Township Council.
§ 39-12.2. Meetings. [1999 Code § 18.28.020]
The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, by their rules,
fix the time and place for holding their regular meetings for business
authorized to be conducted by such agencies. Regular meetings of such
agencies shall be scheduled not less than once a month and shall be
held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development
to process. The agency may provide for special meetings, to be held on
notice to the agency's members and to the public in accordance with the
provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq., and
the agency's regulations. No action shall be taken at any meeting without
a quorum being present. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of
a quorum except as otherwise required by this chapter. Nothing herein
shall be construed to contravene any statute providing for procedures for
Governing Bodies.
§ 39-12.3. Meetings to Be Open to Public. [1999 Code § 18.28.030]
All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public.
Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the provisions
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the floor
area remaining to be developed, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
30.Editor's Note: Former Section 39-10, Stormwater Management, previously codified herein
and containing portions of 1999 Code §§ 18.26.010—1826.030 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. O.1611-2008. See Chapter 34 for Stormwater Regulations.
§ 39-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.3
AO:1129
of the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975, c 231, and the agency's
regulations.
§ 39-12.4. Hearings. [1999 Code § 18.28.040]
a. The Township agency shall hold a hearing(s) on application for
development, as required by subsection 39-12.6, and the adoption,
revision or amendment of the Master Plan. A public hearing shall be
required for all of the following classes of development application:
1. Any application which requires a variance;
2. Preliminary major subdivision applications;
3. All conditional uses;
4. Preliminary major site plan applications;
5. Minor subdivision applications.
b. In addition to the above cases of application requiring public hearing
and notice as per subsection 39-12.6, all other classes of application,
except sketch plats, final major subdivision and final site plan before
the Planning Board, shall be reviewed and decided upon after public
presentation by the applicant at a public meeting of the Board. No
notice by the applicant, as set forth in subsection 39-12.6, shall be
required for such applications.
c. The Board may hear comment and opinion from interested parties in
attendance, further provided that the Board may require the applicant
to present expert testimony pertaining to the application.
d. The Township agency shall make the rules governing hearings. Any
maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be
on file and available for public inspection, at least ten (10) days before
the date of the hearing, during normal business hours, in the office of
the Director of Public Works. The applicant may produce other
documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate, clarify
or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
e. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he or she may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law,
N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
f. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
§ 39-12.3 EDISON CODE § 39-12.4
AO:1130
§ 39-12.5. Notice of Hearings; Content. [1999 Code § 18.28.050]
Notices pursuant to subsections 39-12.6 and 39-12.7 shall state the date,
time and place of the hearing; the nature of the matters to be considered;
and, in the case of notices pursuant to subsection 39-12.6, an identification
of the property proposed for development by street address, if any, and by
reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate
in the Township Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 39-12.6. Notice Requirements for Hearings. [1999 Code
§ 18.28.060]
g. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the chairperson of the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
h. The Township agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic or mechanical or electronic means.
The Township agency shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof on request to any interested party, at his expense, as set
forth in this section.
i. Each decision on any application for development shall be in writing
and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon.
j. Copies of the decision shall be mailed by the secretary or Clerk of the
Township agency, within ten (10) days of the date of decision, to the
applicant or, if represented, then to his or her attorney, without
separate charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision for a fee,
as specified in this chapter. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by
the Township agency in the office of the Township Clerk who shall make
a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party for a fee,
as specified in this chapter, and available for public inspection at his or
her office during Township business hours.
k. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township. Such publication shall be made by the
Township agency, provided that the applicant may, in any case, provide
for publication of the decision. The period of time in which an appeal of
the decision may be made shall run from the first publication of the
decision, whether arranged by the Township or the applicant.
a. Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development, the
applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
1. Notice pursuant to paragraphs 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8 below shall be
given by the applicant not less than ten (10) days prior to the date
of the hearing.
§ 39-12.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.6
AO:1131
2. Public notice of hearing shall be made by the applicant and
published in the official newspapers of the Township.
3. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to paragraph
2. above shall be given by the applicant to the owners of all real
property, as shown on the current tax duplicate, within two
hundred (200) feet of the out boundaries of the site of development.
4. Upon the request of an applicant, the tax assessor shall, within
seven (7) days, make and certify a list, from the current tax
duplicate, of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant
is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph 3. above. The
applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in
such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall
not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A fee of ten ($10.00)
dollars shall be charged for such list.
5. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within two hundred (200) feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to
the clerk of such municipality.
6. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing County road or
proposed road, shown on the official County map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other County land or situated within two
hundred (200) feet of a municipal boundary. Such notice shall be
accompanied by a copy of the application for development.
7. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway, as such
development affects access, drainage and utilities. Such notice
shall be accompanied by a copy of the application for development.
8. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning, New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, of a hearing on an application
for development of property which exceeds one hundred fifty (150)
acres of five hundred (500) dwelling units. Such notice shall be
accompanied by a copy of the application for development.
9. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
appropriate official of the United States Soil Conservation Service
district office of an application for development which exceeds five
thousand (5,000) square feet of soil disturbance in accordance with
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
10. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection, State of New Jersey, or
any application for the development of property which involves a
§ 39-12.6 EDISON CODE § 39-12.6
AO:1132
§ 39-12.7. Notice Concerning Master Plan. [1999 Code § 18.28.070]
The Planning Board shall give:
§ 39-12.8. Effect of Mailing Notice. [1999 Code § 18.28.080]
Any notice made by certified mail pursuant to subsections 39-12.6 and
39-12.7 shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 39-12.9. Notices of Hearing and Action on Development
Regulations, Capital Improvement Programs and Official Map.
[1999 Code § 18.28.090]
stream encroachment, as defined by N.J.S.A. 58:1-1 et seq., and of
any application for development of property involving a floodway
as designated by the State of New Jersey.
b. In the event that the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to this
section, he or she shall file an affidavit of proof of notice and service of
all of the aforesaid notices required for his or her particular application
with the Township agency holding the hearing on the application for
development.
a. Public notice of a hearing on the adoption, revision or amendment of
the Master Plan. Such notice shall be given by publication in the New
Brunswick Home News and in the News Tribune, at least ten (10) days
prior to the date of the hearing;
b. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of an adjoining
municipality of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of a
Master Plan involving property situated within two hundred (200) feet
of such adjoining municipality, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of
any hearing;
c. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board of:
1. All hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of the
Township Master Plan, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing. Such notice shall include a copy of any proposed Master
Plan or any revision or amendment thereto,
2. The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan, not more
than thirty (30) days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment. Such notice shall include a copy of the Master Plan or
revision or amendment thereto.
a. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the clerk of
an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of a development regulation involving property situated
within two hundred (200) feet of such adjoining municipality, at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of any such hearing.
§ 39-12.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.9
AO:1133
§ 39-12.10. Filing of Development Regulations. [1999 Code
§ 18.28.100]
The Township Clerk shall file with the County Planning Board, as soon after
passage as possible, all development regulations, including this one, and
any amendments or revisions thereto and shall file and maintain for public
inspection copies of the regulations in his or her office.
§ 39-12.11. Appeals to Township Council. [1999 Code § 18.28.110]
Any applicant or interested party may appeal a final decision of the Board
of Adjustment on a use variance to the Township Council. The appeal and
procedure shall be as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17, as amended.
§ 39-12.12. Enforcement. [1999 Code § 18.28.120]
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the Mayor, any Township official, elected or
appointed, or any interested party, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent
the occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal
action, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 39-12.13. Tolling of Period of Approval. [1999 Code § 18.28.130]
In the event that during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any State agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health or welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with the development, the running of the period of approval under
b. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the County
Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment
of any development regulation at least ten (10) days prior to the date of
the hearing and of the adoption, revision or amendment of the Township
capital improvement program or Township official map not more than
thirty (30) days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment.
Any notice provided hereunder shall include a copy of the proposed
development regulation, the municipal official map or the Township
capital improvement program, or any proposed revision or amendment
thereto, as the case may be.
c. Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to be
considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 39-12.9 EDISON CODE § 39-12.13
AO:1134
this chapter shall be suspended for the period of time the legal action is
pending or such directive or order is in effect.
§ 39-12.14. Conditional Approvals. [1999 Code § 18.28.140]
§ 39-12.15. Technical Review Committee. [1999 Code § 18.28.150;
Ord. No. O.1521-2006; Ord. No. O.1547-2007]
a. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any State agency, political
subdivision or any other party to protect the public health and welfare
or by a directive or order issued by any State agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health and welfare, the municipal agency shall process such application
for development in accordance with this chapter, and, if such
application for development complies with the requirements of this
chapter, the approving authority shall approve such application
conditioned on the removal of such legal barrier to development.
b. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the approving authority, the approving authority shall, in
appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent
approval of such governmental agency, provided that the approving
authority shall make a decision on any application for development
within the time period provided in this chapter or within an extension of
such period as has been agreed to by the applicant, unless the
approving authority is prevented or relieved from so acting by the
operation of law.
a. Establishment.
1. There is established a Technical Review Committee (TRC) which
shall review all applications for development presented to the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment pertaining to site
plans and subdivisions, which may include conditional use
applications. The TRC shall consist of the administrative officer,
two (2) members of the Planning Board appointed by its chair, two
(2) members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment appointed by its
chair, one (1) member of the Environmental Commission, appointed
by its chair, one (1) citizen representative appointed by the Mayor,
with advice and consent of the Township Council, and one (1)
member of the Emergency Management Office, all of whom shall be
residents of the Township.
2. The Technical Review Committee shall be subject to the provision
of the Open Public Meetings Act and shall annually publish a notice
of all regularly scheduled meetings.
b. Terms of Office.
§ 39-12.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.15
AO:1135
1. The terms of the members shall be for one (1) year after
appointment or shall terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first.
2. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the
members' term of office, the position shall be filled by appointment
as provided herein for the time period of the unexpired term.
3. No member of the Committee shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she has either any direct or indirect personal
or financial interest.
c. Organization and Staff.
1. The Technical Review Committee shall elect a chair and vice-chair
from the members of the Committee.
2. The Technical Review Committee may employ, or contract for, and
fix the compensation of consultant experts and other staff and
services as it may deem necessary, the cost for which shall be borne
by applicants and paid for out of the escrow account established
pursuant to Township ordinance.
d. Powers and Duties. The technical review committee shall have the
power to:
1. Determine the completeness of all major applications presented
before it, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 36, of the
land development regulations of the Township;
2. Determine the compliance of all major applications presented
before it in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 25, 36, 37
and 39;
3. Review, comment on and make recommendations to the applicable
reviewing board by the professional staff with regard to the design
and technical aspects of all applications presented before it;
4. The professional staff shall make recommendations to the
applicable reviewing board, where appropriate, for action to be
taken regarding the waiver of particular technical requirements or
imposition of design standards;
5. Require any major application for development to be resubmitted
to the committee for subsequent review if determined to be
incomplete or not in compliance with the provisions of the land
development regulations of the Township;
6. Review and comment on such other matters as may be requested
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment;
§ 39-12.15 EDISON CODE § 39-12.15
AO:1136
§ 39-12.16. Permits and Certificates; Building Lot to Abut Street;
Exception. [1999 Code § 18.28.160; Ord. No. O.1603-2007§ I]
7. Grant or deny any applications submitted to it seeking a waiver of
the requirement to install sidewalks, curbs, and gutters pursuant to
Chapter 36, subsection 36-11.2, paragraph h.
e. Application Submission and Review Procedure.
1. The Technical Review Committee, in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph d., shall review all development
applications presented to it.
2. For an application to be reviewed by the Technical Review
Committee, all of the documents which constitute a complete
application must be received by the administrative officer at least
thirty-five (35) days prior to the date of the scheduled technical
review committee meeting. All revisions to documents which are
part of an application certified to be complete must also be
submitted no later than at least ten (10) days prior to the date of a
subsequent Technical Review Committee meeting at which such
revisions are to be reviewed. All time frames set forth herein shall
be deemed of the essence for purposes of compliance.
3. No application for development shall be scheduled for review by
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment until such time as the
Technical Review Committee has deemed it complete and has
certified, that the applicant has complied with all of the provisions
of the land development regulations of the Township. Waiver of the
above may only occur in the event that the Technical Review
Committee determines that any particular recommendation(s) and/
or requirement(s) cannot be addressed prior to a public hearing by
the appropriate reviewing board.
a. No permit for the erection of a building or structure shall be issued
unless the lot abuts an approved street giving access to such proposed
building or structure.
b. Where the enforcement of paragraph a. above requiring a building lot
to abut a street would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship or where the circumstances of the case do not require the
building or structure to be related to a street, the Board of Adjustment
or Planning Board, as the case may be, may, upon application, vary the
application of this subsection and grant the issuance of a permit,
subject to conditions, if warranted. Section 39-5 and subsection 39-7.4
shall apply to applications or appeals pursuant to this subsection.
c. An individual seeking to construct a new home on a conforming lot, not
forming part of any subdivision, shall install sidewalks, curbs, gutters
and drywells unless the owner thereof can demonstrate to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Township Engineer that the installation of
§ 39-12.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.16
AO:1137
§ 39-12.17. Conditional Building Permits. [1999 Code § 18.28.170]
No building permit shall be issued in any instance where final site plan or
final subdivision approval is required, except that issuance of permits for
site development, including clearing and grading, is permitted subject to
the requirements of Chapter 36.
§ 39-12.18. Schedule of Application Fees. [1999 Code § 18.28.180;
Ord. No. O.1547-2007; Ord. No. O.1574-2007§ 1]
one (1) or more of these improvements is not practicable under the
circumstances. The decision of the Township Engineer shall be binding
upon the property owner. Any waiver granted by the Township Engineer
shall be conditioned upon the payment by the property owner of a sum
equal to the cost of the installation of the sidewalks, curbs, gutters
and drywells (or any of these items so waived) which would otherwise
have to be installed. The calculation of the payment shall be based
upon estimates prepared by the property owner or its engineer and
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval. The funds
shall be deposited into the Township's general operating account and
be realized as general revenue of the Township.
d. No permit for the erection of a building or structure which does not
require subdivision or site plan approval shall be issued for any lot
unless and until the applicant shall submit a site grading plan which
shall be approved by the Township Engineer, unless the same is waived
by the Planning Board.
a. Purpose.
1. The fees listed below, for applications for the rendering of any
approval by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment
or for any administrative staff for the enforcement of Chapters 36
and 37, are required in order to defray the costs incurred by the
Township. Every application for development shall be accompanied
by a check payable to the Township. The application fee is a flat
charge to cover direct administrative expenses and is
nonrefundable.
2. All fees set forth are for various application types, and if an
application has a request for approval of more than one (1) type,
the fee to be paid shall be equal to the sum of the fee for each type
of application.
b. Application for Subdivision. The fees for applications for subdivision
shall be as follows:
1. Minor subdivision plat: three hundred ($300.00) dollars, plus an
additional fifteen ($15.00) dollars per lot proposed to be created.
2. Preliminary subdivision plat: five hundred ($500.00) dollars, plus
an additional fifteen ($15.00) dollars per lot to be created.
§ 39-12.16 EDISON CODE § 39-12.18
AO:1138
3. Final subdivision plat: three hundred ($300.00) dollars, plus an
additional fifteen ($15.00) dollars per lot proposed to be created.
4. Concept plat: two hundred ($200.00) dollars.
5. Resubmission of any revised plan: one-third (1/3) of the original
submission fee.
c. Application for Site Plans. The fees for application for site plans shall be
as follows:
1. Minor site plan: three hundred ($300.00) dollars.
2. Preliminary site plan: five hundred ($500.00) dollars; plus:
(a) For nonresidential preliminary site plans:
(1) A sum equal to three ($0.03) cents per square foot of
building area for the first ten thousand (10,000) feet of
building, plus
(2) A sum equal to one ($0.01) cent per square foot of building
area for the next ninety thousand (90,000) square feet of
building area, plus
(3) A sum equal to five-tenths ($0.005) cent per square foot of
a building area for all square footage of building area in
excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet;
(b) For residential preliminary site plans:
(1) Ten ($10.00) dollars per unit to be developed up to five
hundred (500) units.
(2) Five ($5.00) dollars per unit for every unit to be developed
over five hundred (500) units.
3. Final site plan: three hundred ($300.00) dollars or one third (1/3) of
the fee paid for preliminary site plan application, whichever is
greater.
4. Concept site plan: two hundred ($200.00) dollars.
5. General development plan: three hundred ($300.00) dollars.
6. Resubmission of any revised plan: one-third (1/3) of the original
submission fee.
d. Variances, Appeals, Vacations and Interpretations. The fees for
variances, appeals and interpretations shall be as follows:
1. Appeals per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a: one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
2. Interpretations per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: seventy-five ($75.00)
dollars.
§ 39-12.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.18
AO:1139
3. Hardship (bulk variances) per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c: one hundred
twenty-five ($125.00) dollars per variance.
4. Use variance per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: two hundred fifty ($250.00)
dollars per variance.
5. Permit per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-35: one hundred fifty
($150.00) dollars.
6. Appeal to Township Council: two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars.
7. Conditional use application: two hundred ($200.00) dollars (in
addition to any other site plan or subdivision fees which may also
be required).
8. Request for rezoning: five hundred ($500.00) dollars for any
rezoning request made by a property owner (other than for a
rezoning initiated by the Township or any of its constituent boards,
bodies or agencies).
9. Request by private property owners for the vacation of a public
road or portion thereof pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-21: One hundred
($100.00) dollars. No such application fee shall be required if the
vacation is initiated by the Township.
e. Other Fees. Other fees shall be as follows:
1. For a certified list of property owners: twenty-five ($0.25) cents per
name or ten ($10.00) dollars, whichever is greater.
2. For a copy of transcripts prepared at cost to the Township: one
dollar and fifty ($1.50) cents per page for first copy of the page,
plus fifty ($0.50) cents per copy of each additional copy of the page.
The estimated amount of the cost shall be deposited into an escrow
account.
3. Copy of minutes or decisions:
(a) One (1) to ten (10) copies: fifty ($0.50) cents per page.
(b) Eleven (11) to twenty (20) copies: twenty-five ($0.25) cents per
page.
(c) Twenty-one (21) plus copies: ten ($0.10) cents per page.
4. Capital project review: one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
5. Waiver request of Township design standards: seventy-five ($75.00)
dollars per each standard waiver requested.
f. Payment of Fees. All fees listed above shall be paid to the Edison
Township administrative officer at the time of the application.
g. Miscellaneous.
§ 39-12.18 EDISON CODE § 39-12.18
AO:1140
§ 39-12.19. Guarantees Required; Surety; Release. [1999 Code
§ 18.28.190; Ord. No. O.2000-2018]
1. Where one (1) application for development includes several
approval requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be
paid.
2. Each applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall agree, in
writing, to pay all reasonable costs for professional review of the
application, including costs incurred with any informal review of a
concept plan which may have preceded the submission of a
preliminary application. Additionally, each applicant shall agree, in
writing, to pay all reasonable costs for the municipal inspection of
the constructed improvement. All such costs for review and
inspection must be paid before any construction permit is issued,
and all remaining costs must be paid in full before any occupancy of
the premises is permitted or a certificate of occupancy issued.
3. If an applicant desires a court reporter, the cost of taking testimony
and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to the
Township shall be at the expense of the applicant, who shall
arrange for the reporter's attendance. One (1) copy of each
transcript prepared shall be made available to the Township at no
cost to the Township.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a waiver of not
more than fifty (50%) percent of all municipal subdivision and site
plan application fees may be granted by the approving municipal
agency for all housing units being provided by the applicant for
low- and moderate-income families.
a. Before filing of final subdivision plats or recording of minor subdivision
deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to
the issuance of a zoning permit the Township may require and shall
accept in accordance with the standards adopted by this subsection,
and regulations adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a for the
purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain on-tract
improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee in accordance with paragraphs
1 and 2. For any successor developer, as a condition to the approval of a
permit update under the State Uniform Construction Code, for the
purpose of updating the name and address of the owner of property on
a construction permit, the Township Council shall accept in accordance
with the standards adopted by this subsection for the purpose of
assuring the installation and maintenance of certain on-tract
improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee, in accordance with paragraphs
1 and 2.
1. (a) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor
of the Township in an amount not to exceed one hundred
§ 39-12.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.19
AO:1141
twenty (120%) percent of the cost of installation of only those
improvements required by an approval or developer's
agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be dedicated to a public
entity, and that have not yet been installed, which cost shall
be determined by the Township Engineer, according to the
method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, for
the following improvements as shown on the approved plans
or plat: streets, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street
lighting, street trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the
final map and required by "the map filing law"
(N.J.S.A.46:26B-1 through N.J.S.A. 46:26B-8), water mains,
sanitary sewers, community septic systems, drainage
structures, public improvements of open space, and any
grading necessitated by the preceding improvements.
The Township Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate
of the improvements covered by the performance guarantee,
which itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each
performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
(b) The Township may also require a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development
privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as required by
local ordinance or imposed as a condition of approval.
At the developer's option, a separate performance guarantee
may be posted for the privately-owned perimeter buffer
landscaping.
(c) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building,
or phase of development, as a condition of the issuance
thereof, the developer shall furnish a separate guarantee,
referred to herein as a "temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee," in favor of the Township in an amount equal to one
hundred twenty (120%) percent of the cost of installation of
only those improvements or items which remain to be
completed or installed under the terms of the temporary
certificate of occupancy and which are required to be installed
or completed as a condition precedent to the issuance of the
permanent certificate of occupancy for the development, unit,
lot, building or phase of development and which are not
covered by an existing performance guarantee. Upon posting
of a "temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee," all sums
remaining under a performance guarantee, required pursuant
to subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, which relate to the
development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development for
which the temporary certificate of occupancy is sought, shall
be released.
§ 39-12.19 EDISON CODE § 39-12.19
AO:1142
The scope and amount of the "temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee" shall be determined by the Township
Engineer. At no time may the Township hold more than one
guarantee or bond of any type with respect to the same line
item. The temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall
be released by the Township Engineer upon the issuance of
a permanent certificate of occupancy with regard to the
development, unit, lot, building, or phase as to which the
temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
(d) A developer shall furnish to the Township a "safety and
stabilization guarantee," in favor of the Township. At the
developer's option, a "safety and stabilization guarantee" may
be furnished either as a separate guarantee or as a line item of
the performance guarantee. A "safety and stabilization
guarantee" shall be available to the Township solely for the
purpose of returning property that has been disturbed to a safe
and stable condition or otherwise implementing measures to
protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable
condition, only in the circumstance that:
(1) site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work
on the development has ceased for a period of at least sixty
(60) consecutive days following such commencement for
reasons other than force majeure, and
(2) work has not recommenced within thirty (30) days
following the provision of written notice by the Township
to the developer of the Township's intent to claim payment
under the guarantee. The Township shall not provide
notice of its intent to claim payment under a "safety and
stabilization guarantee" until a period of at least sixty (60)
days has elapsed during which all work on the
development has ceased for reasons other than force
majeure. The Township shall provide written notice to a
developer by certified mail or other form of delivery
providing evidence of receipt.
The amount of a "safety and stabilization guarantee" for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars
shall be five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars.
The amount of a "safety and stabilization guarantee" for
a development with bonded improvements exceeding one
hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars shall be
calculated as a percentage of the bonded improvement
costs of the development or phase of development as
follows: five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars for the first one
hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars of bonded
improvement costs, plus two and a half percent of bonded
§ 39-12.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.19
AO:1143
improvement costs in excess of one hundred thousand
($100,000.00) dollars up to one million ($1,000,000.00)
dollars, plus one percent of bonded improvement costs in
excess of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars.
The Township shall release a separate "safety and
stabilization guarantee" to a developer upon the
developer's furnishing of a performance guarantee which
includes a line item for safety and stabilization in the
amount required under this paragraph, or upon the
Township Engineer's determination that the development
of the project site has reached a point that the
improvements installed are adequate to avoid any
potential threat to public safety.
2. (a) The developer shall post with the Township, prior to the
release of a performance guarantee required pursuant to
subparagraph (a), subparagraph (b), or both subparagraph (a)
and subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of this subsection, a
maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed fifteen
(15%) percent of the cost of the installation of the
improvements which are being released.
(b) If required, the developer shall post with the Township, upon
the inspection and issuance of final approval of the following
private site improvements by the Township Engineer, a
maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed fifteen
(15%) percent of the cost of the installation of the following
private site improvements: stormwater management basins, inflow
and water quality structures within the basins, and the
out-flow pipes and structures of the stormwater management
system, if any, which cost shall be determined by the municipal
engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
(c) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period
not to exceed two (2) years and shall automatically expire at
the end of the established term.
3. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by
the Township for such utilities or improvements.
b. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
Township Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed one
§ 39-12.19 EDISON CODE § 39-12.19
AO:1144
hundred twenty (120%) percent of the cost of the installation, which
cost shall be determined by the Township Engineer according to the
method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of
the passage of the resolution.
c. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements
shall be subject to the public bidding requirements of the "Local Public
Contracts Law," N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1, et seq.
d. 1. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements,
and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
request of the Township Council in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Township Clerk, that the Township
Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to subsection a. of this section, a
list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed bonded
improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a
copy of the request to the Township Engineer. The request shall
indicate which bonded improvements have been completed and
which bonded improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment
of the obligor. Thereupon the Township Engineer shall inspect all
bonded improvements covered by obligor's request and shall file a
detailed list and report, in writing, with the Township Council, and
shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later
than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the obligor's request.
2. The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each bonded improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and
extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed bonded improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
The report prepared by the Township Engineer shall identify each
bonded improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection a.
of this section.
e. 1. The Township Council, by resolution, shall either approve the
bonded improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory
§ 39-12.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.19
AO:1145
by the Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to subsection a. of this section.
This resolution shall be adopted not later than forty-five (45) days
after receipt of the list and report prepared by the Township
Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Council,
the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee, with respect to those approved bonded
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet
approved; provided that thirty (30%) percent of the amount of
the total performance guarantee and "safety and stabilization
guarantee" posted may be retained to ensure completion and
acceptability of all improvements
The "safety and stabilization guarantee" shall be reduced by the
same percentage as the performance guarantee is being reduced at
the time of each performance guarantee reduction. For the purpose
of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee the amount of the performance guarantee attributable
to each approved bonded improvement shall be reduced by the
total amount for each such improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection a.
of this section, including any contingency factor applied to the cost
of installation. If the sum of the approved bonded improvements
would exceed seventy (70%) percent of the total amount of the
performance guarantee, then the Township may retain thirty (30%)
percent of the amount of the total performance guarantee and
"safety and stabilization guarantee " to ensure completion and
acceptability of bonded improvements, as provided above, except
that any amount of the performance guarantee attributable to
bonded improvements for which a "temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee" has been posted shall be released from the
performance guarantee even if such release would reduce the
amount held by the Township below (30%) percent.
2. If the Township Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report
as requested by the obligor pursuant to subsection d. of this section
within forty-five (45) days from receipt of the request, the obligor
may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order
compelling the Township Engineer to provide the list and report
within a stated time and the cost of applying to the court, including
reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
§ 39-12.19 EDISON CODE § 39-12.19
AO:1146
If the Township Council fails to approve or reject the bonded
improvements determined by the Township Engineer to be
complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for
the complete and satisfactory improvements within forty-five (45)
days from the receipt of the Township Engineer's list and report,
the obligor may apply to the court in a summary manner for an
order compelling, within a stated time, approval of the complete
and satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in the
performance guarantee for the approvable complete and
satisfactory improvements in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to subsection a. of this section;
and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
3. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
Township as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial
reduction granted in the performance guarantee pursuant to this
subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same
proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of
the performance guarantee, provided that if the developer has
furnished a "safety and stabilization guarantee," the Township may
retain cash equal to the amount of the remaining "safety and
stabilization guarantee."
f. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
Township Engineer may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
g. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Township Council or the Township Engineer.
h. 1. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; which fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts
set forth in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph. The
Township may require the developer to post the inspection fees in
escrow in an amount:
(a) not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of five hundred ($500.00) dollars or five (5%) percent
of the cost of bonded improvements that are subject to a
performance guarantee under subparagraph (a),
subparagraph (b), or both subparagraph (a) and subparagraph
(b) of paragraph 1. of subsection a. of this section; and
(b) not to exceed five (5%) percent of the cost of private site
improvements that are not subject to a performance guarantee
under subparagraph (a) of paragraph 1. of subsection a. of this
§ 39-12.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.19
AO:1147
section, which cost shall be determined pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4.
2. For those developments for which the inspection fees total less
than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars, fees may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in two (2) installments. The initial amount
deposited in escrow by a developer shall be fifty (50%) percent of
the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops to ten
(10%) percent of the inspection fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Township Engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit the
remaining fifty (50%) percent of the inspection fees.
3. For those developments for which the inspection fees total ten
thousand ($10,000.00) dollars or greater, fees may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount
deposited in escrow by a developer shall be twenty-five (25%)
percent of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to ten (10%) percent of the inspection fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to
the Township Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make
additional deposits of twenty-five (25%) percent of the inspection
fees.
4. If the Township determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated pursuant to
subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 1. of this subsection, is
insufficient to cover the cost of additional required inspections, the
Township may require the developer to deposit additional funds in
escrow provided that the Township delivers to the developer a
written inspection escrow deposit request, signed by the Township
Engineer, which: informs the developer of the need for additional
inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
i. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38(a), the provisions of this section shall be
applied by stage or section.
j. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Township on the subdivision plat or site plan, the Township Council
shall be deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee
required pursuant to subsection a. of this section, to accept dedication
for public use of streets or roads and any other improvements made
thereon according to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the
Township Engineer.
§ 39-12.19 EDISON CODE § 39-12.20
AO:1148
§ 39-12.20. Special Meetings of Boards. [1999 Code § 18.28.200]
Upon request of the applicant, the Planning or Zoning Board of Adjustment
may call for a special meeting to conduct a public hearing or otherwise
consider an application for development, provided that, in such event,
the applicant shall pay a fee of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars to the
Township to defray the costs associated with attendance of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment staff.
§ 39-12.21. Off-Tract Improvements. [1999 Code § 18.28.210]
a. Improvements to be Constructed at the Sole Expense of the Applicant.
In cases where the need for an off-tract improvement is created by the
proposed subdivision or site plan and where no other property owners
receive a special benefit thereby, the Board may recommend to the
Governing Body that it require the applicant, as a condition for
subdivision or site plan approval, at the applicant's expense, to acquire
lands outside of the subdivision or tract and improve and dedicate such
lands to the municipality or the County or, in lieu thereof, require the
applicant to deposit with the municipality a sum of money sufficient to
allow the municipality to acquire and to improve such lands.
b. Other Improvements.
1. In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is created by
the proposed subdivision or site plan and where the Board
determines that properties outside the subdivision or tract will also
be benefited by the improvement, the Board shall forthwith
forward to the Governing Body a list and description of all such
improvements, together with its request that the Governing Body
determine and advise the Board of the procedure to be followed in
the construction or installation thereof. The Board shall defer final
action upon the subdivision or site plan until receipt of the
Governing Body's determination or until the expiration of ninety
(90) days after the forwarding of such list and description to the
Governing Body without such determination having been made,
whichever occurs sooner.
2. The Governing Body, within ninety (90) days after receipt of said
list and description, shall determine and advise the Board whether:
(a) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or
installed by the municipality:
(1) As a general improvement, the cost of which is to be borne
at general expense (except as hereinafter otherwise
provided as the applicant's pro rata share); or
(2) As a local improvement, all or part of the cost of which is to
be specially assessed against the properties benefited
thereby, in proportion to the benefits conferred by the
improvements in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.,
§ 39-12.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.21
AO:1149
except as hereinafter otherwise provided as the
applicant's pro rata share pursuant to as hereinafter
provided.
(b) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or
installed by the applicant under a formula for partial
reimbursement as hereinafter set forth.
3. If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under paragraph
b2(a)(1) above, the board shall estimate, with the aid of the
Municipal Engineer or such other persons as have pertinent
information or expertise, the amount, if any, by which the total cost
thereof will exceed the total amount by which all properties,
including the subdivision or tract, will be specially benefited
thereby, and the applicant shall be liable to the municipality for
such excess. Further, the Governing Body shall adopt an ordinance
authorizing and providing for the financing of the improvement or
improvements in a manner consistent with the obligation of the
applicant for any excess of total cost over the total benefits
conferred, as set forth above.
4. If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under paragraph
b2(a)(2) above, the Board shall, as provided in paragraph b3 above,
estimate the difference between the total costs to be incurred and
the total amount by which all properties, including the subdivision
property or tract, will be specifically benefited by the improvement,
and the applicant shall be liable to the municipality therefor, as well
as for the amount of any special assessments against the
subdivision property or tract for benefits conferred by the
improvement or improvements and the assessment of benefits
arising therefrom, in a manner consistent with the accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq., except to the extent modified by the
obligation of the applicant for any excess of total costs over total
benefits conferred, as set forth above.
5. If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements are to be constructed or installed by the applicant
under paragraph b2(b), the Board shall, in like manner, estimate
the amount of such excess. The applicant shall be liable to the
municipality therefor, as well as for the amount of any special
assessments against the subdivision property or tract for benefits
conferred by the improvement or improvements. However, the
applicant shall be entitled to be reimbursed by the municipality for
the amount of any special assessments against property other than
the subdivision property or tract for benefits conferred by the
improvement or improvements. Proceedings under said ordinance
shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq. However, any
such assessment against the subdivision property or tract shall be
§ 39-12.21 EDISON CODE § 39-12.21
AO:1150
marked "paid" and satisfied in consideration of the construction or
installation of the improvement or improvements by the applicant.
6. If the Governing Body shall not adopt such an ordinance or
resolution within said time, the final subdivision layout or site plan
shall be designed accordingly, and the Board shall thereupon grant
or deny final approval.
c. Performance Guaranty. The applicant shall be required to provide, as a
condition for final approval of the applicant's subdivision or site plan
application, a performance guaranty running to the municipality as
follows:
1. If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant under
paragraph a. or under paragraph b2(b) above, a performance bond
with surety in an amount equal to one hundred twenty (120%)
percent of the estimated cost of the improvement or, as to any part
of the improvement that is to be acquired or installed by the
municipality under said paragraph a., a cash deposit equal to the
estimated cost of such acquisition or installation by the
municipality.
2. If the improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a
general improvement under paragraph b2(a)(1), a cash deposit
equal to the amount of the excess of the estimated cost of the
improvement over the estimated total amount by which all
properties, including the subdivision property or tract, will be
specially benefited thereby.
3. If the improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a
local improvement under paragraph b2(a)(2), a cash deposit equal
to the amount by which the subdivision property or tract will be
specially benefited by the improvement.
d. Refund of Deposit Where Improvements are not Authorized Within Ten
(10) Years. In any case in which an applicant shall deposit money with
the municipality for the completion of an improvement that is to be
constructed pursuant to this chapter by the municipality, the applicant
shall be entitled to a full refund of such deposit if the Governing Body
shall not have enacted an ordinance authorizing the improvement
within ten (10) years after the date of all other improvement are
completed.
e. Deposit of Funds. All moneys paid by an applicant pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited with the municipality, and a suitable
depository shall be established for such moneys. Such funds shall be
used only for the improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements serving the same purpose.
f. Redetermination of Assessment Upon Completion of Improvement.
Upon the completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to
this section, the applicant's liability hereunder shall be recalculated in
§ 39-12.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.21
AO:1151
§ 39-12.22. Inspections and Tests. [1999 Code § 18.28.220]
accordance with the actual, as compared with the estimated, cost of the
improvements. To the extent that it shall decrease the amount thereof,
the municipality shall forthwith refund the amount of such decrease
to the applicant. In cases where improvements are specially assessed
against all benefited properties, recalculation shall be made by the
municipal assessing authority in the course of the special assessment
proceedings. In other cases, it shall be made by the Municipal Engineer.
g. Governing Body Approval Required. All estimates required to be made
by the Board herein shall be reviewed and approved by the Governing
Body.
a. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during the
time of their installation under the supervision of the Municipal
Engineer or a qualified representative to ensure satisfactory
completion. The cost of the inspection shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. The applicant shall deposit with the custodian of the
professional escrow account a sum equal to five (5%) percent of the
amount of the total improvement cost of the project. Such funds shall be
used by the municipality only for purposes relating to the application
and shall be expended only for the actual outlays incurred as a result of
the application. If actual inspection costs based upon time and expense
records are less than the five (5%) percent deposited, the balance shall
be returned to the applicant.
b. In no case shall any paving work, including prime and seal costs, be
commenced without permission from the Municipal Engineer. At least
two (2) days' notice shall be given to the Municipal Engineer prior to
any such construction so that the Municipal Engineer or a qualified
representative may be present at the time the work is to be done.
c. The Municipal Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the
following phases of the work has been completed so that the Municipal
Engineer or a qualified representative may inspect the work:
1. Road subgrade;
2. Curb and gutter forms;
3. Curbs and gutters;
4. Road paving;
5. Sidewalk forms;
6. Sidewalks;
7. Drainage pipes and other drainage or flood-control facilities;
8. Street name signs;
§ 39-12.21 EDISON CODE § 39-12.22
AO:1152
§ 39-12.23. Schedule of Escrow Deposit Fees. [1999 Code
§ 18.28.230; Ord. No. O.1525-2006; Ord. No. O.1547-2007; Ord. No.
O.1574-2007§ 2]
The escrow deposit fees are established to cover the costs of professional
services, including but not limited to: engineering, legal, planning,
landscaping, traffic, environmental and other expenses incurred by the
9. Monuments;
10. Soil disturbance activities;
d. A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be initiated
within ten (10) days of written notification by the applicant, to
determine whether the work is satisfactory and in agreement with the
approved final drawings and the municipal specifications. The general
condition of the site shall be considered. Upon a satisfactory final
inspection report, action shall be taken to release or declare in default
the performance guaranty covering such improvements and utilities.
e. Inspection by the municipality of the installation of improvements and
utilities shall not operate to subject the municipality to liability for
claims, suits or liability of any kind that may at any time arise because
of defects or negligence during construction or at any time thereafter. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant and the applicant's
contractors, if any, to maintain safe conditions at all times during
construction and to provide proper utilities and improvements.
f. Upon the substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of the same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the Governing Body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion or
substantial completion of the improvements and shall simultaneously
send a certified copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer. As-built plans
must be presented to the Municipal Engineer before improvements can
be inspected. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notice and
the as-built plans, the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all of the
improvements of which such notice has been given and file a detailed
report, in writing, with the Governing Body, indicating either approval,
partial approval or rejection of such improvements, with a statement of
the reasons for any rejection. The costs of the improvements as
approved or rejected shall be set forth.
g. The Municipal Council may reduce by fifty (50%) percent the fees to be
imposed by this section for the connection to the sewer system of any
commercial or industrial building or structure which is located within a
designated "area in need of rehabilitation and development" in
accordance with this Code and which is subject to a tax abatement
agreement with the Township as authorized by this Code and N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1, et seq. "The Five Year Exemption and Abatement Law."
§ 39-12.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.23
AO:1153
Township for the review of submitted materials for specific development
applications.
a. Escrow Deposits for Professional Services.
1. The Township, acting through its Planning board and/or board of
adjustment shall require fees for technical and/or professional
services and testimony employed to the Board in reviewing an
application. Fees required for this purpose shall be held in an
escrow account by the Township.
2. Fees for technical and/or professional services shall be in addition
to any and all other required fees.
3. The applicant shall pay for professional review services which are
reasonably necessary for the review, processing, research and/or
memorialization of any application for development. These services
may include, but need not be limited to, an attorney, professional
planner, professional engineer, traffic engineer, environmental
consultant and/or other professional as deemed reasonable and
necessary by the reviewing board.
4. If the Board determines that because of the complexity of an
application, the services of a traffic engineer or professional other
than engineer, planner and attorney are needed, an additional
escrow fee equal to the cost of the services may be required before
the next scheduled hearing.
5. All costs for the review and inspection of any application for
development shall be paid before any construction permit is issued,
and all remaining costs shall be paid in full before an occupancy of
the premises is permitted or a certificate of occupancy issued.
6. The review services of these professionals shall be charged at the
hourly rate authorized or paid by the Township for professional
services based upon the current fee schedule.
7. Each applicant shall provide the Township with a Federal tax
identification number or Federal social security number.
8. All payments charged to the individual application escrow deposit
shall be pursuant to charges from the professionals stating the
hours spent, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. The
municipality shall render a written final accounting to the
developer on the uses to which the escrow deposit was put.
Thereafter, the municipality shall, upon written request, provide
copies of the vouchers to the developer.
9. If the salary, staff support and overhead for a professional review
are provided by the municipality, the charge to the escrow deposit
shall not exceed two hundred (200%) percent of the sum of the
products resulting from multiplying the hourly base salary of each
§ 39-12.23 EDISON CODE § 39-12.23
AO:1154
of the in-house professionals and support staff by the number
of hours spent on the respective review of the application for
development. For other professionals, the charge to the deposit
shall be at the same rate as all other work of the same nature by
the professionals for the municipality.
b. Exception from Escrow Deposit Requirements.
1. A waiver of not more than fifty (50%) percent of all municipal
subdivision, site plan and/or variance escrow fees may be granted
by the approving municipal agency for all housing units being
provided by the applicant for low- and moderate-income families
consistent with the criteria established by the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing.
2. Residential fencing, decks, pools and minor residential building
additions of less than three hundred (300) square feet gross floor
area shall be exempt from escrow deposit requirements.
3. Development of or improvement to one (1) single-family dwelling
on an existing lot where no off-tract improvements or municipal
improvements which extend beyond the frontage of the lot are
involved shall be exempt from escrow deposit.
4. When the reviewing board determines that the application will
serve a public purpose and promote the public health, safety and
welfare, the following applicants shall submit fifty (50%) percent of
the required escrow deposit:
(a) Public organizations and/or agencies;
(b) Charitable and/or philanthropic organizations;
(c) Fraternal and/or religious nonprofit organizations.
5. Any organization qualifying for paragraph b4(b) above must hold a
tax-exempt status under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of
1954 (26 U.S.C. Section 501(c) or (d)).
6. The Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment may, at its
discretion, waive the requirement for submission of additional
escrow deposit fees for the resubmission of the second or
subsequent set of revised plans or applications when fifty (50%)
percent of the previously submitted escrow deposit funds remain
available and unused in the escrow deposit account of that
particular applicant.
c. Submission of Escrow Deposit.
1. The applicant shall submit the required escrow deposit to the
administrative officer prior to the application being reviewed for
completeness. No application shall be determined complete,
§ 39-12.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.23
AO:1155
reviewed by professional staff or placed on the agenda for public
hearing until the required escrow deposit is paid.
2. Required escrow deposits shall be in the form of cash, money order
or check payable to the Township.
d. Escrow for Informal Review.
1. Whenever an applicant requires an informal review of an
application for development, involving technical or professional
advisors, an escrow deposit shall be required in accordance with
the schedule for formal applications. The deposit must be received
prior to professional review. There shall be a fee assessed for each
informal review that might be required for any reason.
2. Informal review fees shall be as follows:
(a) Minor subdivision or minor site plan: one hundred ($100.00)
dollars.
(b) Major subdivision, major site plan or use variance: five
hundred ($500.00) dollars.
(c) Request by private property owners for the vacation of a public
road or portion thereof pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:66-21: two
thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars. No such escrow
shall be required if the vacation is initiated by the Township.
3. Any escrow deposit received for informal review shall be credited
to the required escrow deposit for formal applications. The cost for
professional services involved in the informal review shall be
considered part of the formal application review and charged to the
escrow account.
4. Capital project review fees shall be seven hundred fifty ($750.00)
dollars.
e. Schedule of Required Fees for Escrow Deposits. The following sums are
required to be deposited in an escrow account for applications to the
Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances.
(a) Bulk (hardship) variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, not
requiring site plan or subdivision approval: one hundred
($100.00) dollars.
(b) Variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, not requiring site plan or
subdivision approval (use, etc.): two thousand five hundred
($2,500.00) dollars.
(c) Conditional use approval (fees shall be in addition to site plan
approval): one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
§ 39-12.23 EDISON CODE § 39-12.23
AO:1156
2. Site Plan Applications (Fees Shall be in Addition to any Required
Variances).
(a) Residential Site Plan (Involving Dwelling Units).
(1) Preliminary approval:
Number of Units Fee
1 to 9 $3,000.00
10 to 25 $4,500.00
26 to 50 $6,000.00
51 to 100 $7,500.00
101 to 250 $10,000.00
251 to 500 $12,000.00
Over 500 $14,000.00
(2) Final approval: twenty (20) percent of preliminary
approval escrow fee or a minimum of one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars whichever is greater.
(b) Nonresidential Site Plan (Not Involving Dwelling Units).
(1) Preliminary approval with principal buildings over one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Fee
1,001 to 2,500 $2,500.00
2,501 to 5,000 $4,000.00
5,001 to 10,000 $6,000.00
10,001 to 15,000 $8,000.00
15,001 to 20,000 $10,000.00
20,001 to 25,000 $12,500.00
25,001 to 100,000 $15,500.00
Over 100,000 $18,000.00
(2) Preliminary approval without principal buildings over one
thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area:
Lot Area Fee
Up to an acre $2,500.00
1 to 5 $4,000.00
5 to 10 $5,000.00
§ 39-12.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.23
AO:1157
Lot Area Fee
Over 10 $6,000.00
(3) Final approval: twenty (20%) percent of preliminary
approval escrow fee or a minimum of one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars, whichever is greater.
(4) Minor site plan: one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
3. 3 Subdivision Applications (Fees Shall be in Addition to any
Required Variances).
(a) Minor subdivision (three (3) lots or fewer): Two thousand five
hundred ($2,500.00) dollars.
(b) Preliminary subdivisions:
(1) Preliminary approval of four (4) to ten (10) lots: four
thousand ($4,000.00) dollars.
(2) Preliminary approval of eleven (11) to twenty-five (25) lots:
five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars.
(3) Preliminary approval of twenty-six (26) to fifty (50) lots: six
thousand ($6,000.00) dollars.
(4) Preliminary approval of fifty-one (51) to one hundred (100)
lots: eight thousand ($8,000.00) dollars.
(5) Preliminary approval of one hundred one (101) to two
hundred fifty (250) lots: ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars.
(6) Preliminary approval of two hundred fifty-one (251) to five
hundred (500) lots: twelve thousand ($12,000.00) dollars.
(7) Preliminary approval of over five hundred (500) lots:
fourteen thousand ($14,000.00) dollars.
(c) Final Subdivisions.
(1) Final approval of four (4) lots to twenty-five (25) lots: two
thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
(2) Final approval of twenty-six (26) lots to one hundred (100)
lots: three thousand ($3,000.00) dollars.
(3) Final approval of one hundred one (101) lots to five
hundred (500) lots: four thousand ($4,000.00) dollars.
(4) Final approval of over five hundred (500) lots: five
thousand ($5,000.00) dollars.
4. Planned Unit Development. Fees shall be as for a simultaneous
major site plan and major subdivision application, with fees for
§ 39-12.23 EDISON CODE § 39-12.23
AO:1158
residential and nonresidential development computed separately,
and thereafter cumulatively upon the applicant.
5. Concept Plan Applications.
(a) Minor subdivision or minor site plan: one hundred ($100.00)
dollars.
(b) Major subdivisions: five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
(c) All site plans with more than one thousand one (1,001) square
feet of gross floor area: five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
(d) Use variance application: five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
(e) All fees for concept plans or informal submission: to be
credited toward required escrow fees for the review of the
formal application for the same development.
6. General development plan: one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars (in
addition to any other site plan and/or subdivision fees which may
also be required).
7. Resubmissions.
(a) Applicants shall pay escrow deposit fees based upon thirtythree
(33%) percent of the original submission fee for each
resubmission of revised plans, including applications for use
variances, preliminary subdivisions, final subdivisions,
preliminary site plans, final site plans and planned unit
development applications.
(b) If plans are resubmitted in accordance with conditions of
approval by the appropriate board, the escrow deposit fee for
resubmission shall be one-third (1/3) of the original escrow fee.
8. Special Design Elements. Applicants shall pay escrow fees based
upon twenty (20%) percent of the original escrow fee, when and as
determined by the reviewing board that the proposed project
includes a special design consideration, such as but not limited to a
sanitary sewer pump station, detention or retention ponds, a
potable water storage facility, traffic signalization devices, off-tract
improvements, etc.
9. Request for Rezoning. Any property owner seeking a rezoning of its
property shall, in addition to the fee paid pursuant to subsection
39-12.18d8, pay an escrow fee of two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars.
10. Single Family Lot Where Off-Tract Improvements or Municipal
Improvements Which Extend Beyond Frontage of Lot. The
development of or improvement to an individual single family
dwelling on an existing lot where off-tract improvements or
municipal improvements extend beyond the frontage of the lot shall
§ 39-12.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.23
AO:1159
require the payment of an escrow fee of two thousand ($2,000.00)
dollars.
11. Single Family Lot Involving Construction in Flood Hazard Area. The
development of an improvement to an individual single family
dwelling on an existing lot involving construction in a flood hazard
area as set forth in Chapter 33, Flood Damage Prevention and
Protection, shall require the payment of an escrow of two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars.
f. Review of Escrow Deposit Amount.
1. Prior to making a determination of completeness upon any
application, the administrative official shall review the application
to determine whether the escrow amount set forth above is
sufficient. If the amount set forth is determined insufficient by the
administrative official or reviewing board to cover professional
costs anticipated for the application, additional funds in the amount
of one-third (1/3) of the initially required escrow fee shall be
deposited by the applicant prior to declaring the application
complete. The application shall not be declared complete or placed
on the agenda for public hearing until such additional escrow
deposit is received.
2. Further additional escrow deposit fees may be required at any time
upon determination by the reviewing board. All approvals shall be
conditional upon receipt of such additional fees deposited by the
applicant in increments of one-third (1/3) of the initially required
escrow fee, when and as determined necessary by the reviewing
board. No building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be
issued until all required escrow funds have been received.
g. Appeal of Escrow Fees. In the event that the applicant believes the fees
to be unreasonable, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall
hear and decide whether such fees are reasonable. The applicant may
appeal the decision of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment to the
Governing Body, provided that the applicant shall provide to the
Governing Body transcripts of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment hearing on fees, at his or her cost, and such appeal shall be
on the record. The Governing Body shall set a meeting date, with notice
to the applicant. The applicant may submit oral and/or written
arguments on the record, provided that the applicant provides a courtcertified
stenographer to record the meeting and provides a transcript
of the meeting. The Governing Body may reverse a Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment decision upon showing that the Board's decision is
not sustained by the preponderance of the evidence.
h. Escrow Deposit Submission. The escrow amount shall be deposited by
the Township into an official depository of the Township in a separate
interest-bearing escrow account in the name of the Township and the
applicant. The custodian of the account shall be the director of finance.
§ 39-12.23 EDISON CODE § 39-12.23
AO:1160
The custodian shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and
address of the depository and the amount of the deposit. Disbursements
for professional review services shall be made in accordance with State
law and Township procedures. Deposit amounts shall be transmitted
pursuant to State statute and applicable Township regulations and
ordinances. When charges for review fees are received by the custodian
of the escrow account, the amounts shall be transferred to the general
fund of the Township for approval and disbursements. In accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, sums not utilized in the review process shall
be returned to the applicant. If additional sums are deemed necessary,
the applicant shall be notified of the required additional amount and
shall add such sum to the escrow as detailed elsewhere in this
subsection.
i. Escrow Accounts Over Five Thousand Dollars; Conditions. Pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, whenever an amount of money in excess of five
thousand ($5,000.00) dollars shall be deposited by an applicant in the
Township for professional services employed by the Township to review
applications, the money, until repaid or applied to the purposes for
which it is deposited, including the applicant's portion of the interest
earned thereon, except as otherwise provided for therein, shall
continue to be the property of the applicant and shall be held in trust by
the municipality. Money deposited shall be held in escrow in an account
bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid by the institution or
depository on time or savings deposits. The Township shall notify the
applicant in writing of the name and address of the institution or
depository in which the deposit is made and the amount of the deposit.
The Township shall not refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit
which does not exceed one hundred ($100.00) dollars for the year. If the
amount of interest exceeds one hundred ($100.00) dollars, that entire
amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him or
her by the Township at the time that the unexpended deposit is repaid
or applied to the purpose for which it was deposited, as the case may
be; except that the Township shall retain for administrative expenses a
sum equivalent to no more than thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3%)
percent of that entire amount which shall be in lieu of all other
administrative and custodial expenses.
j. Accounting of Fees. In the event that any applicant desires an
accounting of the expenses or fees paid by him or her for professional
review, he or she shall request such in a letter directed to the
administrative officer. Such additional amount as may be required for
the accounting shall be paid to the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in the event
that there are insufficient escrow funds to pay for the account.
k. Refunds. All escrow funds described herein shall be utilized by the
appropriate board to pay the cost of any technical and/or professional
services incurred by the Board for review and/or testimony in
connection with the particular application. All funds not expended shall
§ 39-12.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-12.23
AO:1161
§ 39-12.24. Developers' Agreements. [1999 Code § 18.28.240; Ord.
No. O.1522-2006; Ord. No. O.1747-2020§ I]
§ 39-12.25. Mandatory Shorthand Reporter. [Ord. No. O.1540-2006]
be refunded to the applicant within one hundred twenty (120) days
after the final determination by the appropriate board with respect to
such application. No amount shall be refunded prior to certification by
the board secretary that the application has been finally determined.
l. Rules and Regulations. Pursuant to municipal Charter, the Township
shall promulgate rules and regulations for the administration of all
processing of the provisions of this escrow deposit ordinance in
compliance with all applicable Township ordinances and State laws.
a. Prior to the commencement of any on-site construction, there shall be
executed and delivered to the Township Council a developer's
agreement between the applicant and the Township of Edison
incorporating all of the terms and conditions of final approval, except
that such developer's agreement shall not be required for the following:
1. Minor subdivisions and minor site plans; or
2. Major subdivisions and/or major site plans for which the value of
site improvements as determined by an engineer's estimate (as
approved by the Township Engineer) does not exceed one hundred
thousand ($100,000.00) dollars; or
3. Major subdivisions in which no public improvements are required.
b. The Planning Board or Zoning Board, as the case may be, shall have the
right to specifically require a developer's agreement notwithstanding
the exceptions set forth in paragraphs a1, a2, or a3 hereinabove.
c. The developer's agreement shall be drawn by the Township Attorney
and shall be executed by the applicant. Legal fees incurred by the
Township associated with the preparation and negotiation of the
developer's agreement shall be paid by the applicant in accordance
with the fees established in subsection 39-12.23.
d. The developer's agreement shall be recorded against the affected
properties by the Township Attorney. Legal fees and recording fees
incurred by the Township associated with the recording of the
developer's agreement shall be paid by the applicant in accordance
with the fees established in subsection 39-12.23.
a. Any applicant for an application for development to either the Edison
Township Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board shall engage
the services of a certified shorthand reporter to document all hearings
regarding said land development application at his/her or its expense. A
copy of all transcripts shall be promptly provided to the board secretary
after each hearing at the applicant's expense.
§ 39-12.23 EDISON CODE § 39-12.25
AO:1162
§ 39-13. EMINENT DOMAIN. [Ord. No. O.1582-2007§ 2]
The Township of Edison is prohibited from exercising the power of eminent
domain to acquire property from a private landowner without acquiring the
private land owner's consent when the purpose or result of such acquisition
is to sell, transfer, lease, or in any way convey such property in whole or in
part, to any private entity or party.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word Special or the word NCM in
the Disposition column indicates material that is special in nature/non-Code
material and has not been included in the Code.
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1754-201100-27-10 Appropriation Special 6
O.1755-201100-27-10 General Fees 2-128.2 6
O.1756-201100-27-10 Traffic Control Signal 7-42 6
O.1757-201100-27-10 Traffic Control Signal 7-42 6
O.1758-201101-10-10 Shared Services
Agreement with
Woodbridge Township
Elevator Subcode
Special 6
b. This requirement shall apply to all applications for development except
for the following:
1. Minor subdivisions;
2. Minor site plans;
3. Stand alone "c" variance applications under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c)(1) or (2); and
4. Any application for development for which a waiver of this
requirement shall have been granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board (as the case may be), at its sole
discretion.
§ 39-12.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1163
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1759-201101-10-10 Rename Washington
Lincoln Gateway to
Washington Lincoln
Veterans Park
Special 6
O.1760-201101-22-10 Township Clerk 2-5.1, 2-5.2,
2-5.9
6
O.1761-201101-22-10 Salary Ordinance Special 6
O.1762-201102-8-10 No stopping or
standing
7-11 6
O.1763-201D0ied 6
O.1764-20121-24-11 Acceptance of
easement
Special 6
O.1765-201T1abled 6
O.1766-20131-30-11 Powers of the Mayor 2-1.1 6
O.1767-20131-30-11 Mayor's staff 2-1.2 6
O.1768-20141-13-11 Parking prohibited at
all times
7-14 6
O.1769-20141-13-11 Township employees;
reorganization of labor
forces
2-91 6
O.1770-20151-25-11 Riparian Zone Ch. XXXVIII 7
O.1771-20151-11-11 Acceptance of
easement
Special 7
O.1772-20151-11-11 Acceptance of
easement
Special 7
O.1773-20151-11-11 Refund bond Special 7
O.1774-20151-25-11 Residential permit
parking
7-17 7
O.1775-20151-25-11 Division of Police and
Fire—decrease of
force for economic
reasons
2-35 7
O.1776-20161-8-11 Acquisition and
condemnation of
property
Special 7
O.1777-20181-24-11 Sale of property Special 7
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1164
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1778-20191-14-11 Traffic
signal—Vineyard Road
and Costco Wholesale
North Driveway
7
O.1779-201110-13-11 Massage, bodywork
and somatic therapy
establishments
11-11 8
O.1780-201111-9-11 Parking prohibited at
all times
7-14 8
O.1781-201111-21-11 Right-of-way
agreement
Special 8
O.1782-201111-21-11 Rezone property Special 8
O.1783-201112-28-11 Bond Special 8
O.1784-201111-21-11 Appropriation Special 8
O.1785-201112-14-11 Right-of-way
agreement
Special 8
O.1786-201112-14-11 Lease agreement Special 8
O.1787-201112-28-11 Rezone property Special 8
O.1788-201112-28-11 Acceptance of
easement
Special 8
O.1789-201112-28-11 Extend expiration date
of promotion
list—Patrol Officer to
Sergeant
2-29.5j 8
O.1790-2011 Tabled 8
O.1791-20122-24-12 Resident permit
parking
7-17 8
O.1792-20122-24-12 Adopt Redevelopment
Plan—Revlon Property
37-2.2 8
O.1793-20132-14-12 Human Resources
Officer; duties.
2-25.2 8
Hiring of
Applicants—Background
checks; drug and
alcohol tests; credit
checks
4-3.6 8
O.1794-20132-14-12 Purchasing
procedures.
2-24.3 8
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1165
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Division of Custody
and Disbursements
2-44.2 8
Furloughs 2-92 8
O.1795-20132-28-12 CAP Special 8
O.1796-20142-25-12 Off-street parking 37-60.3 9
O.1797-20152-9-12 Parks and recreation
fee schedule
24-4.1 9
O.1798-20152-9-12 Mid-block crosswalks 7-29 9
O.1799-20152-9-12 Salary Special 9
O.1800-20152-9-12 Firefighters—Entry
level criteria
2-33.5 9
O.1801-20162-13-12 Refuse containers/
dumpsters; private
storm drain inlet
retrofitting
34-3A,34-9 9
O.1802-20172-25-12 Salary Special 9
O.1803-20182-22-12 Traffic signal Special 9
O.1804-20182-22-12 Handicapped parking, 7-39.2 9
O.1805-20182-22-12 Emergency
appropriation
Special 9
O.1806-20182-22-12 Purchase of property Special 9
O.1807-20192-24-12 Purchase of property Special 10
O.1808-20192-24-12 Police
Department—Entry
level criteria
2-29.2 10
O.1809-201121-28-2012 Police firearms 2-30 10
O.1810-201N2ot adopted 10
O.1811-201120-11-12 Residential permit
parking
7-17 10
O.1812-201120-11-12 Rename portion of
street
Special 10
O.1813-201121-13-12 Bond Special 10
O.1814-201T2abled 10
O.1815-201T2abled 10
O.1816-201122-12-12 Salary Special 10
O.1817-201122-26-12 Bond Special 10
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1166
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1818-20113-24-13 Police firearms 2-30 10
O.1819-20113-24-13 Vacate street Special 10
O.1820-20113-24-13 Grant of easement Special 10
O.1821-20113-24-13 Duties of Mayor 2-1.2 10
O.1822-20123-13-13 Parking prohibited at
all times
7-14 10
O.1823-201T3abled 10
O.1824-20123-27-13 Tattoo, body art and
body piercing
11-12 10
O.1825-201T3abled 10
O.1826-20133-27-13 CAP Bank Special 10
O.1827-20133-27-13 Residential permit
parking
7-17 10
O.1828-20143-10-13 Inspection fees, life
hazard uses; smoke
detectors
16-1.3; 16-3.4 10
O.1829-20143-10-13 Purchase of property Special 10
O.1830-20143-10-13 Transfer of property Special 10
O.1831-20143-24-13 Kilmer Homes
Redevelopment Plan
Special 10
O.1832-20153-8-13 Acquisition of property Special 10
O.1833-20153-8-13 Lease of property Special 10
O.1834-20153-22-13 Lease of property Special 10
O.1835-2013 Tabled 10
O.1836-2013 See Supplement No.
11 (2/14)
10
O.1837-20163-12-13 Authorize rights-ofway
use with Fiber
Technologies
Networks, LLC
Special 10
O.1838-20163-26-13 Approve right-of-way
agreement
Special 10
O.1836-20183-28-13 Taxicabs 11-30 11
O.1839-20193-25-13 Add E-1 Educational
District 1 and T-1
Township District 1
37-2.1, 37-2.2,
37-45, 37-49
11
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1167
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1840-20183-28-13 Construction Code
fees (Voided by
Department of
Community Affairs)
11
O.1841-201N3ot adopted 11
O.1842-20193-9-13 Transfer of property Special 11
O.1843-20193-9-13 Residential permit
parking
7-17 11
O.1844-20193-25-13 Transfer of property Special 11
O.1845-20193-25-13 Bond Special 11
O.1846-201130-9-13 Construction Code
fees
14-1.10 11
O.1847-201130-23-13 Appropriation Special 11
O.1848-201131-26-13 Approve right-of-way
agreement
Special 11
O.1849-201132-11-13 Rezone property —
amend zoning map
37-2.2 11
O.1850-201132-11-13 Construction Code
fees
14-1.10 11
O.1851-201132-23-13 Mayor's staff 2-1.2 11
O.1852-201132-23-13 Transfer of property Special 11
O.1853-201132-23-13 Accept deed of
easement
Special 11
O.1854-20124-26-14 Performance of
Marriage or civil union
ceremonies by Mayor
2-127 11
O.1855-201N4ot adopted 11
O.1856-20134-12-14 Penalties, dogs;
penalties, cats
9-2.7; 9-8.14 11
O.1857-20134-12-14 Reoccupancy
inspection fees
17-1.11 11
O.1858-20134-26-14 No parking—snow
removal
7-10 11
O.1859-20134-26-14 Violations—removal of
snow and ice from
sidewalks
19-2.5 11
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1168
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1860-20134-26-14 Purchasing—limit on
monetary amount of
contracts approved by
Business
Administrator prior to
Council approval
2-24.3 11
O.1861-20144-9-14 Appropriation Special 11
O.1862-20144-9-14 Sewer rates 27-8.1 11
O.1863-20144-9-14 Transfer of property Special 11
O.1864-20144-21-14 Traffic control signals 7-42 11
O.1865-20154-14-14 Mayor's authority to
supervise the Division
of Fire and Police,
2-27; Division of
Police, 2-28; Police
entry level and
promotional criteria,
2-29
2-27, 2-28,
2-29
11
O.1866-20154-28-14 Government—Private
Energy Aggregation
Program
2-124 11
O.1867-20154-28-14 Continued Certificates
of Occupancy
14-1.6 11
O.1868-20164-11-14 CAP Special 11
O.1869-20164-11-14 Name Riverside Park Special 11
O.1870-20184-27-14 Zoning-AAR Amboy
Avenue Revitalization
Zone
37-25 12
O.1871-20174-23-14 Tabled 12
O.1872-20174-23-14 Bond Special 12
O.1873-20174-23-14 Bond Special 12
O.1874-20174-23-14 Vacate portion of
street
Special 12
O.1875-20174-23-14 Rezone property;
amend Zoning Map
37-2.2 12
O.1876-20174-23-14 Plenary retail
distribution license
6-3.5 12
O.1877-20184-27-14 COAH development
fees-definition
30-1.2 12
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1169
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1878-20194-10-14 Planting of trees 25-9.1 12
O.1879-20194-10-14 Abatement of unkempt
vegetation and debris
15-2.3 12
O.1880-201142-10-14 Zoning-fracturing
prohibited in all zones
37-4.14 12
O.1881-201140-8-14 Grant of easement Special 12
O.1882-2014 Tabled 12
O.1883-201140-22-14 Cable Television
System
Chapter 28 12
O.1884-201141-6-14 Plenary retail
consumption license
6-3.4 12
O.1885-201141-12-14 Stop intersections 7-21 12
O.1886-201141-12-14 Speed limits 7-33 12
O.1887-201141-12-14 Zoning-AAR Amboy
Avenue Revitalization
Zone
37-25 12
O.1888-201141-12-14 Grant of right-of-way
easement to Sunesys,
LLC
Special 12
O.1889-201141-12-14 Grant of right-of-way
easement to TWTC
Special 12
O.1890-201141-12-14 Lease agreement Special 12
O.1891-201141-24-14 Bond Special 12
O.1892-201142-10-14 Limousine licensing
fees
11-31.6 12
O.1893-201142-22-14 Emergency
appropriation
Special 12
O.1894-20115-28-15 Bond Special 13
O.1895-20125-25-15 Appropriation Special 13
O.1896-20125-25-15 Amends Ch. II,
Administration,
2-122.2, establishes
Insurance Fund
2-122.2 13
O.1897-20145-8-15 Amends access of
easement for Visco
property
Special 13
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1170
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1898-20135-25-15 Amends Ch. XXXVII,
Zoning, 37-2.1, Zoning
districts; 37-2.2,
Zoning Map; adds
37-35, Flexible
Business Zone
37-2.1, 37-2.2,
37-35
13
O.1899-20145-22-15 Bond Special 13
O.1900-20145-22-15 Amends Ford
Assembly Plant
Redevelopment Plan
Special 13
O.1901-20155-13-15 Amends Ch. VII,
Traffic, 7-14, parking
prohibited at all times
7-14 13
O.1902-20155-13-15 Amends Ch. XIV,
Building and
Construction, 14-1.10,
Construction Code
fees
14-1.10 13
O.1903-20155-27-15 Amends Ch. VII,
traffic, 7-39.5,
verification required
for certain
handicapped parking
ordinances
7-39.5 13
O.1904-20155-27-15 Amends Ch. XXVII,
Water and Sewer,
27-8.1, sewer system
fees and charges
27-8.1 13
O.1905-20155-27-15 Amends Ch. XXVII,
Water and Sewer,
27-7.2, definitions;
27-8.1, sewer system
fees and charges; adds
27-7.9—27-7.16
pertaining to industrial
wastes
27-7.2, 27-7.9,
27-7.10,
27-7.11,
27-7.12,
27-7.13,
27-7.14,
27-7.15,
27-7.16,
27-8.1
13
O.1906-20165-10-15 CAP Bank Special 13
O.1907-20165-10-15 Appropriation Special 13
O.1908-20165-10-15 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic,
7-21, Stop
intersections
7-21 13
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1171
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1909-20165-10-15 Amends Ch. XI,
General Licensing and
Business Regulations,
11-6.9, exemptionbusiness
purchasing or
selling used electronic
equipment
11-6.9 13
O.1910-20165-24-15 Amends Ch. XXXVII,
Zoning, 37-2.2, Zoning
Map-establishes
Roosevelt Care Center
Site Redevelopment
Plan
37-2.2 13
O.1911-20175-22-15 Accepts dedication of
portions of a joint
wastewater
conveyance system
from SC Holdings, Inc.
Special 13
O.1912-20185-19-15 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic,
7-39.2, handicapped
parking
7-39.2 13
O.1913-20195-9-15 Amends Ch. XV,
Property Maintenance,
15-1.5, definitions;
15-1.9, nuisances and
unsanitary conditions
15-1.5, 15-1.9 14
O.1914-20195-21-15 Bond Special 14
O.1915-201150-14-15 Developer's agreement
to connect Block 65,
Lot 12 to sewer system
Special 14
O.1916-201151-9-15 Amends
Redevelopment Plan
for Salsburg
properties
Special 14
O.1917-201152-21-15 Amends Ch. VII,
Traffic; 7-14, parking
prohibited at all times;
7-15, parking
prohibited certain
hours on certain
streets
7-14, 7-15 14
O.1918-201152-21-15 Appropriation Special 14
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1172
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1919-20116-27-16 Lease agreement Special 14
O.1920-20116-27-16 Amends Ch. II,
Administration; 2-28.2,
personnel of Division
of Police
2-28.2 14
O.1921-20126-10-16 Salary Special 14
O.1922-20136-9-16 Refund bond Special 14
O.1923-20136-9-16 Amends
Redevelopment Plan
for Salsburg
Properties
Special 14
O.1924-20136-9-16 Easement Special 14
O.1925-20136-23-16 Amends Ch. XXVII,
Water and Sewer;
27-8.1, sewer system
fees and rates
27-8.1 15
Res.
R.212-032016
3-23-16 Recreation program
fees-schedule 24-4.1
24-4.1 15
O.1926-20146-27-16 Vacation of rights-ofways
Special 15
O.1927-20146-27-16 Sale of property Special 15
O.1928-20146-27-16 Amends Ch. XXIV,
Parks and Recreation
Areas; 24-11 Whitman
Avenue Park Off-Leash
Dog Area, rules and
regulations
24-11 15
O.1929-20146-27-16 Amends Ch. VII,
Traffic; 7-39.2,
handicapped parking
on streets for private
residences
7-39.2 15
O.1930-20166-22-16 Financial agreement
with Roosevelt
Hospital Housing
Urban Renewal
Associates, LLC
Special 15
O.1931-20166-22-16 Sale of property Special 15
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1173
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1932-20166-22-16 Approves Municipal
Services Agreement
with Out of Bounds
Association, Inc
Special 15
O.1933-20166-22-16 Budget, CAP Bank Special 15
O.1934-20186-24-16 Bond Special 15
O.1935-20186-24-16 Amends Ch. II,
Administration; 2-29.3,
Entry Level Officers
2-29.3 15
O.1936-20186-24-16 Adopts Amboy Avenue
Redevelopment Plan
Special 15
O.1937-20196-14-16 Amends Ch. XI,
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
adds 11-33
Transportation
Network Companies,
Drivers and Vehicles
11-33 15
O.1938-20196-14-16 Amends Ch. XIX,
Streets and Sidewalks,
19-4, Sidewalks,
Curbs, Gutters and
Drywells; amends Ch.
XXXVII, Zoning;
37-4.25, General
Design and Use
Regulations,
Exceptions; Ch. XXXIX,
Land Use; 39-4.4,
Planning Board,
Powers and Duties;
39-7.3, Zoning Board
of Adjustment, Powers
and Duties
19-4, 37-4.25,
39-4.4, 39-7.3
15
O.1939-2016 Not adopted 15
O.1940-20196-14-16 Amends Ch. X, Police
Regulations; 10-18.1
Drug-Free School
Zones, Purpose
10-18.1 15
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1174
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1941-20196-28-16 Amends Ch. XXXVII,
Zoning; 37-13 R-B
Residential District;
37-14 R-A-th, R-BB-th
and R-B-th Residential
Districts; 37-15 L-R
Residential District;
37-25 AAR Amboy
Avenue Revitalization
Zone; 37-30 O-S, O-S-1
and O-S-2 Service
Districts; 37-50
AHOZ-3 Affordable
Housing District;
37-51 AHOZ-4
Affordable Housing
District
37-13, 37-14,
37-15, 37-25,
37-30, 37-50,
37-51
15
O.1942-20196-28-16 Amends Ch. XXX
Affordable Housing,
replaces in entirety
Ch. XXX 15
O.1943-20196-14-16 Amends Ch. XV,
Property Maintenance;
15-3 Abandoned and
Vacant Properties,
Registration and
Maintenance
15-3 15
O.1944-20196-28-16 Exchange of Fire
Department
Equipment to
Middlesex County Fire
Marshal's Office for
$6,000 Credit toward
Training Classes for
Fire Department
Special 15
O.1945-201160-26-16 Adopts Our Lady of
Peace Redevelopment
Plan
Special 16
O.1946-201160-13-16 Adopts 225 Raritan
Center Parkway
Redevelopment Plan
Special 16
O.1947-201160-13-16 Adopts 1015 Route 1
Redevelopment Plan
Special 16
O.1948-201160-13-16 Bond Special 16
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1175
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1949-201160-26-16 Amends Ch. XXX
Affordable Housing;
30-30 Affordable
Housing Development
Fees
30-30 16
O.1950-201161-7-16 Appropriation Special 16
O.1951-201161-7-16 Lease Agreement Special 16
O.1952-201161-7-16 Amends Ch. XXVII
Zoning; 37-66.3
Nonconforming Uses
of Land; 37-66.5
Nonconforming Lots;
37-66.6 Abandonment-
Nonconforming Uses
and Structures
37-66.3,
37-66.5,
37-66.6
16
O.1953-201161-21-16 Amends Ch. XXXVII,
Zoning, 37-13.6
Planned Unit
Development,
Affordable Housing;
13-15.7 Affordable
Housing Requirements
37-13.6,
13-15.7
16
O.1954-201161-21-16 Amends Ch. XXX,
Affordable Housing,
amends 30-2,
Applicability; adds
30-22 Reporting and
Monitoring
Requirements
30-2, 30-22 16
O.1955-201162-4-16 Adopts the Camp
Kilmer Redevelopment
Plan
Special 16
O.1956-201162-28-16 Amends Ch. VII, 7-42
Traffic Control Signal
7-42 16
O.1957-201162-28-16 Amends Ch. VII, 7-42
Traffic Control Signal
7-42 16
O.1958-20127-8-17 Bond Special 16
O.1959-20127-8-17 Bond Special 16
O.1960-20127-8-17 Deed of Easement Special 16
O.1961-20127-8-17 Capital Improvement Special 16
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1176
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1962-20127-22-17 Amends Ch. XXXVII,
Zoning, 37-62.3,
37-62.4, 37-62.6, Real
Estate Signs
37-62.3,
37-62.4,
37-62.6
16
O.1963-20137-8-17 Amends Ch. XXXVII
Zoning; adds 37-21.2p
Fuel Only Service
Station with
Convenience Store as
Permitted Use in the
G-B and G-BH Zones
37-21.2p 16
O.1964-20137-8-17 Sale of Property Special 16
O.1965-20137-22-17 Amends Ch. XXXII Soil
Removal;
32-1.2—32-1.7, 32-1.9,
32-10, 32-2.2, 32-2.4,
32-2.6 Designates
Township Engineer to
Review and Approve
Permits
32-1.2—32-1.7,
32-1.9, 32-10,
32-2.2, 32-2.4,
32-2.6
16
O.1966-20137-22-17 Amends Ch. XXVII
Water and Sewer;
27-8.1 Sewer System
Rates and Fees
27-8.1 16
R.212-032031-263-16 Amends Ch. XXIV
Parks and Recreation
Areas, 24-4.1 Fees
24-4.1 17
O.1967-20147-12-17 Financial Agreement
with Metuchen
Catholic Charities
Senior Development
Urban Renewal, LLC
Special 17
O.1968-20147-12-17 Financial Agreement
with Camp Kilmer A
Urban Renewal
Associates, LLC and
Camp Kilmer B Urban
Renewal Associates,
LLC
Special 17
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1177
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1969-20147-12-17 Amends Ch. XXXVII
Zoning; 37-4 General
Design and Use
Regulations, adds
37-4.25 Mobile
Temporary Storage
Units; renumbers
exceptions to 37-4.26
37-4, 37-4.25,
37-4.26
17
O.1970-20147-12-17 Adopts Beauty Rest
Motel Redevelopment
Plan
Special 17
O.1971-20147-24-17 Amends Ch. X, Police
Regulations; adds
10-24 Internet-Based
Transactions
10-24 17
O.1972-20147-24-17 Bond Special 17
O.1973-20157-10-17 Amends Ch. XI,
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
adds 11-34 Filming
and Videotaping;
11-34.1—11-34.6
11-34,
11-34.1—11-34.6
17
O.1974-20157-10-17 Revokes and rescinds
appropriation,
Ordinance 1861-2014
Special 17
O.1975-20157-24-17 Grant of easement Special 17
O.1976-20167-14-17 Amends Ch. VII
Traffic; 7-39.2
Handicapped Parking
on Streets for Private
Residences
7-39.2 17
O.1977-20167-14-17 Contract with New
Jersey American Water
for the Township's
Water Transmission
and Distribution
System
Special 17
O.1978-20167-28-17 CAP Bank Special 17
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1178
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1979-20167-28-17 Amends Ch. XV
Property Maintenance;
15-1.9 Nuisances and
Unsanitary Conditions;
Removal or
Abatement; Notice;
Lien for Costs of
Township
15-1.9 17
O.1980-20167-28-17 Amends Ch. XIX
Streets and Sidewalks;
adds 19-5 Public
Utility Poles,
19-5.1—19-5.5
19-5,
19-5.1—19-5.5
17
O.1981-20167-28-17 Amends Ch. VII
Traffic; 7-40.2
Regulation for the
Movement and the
Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open
to the Public and to
Which the Public Is
Invited (Retail
Business) add Inman
Square a/k/a Inman
Avenue
7-40.2 17
O.1982-20187-24-17 Amends Ch. XI
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
adds 11-36 Clothing
Donation Bins;
Regulations
11-36, 11-36.1 17
O.1983-20187-24-17 Amends Ch. VII
Traffic; 7-14 Parking
Prohibited at All Times
On Certain Streets
7-14 17
O.1984-20197-13-17 Amends Ch. XI
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
adds 11-35 Crane
Operation
11-35.1—11-35.10
11-35,
11-35.1—11-35.10
17
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1179
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1985-20197-13-17 Amends Ch. IX
Animals; creates new
9-3.3 Dogs on
Premises to Be
Tethered; renumbers
9-3.3—9-3.5 to
9-3.4—9-3.6
9-3.3,
9-3.4—9-3.6
17
O.1986-20197-13-17 Lease of property Special 17
O.1987-20197-13-17 Amends Ch. IX
Animals; 9-15.4
Shelter Fees
9-15.4 17
O.1988-20197-13-17 Bond Special 17
O.1989-20197-29-17 Acceptance of Gift Special 17
O.1990-201170-11-17 Amends Ch. VII
Traffic; 7-39.2
Handicapped Parking
on Streets for Private
Residences
7-39.2 17
O.1991-201170-25-17 Deed of easement Special 17
O.1992-201170-25-17 Amends Ch. XI
General Licensing;
11-27 Alarm Systems,
11-27.1—11-27.9
11-27,
11-27.1—11-27.9
17
O.1993-2017 Not Adopted 17
O.1994-201171-20-17 Lease agreement with
Metuchen Acquisition
Realty, LLC at 212
Durham Avenue,
effective December 1,
2017
Special 17
O.1995-2017 Not Adopted 17
O.1996-201172-20-17 Appropriation Special 17
O.1997-2018 Not Adopted 17
O.1998-20128-14-18 Amends Ch. II
Administration; 2-33.6
Firefighters,
Promotion Procedures
2-33.6 17
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1180
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.1999-20128-14-18 Amends Ch. XIX
Streets and Sidewalks,
19-1 Street
Excavations and
Occupation
19-1.1—19-1.12 17
R.134-022021-288-18 Amends Ch. XXIV
Parks and Recreation,
24-4.1 Fee Schedule
24-4.1 17
O.2000-20138-14-18 Amends Ch. XXXIX
Land Use; 39-12.19
Guarantees Required;
Surety; Release
39-12.19 18
O.2001-20138-14-18 Amends Ch. II
Administration; 2-5.5
Corporate Seal,
Township Clerk
2-5.5 18
O.2002-20138-28-18 Financial Agreement
with 225 Raritan
Center Parkway Urban
Renewall, LLC, Special
Special 18
O.2003-20138-28-18 Amends Ch. XI
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
11-11.5 Building
Requirements;
Inspections, Massage,
Bodywork and Somatic
Therapy
Establishments
11-11.5 18
O.2004-20148-25-18 Amends Ch. II
Administration;
2-128.2 Fees
Established, Handling
of Tax Sale Certificates
2-128.2 18
O.2005-2018 Not adopted 18
O.2006-20158-9-18 Adopts Ford Assembly
Plant Redevelopment
Plan, Special
Special 18
O.2007-20158-9-18 Adopts 720 Route 1
Redevelopment Plan,
Special
Special 18
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1181
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.2008-20158-9-18 Amends Ch. XXVII
Water and Sewer;
27-8.1 Sewer Systems
Fees and Rates
27-8.1 18
O.2009-20158-23-18 Amends Ch. XI
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
11-1.3 License
Required; Badge;
Investigation; Hours of
Operation
11-1.3 18
O.2010-20168-27-18 CAP Bank, Special Special 18
O.2011-20168-27-18 Amends Ch. XXXVI
Subdivisions and Site
Plans; 36-11.2
Additional Design
Standards
36-11.2 18
O.2012-20168-27-18 Amends Ch. VII
Traffic; 7-17
Residential Permit
Parking
7-17 18
O.2013-20168-27-18 Amends Ch. XII Health
Regulations and
Licensing; 12-27.4
Noise Control Officers/
Administrators;
12-27.9 Conditions for
Variance
12-27.4,
12-27.9
18
O.2014-20178-25-18 Amends Ch. XI
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
11-36 Clothing
Donation Bins, 11-36.1
Regulations
11-36, 11-36.1 18
O.2015-20188-22-18 Amends Ch. XII Health
Regulations and
Licensing; creates
12-29 Food Allergy
Information Required
to Be Posted, 12-29.1,
12-29.2
12-29,
12-29.1,
12-29.2
18
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1182
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.2016-20188-22-18 Amends Ch. XVI Fire
Prevention and
Protection; 16-3.4
Responsibility for
Installation and
Maintenance, Smoke
Detectors
16-3.4 18
O.2017-2018 Not adopted 18
O.2018-20198-12-18 Adopts Exxon Mobil
Redevelopment Plan,
Special
Special 18
O.2019-20188-22-18 Amends Ch. XVI Fire
Prevention and
Protection; 16-1
Uniform Fire Safety
Act Local Enforcing
Agency, 16-1.3—16-1.5
16-1,
16-1.3—16-1.5
18
O.2020-2018 Not adopted 18
O.2021-20198-12-18 Amends Ch. XI
General Licensing and
Business Regulations;
11-28 Towing
Regulations,
11-28.1—11-28.26
11-28,
11-28.1—11-28.26
18
O.2022-201180-10-18 Lease of Property,
Special
Special 18
O.2023-20198-26-18 Amends Ch. XXXVII
Zoning; 37-50.3
Permitted Uses,
AHOZ-3 Affordable
Housing District
37-50.3 18
O.2024-20198-26-18 Amends Ch. XV
Property Maintenance;
15-3 Abandoned and
Vacant Properties,
Registration and
Maintenance,
15-3.1—15-3.8
15-3,
15-3.1—15-3.8
18
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1183
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.2025-201180-10-18 Amends Ch. XXII
Environmental
Regulations; creates
22-4 Protection of
Waterways,
22-4.1—22-4.4
22-4,
22-4.1—22-4.4
18
O.2026-2018 Not adopted 18
O.2027-201180-24-18 Appropriation, Special Special 18
O.2028-201180-24-18 Bond, Special Special 18
O.2029-201180-24-18 Amends Ch. II
Administration;
creates 2-31 Police
Extra Duty
Employment, 2-31.1
2-31, 2-31.1 18
O.2030-2018 Lease Agreement,
Special
Special 18
O.2031-201180-24-18 Grant permissions for
telecommunication
facilities in public
right-of-way, Special
Special 18
O.2032-201181-28-18 Amends Ch. VII
Traffic; Edison
shopping center-police
enforcement
Ch. VII 18
O.2033-2018 Not adopted 18
O.2034-201182-12-18 Street Dedication,
Special
Special 18
O.2035-201182-12-18 Amends Ch. XXVII
Water and Sewer; 27-9
Connection Charges
and Regulations,
27-9.1, 27-9.2
27-9, 27-9.1,
27-9.2
18
O.2036-201182-27-18 Sale of Property,
Special
Special 18
O.2037-20129-13-19 Acceptance of Balzano
Court
Special 18
O.2038-2019 Tabled 19
O.2039-20129-27-19 Vacate Harley Road Special 18
O.2040-2019 Not Adopted 19
O.2041-20149-10-19 Easement Special 18
§ DL-1 EDISON CODE § DL-1
AO:1184
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O.2042-20149-10-19 Tax Exemption
agreement
Special 18
O.2043-20149-24-19 Lease Agreement Special 18
O.2044-20169-26-2019 Water and Sewer
Amendment
Ch. 27 19
O.2045-20179-24-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 19
O.2046-20179-24-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 19
O.2047-20199-10-2019 Water and Sewer
Amendment
Ch. 27 19
O.2048-20199-10-2019 Lease of Property NCM 19
O.2049-20199-9-2019 Administration
Amendment; Water
and Sewer Amendment
Ch. 2; Ch. 27 19
O.2050-20199-9-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 19
O.2051-20199-25-2019 General Licensing and
Business Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 11 19
O.2052-2019 Tabled 19
O.2053-201190-7-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 19
O.2054-201190-7-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 19
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1185