Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE.
The book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, 1988," and is herein
referred to as the "revision."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Englewood Cliffs in the County of
Bergen and State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the mayor and council of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
CLERK OR BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the municipal clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or this revision as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to
such organizational unit by the borough council.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this revision, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
AO:1
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION.
For the purpose of this revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the borough are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this revision, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this revision shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the revisions identified
by an Arabic number and divided by subject matter.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
§ 1-2 ENGLEWOOD § 1-4
AO:2
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY.
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this revision.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
[Englewood Cliffs is governed by the borough form of government
outlined in Chapters 86-94 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes. The
administrative code has been drafted in conformity with borough law
and in many instances provisions have been restated. Other enabling
laws relevant to this chapter are R.S. 2A:9-7 et seq., Municipal Court;
Board of Health, R.S. 26:3-1 et seq.; Planning Board, R.S. 40:55D-28
et seq., Zoning Board of Adjustment, R.S. 40: 55D-69 et seq; Shade
Tree Commission, R.S. 40:64-1 et seq.; and Environmental
Commission, R.S. 40:56A-1 et seq. General authority to regulate the
internal affairs of the Borough, R.S. 40:48-2.]
§ 2-1. CHAPTER TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Administrative Code of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and is herein referred to as the code.
§ 2-2. BOROUGH COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. Organization.
The Council shall consist of the Mayor and six Councilmen, all of whom shall
be elected at large in the Borough and take office in the manner provided
by law. Their term of office shall commence January 1 next following their
election.
§ 2-2.2. Vacancies.
Pursuant to the Borough law, a vacancy occurring in the office of the Mayor,
whether by resignation or otherwise, shall be filled by the Council until the
next general election and until the election and qualification of a successor.
At such next general election the person elected to fill such vacancy shall
be elected for the unexpired term only. All vacancies in other elected offices
shall be filled by nomination of the Mayor and appointment by him, with
the advise and consent of the Council members present at the meeting,
provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such
purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
§ 1-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.2
AO:3
All appointment to fill vacancies on the Council shall be until January 1
following the next general election.
If such vacancies shall occur at so short a period of time before the next
general election that the office cannot be filled at the election, the vacancy
shall be filled in the same manner as though it had occurred immediately
after the election at the next subsequent general election for such portion of
the term, if any, as may still remain unexpired. At such next general election
the person elected to fill the vacancy shall be elected for the unexpired term
only.
§ 2-2.3. Rules of Council.
The Council shall by resolution adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent
with this code. The rules shall provide for standing committees of the
Council.
§ 2-2.4. Ordinances and Resolutions.
Council shall take appropriate action to insure that ordinances and
resolutions of the preceding year are compiled or codified.
§ 2-3. MEETINGS.
The Council shall meet for organization on the first day of January, or during
the first seven days of January in any year at the call of the incoming Mayor.
Thereafter, the Council shall meet regularly within the Borough at such
times and places as provided by the rules of the Council. The Mayor shall,
when necessary, call special meetings of the Council as provided by law. In
case of his neglect or refusal, any four members of the Council may call such
meetings at such time and place in the Borough as they may designate.
§ 2-4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Council but shall not vote
except to give the deciding vote in the case of a tie. Except as otherwise
provided by statute, the Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and
consent of the Council, appoint all officers in the Borough. No appointments
requiring Council approval and confirmation shall be made except by a
majority vote of the Council members present at the meeting, provided
that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose,
the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a tie. Vacancies in
appointive offices shall be filled by appointment in the same manner for the
unexpired term only. The Mayor shall make such nomination to fill a vacancy
within 30 days after the appointive office become vacant. If the Mayor fails
to nominate within 30 days or the Council fails to confirm any nomination
made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of 30 days, the Council shall
appoint the officer.
The Mayor shall see that the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
Borough are faithfully executed, and shall recommend to the Council such
§ 2-2.2 ENGLEWOOD § 2-4
AO:4
measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
Borough. He shall maintain peace and good order and have the power to
suppress all riots and tumultuous assemblies in the Borough.
The Mayor shall supervise the conduct and acts of all officers in the Borough
and shall execute all contracts made on behalf of the Council.
§ 2-5. PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL.
At an organizational meeting the Council by a majority vote shall elect from
their number a president of the Council, who shall preside at all of its
meetings when the Mayor does not preside. The president of the Council
shall hold office for one year and until the next annual meeting. He shall
have the right to debate and vote on all questions before the Council. If
the Council at its annual meeting fails to elect a president, the Mayor shall
appoint the president from the Council and in that case no confirmation
shall be necessary. If the Mayor is absent from the Borough for a period of
three consecutive days or for any reason is unable to act, the president of
the Council shall perform all the duties of the Mayor during his absence or
disability. The Mayor, in case of his intended absence from the Borough for
more than three days at any one time, shall notify the president in writing
of such intended absence, whereupon the president shall be and become
acting Mayor from the receipt of such notice and continue to act until the
Mayor's return. In case of the temporary inability of the president to so act,
the Council member having the longest term of service as such may act
temporarily for the president.
§ 2-6. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-6.1. Creation.
Pursuant to Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948 and the amendments thereof
and supplements thereto, there is created in the Borough a municipal court
with all the rights, duties, powers and privileges thereto pertaining and
conferred by statute.
§ 2-6.2. Title of Court.
The court shall be known as "Municipal Court of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs."
§ 2-6.3. Judge: Appointment: Term.
The court shall be presided over by a judge, who shall be known as the
municipal judge. The municipal judge shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. The municipal judge shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of his appointment and until his successor
is appointed and qualified.
§ 2-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-6.4
AO:5
§ 2-6.4. Salary of Judge.
The salary of the municipal judge shall be determined by the annual salary
ordinance.
§ 2-6.5. Court Clerk.
A municipal court Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the consent
and advice of the Council. The Clerk shall serve for a term of one year.
§ 2-6.6. Violations Clerk.
A municipal violations Clerk shall be appointed by the Council, upon the
recommendation of the municipal court judge. The violations Clerk shall
serve for a three-year term. Any vacancy in this office shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
§ 2-7. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-7.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 2. § 1; Ord. No. 2014-03]
There shall be a local Board of Health of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
which shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the Borough
and legal voters within the Borough.
§ 2-7.2. Appointment of Members.
The members of the board shall be nominated by the Mayor, and appointed
by him with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-7.3. Terms.
The term of office of the members of the board shall be four years.
§ 2-7.4. Vacancy.
If any vacancy occurs in the membership of the board, such vacancy shall
be filled to the unexpired term only by nomination and appointment, as
hereinbefore provided.
§ 2-8. SHADE TREE COMMISSION.1
§ 2-8.1. Established.
The regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees
and shrubbery upon and in the streets, public places, parks and parkways of
the Borough except county parks and parkways, shall be exercised by and
be under the authority of a commission which shall be known as the "Shade
Tree Commission of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs."
1. Editor's Note: Rules and regulations pertaining to shade trees may be found at the end of
this book as Chapter ST1.
§ 2-6.4 ENGLEWOOD § 2-8.2
AO:6
§ 2-8.2. Composition.
The Englewood Cliffs Shade Tree Commission shall be composed of five
members, as appointed by the Mayor. Each shall be a resident of Englewood
Cliffs, and preferably retired residents, in order to afford the members time
to fulfill numerous property examinations required by the position. Terms
shall be staggered for one, two, three, four and five years. After five years
of service on the commission, a member may be appointed for an additional
five-year term.
§ 2-8.3. Terms of Members.
All appointments except to fill vacancies shall be made to take effect on
January 1 of each year for the full term of five years. Any vacancies
occurring by reason of death shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-8.4. Organization.
The shade tree commission shall organize annually within 30 days of
January 1 by the election of one of its members as president and the
appointment of a secretary who need not be a member of the commission.
The compensation to be paid to any secretary and any and all other
employees shall be fixed by the commission.
§ 2-8.5. Powers.
The shade tree commission shall have the following powers:
§ 2-8.6. Costs to be Tax Lien.
Except as hereinafter provided the initial cost of all trees planted by the
commission, the cost of planting the same, the cost of the posts and boxes
or guards used for the protection thereof, and the cost of the removal of
a. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or
which may hereafter be planted in any public street, highway, public
place, park or parkway, except county parks or parkways of the
Borough, including the planting, trimming, spraying, care and
protection thereof;
b. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection;
c. Move or require the removal of any tree, or part thereof dangerous to
public safety, at the expense of the owner of such tree;
d. Care for and control such parks and parkways; encourage
arboriculture; make, alter, amend and repeal in the manner provided
for the passage, alteration, amendment and repeal of ordinance by the
Mayor and Council, any and all Borough ordinances necessary or
proper for carrying out the provisions hereof.
§ 2-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-8.6
AO:7
any tree dangerous to public safety shall be a charge upon the real estate
in front of which such tree or trees shall be planted or removed as an
improvement thereof. Such cost unless paid directly to the commission shall
be certified by it to the collector of taxes of the Borough, shall thereupon
become and be a lien upon said real estate, shall be included in the next tax
bill rendered to the owner or owners thereof, and be collected in the same
manner as other taxes against that property.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
§ 2-8.7. Notice to Property Owner of Planting; Manner of
Objections.
In every case where the property of an abutting owner will be chargeable
with the cost of the planting of any shade tree or trees the commission shall
give notice of the meeting at which it is proposed to consider the planting
by publishing the notice at least once, not less than 20 days before the
meeting, in a newspaper circulating in the Borough, or by personal service
of a copy of the notice upon the abutting owner at least 10 days before the
meeting. The notice shall specify the street, or portions thereof, on which
such planting is proposed and require all persons who may object thereto
to present their objections in writing at the office of the commission at
or before the meeting. Before final action shall be taken all objections so
filed shall be considered. The commission shall give reasonable notice of
its intention to remove, or cause the removal of, a tree, or part of a tree,
dangerous to public safety unless public safety requires immediate removal,
in which case no notice shall be necessary.
§ 2-9. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-9.1. Creation.
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs Environmental Commission is hereby
established pursuant to Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1968 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
to 40:56A-5).
§ 2-9.2. Members.
The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor,
one of whom shall also be a member of the planning board and all of
whom shall be residents of the Borough. The members shall serve without
compensation except as hereinafter provided. The Mayor shall designate
one of the members to serve as chairman and presiding officer of the
commission.
a. A planting to replace a tree or trees theretofore planted by the
commission;
b. A planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other educational
demonstration.
§ 2-8.6 ENGLEWOOD § 2-9.3
AO:8
§ 2-9.3. Term of Office.
The members shall be appointed for terms of three years and until the
appointment and qualifications of their successors.
§ 2-9.4. Removal of Member.
The Mayor or Council may remove any member of the commission for cause,
on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing thereon at
which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
§ 2-9.5. Vacancy.
A vacancy on the commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 2-9.6. Powers of Commission.
The commission is established for the protection, development or use of
natural resources, including water resources, located within the territorial
limits of the Borough. The commission shall have power to conduct research
into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the Borough and
may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for
its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to
obtain information on the proper use of such areas and may recommend to
the planning board, plans and programs for inclusion in the master plan and
the development and use of such areas.
§ 2-9.7. Acquisitions by Commission.
The environmental commission may, subject to the approval of the Council
acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the Borough
by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes
and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to the terms of
the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or
any lesser interest, development right, easement (including conservation
easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance
on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use or otherwise
conserve properly utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the
Borough.
§ 2-9.8. Records and Annual Report.
The environmental commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report to the Council.
§ 2-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.9
AO:9
§ 2-9.9. Appropriations.
The commission may appoint such Clerks and other employees as it may
require, providing the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it by the Council.
§ 2-10. MUNICIPAL OFFICES.
There are hereby created the following offices and/or positions in the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs:
§ 2-10.1. Borough Clerk.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to maintain an office in the Borough
Hall, keep therein all records of the municipality, attend regular meetings
of the Mayor and Council, report any and all correspondence to the elected
officials and other administrative bodies of the municipality and in general
to perform any and all acts required by ordinances of the Borough, the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or other Federal or State law. The Borough
Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The Borough Clerk shall serve initially for a term of one year and
thereafter as provided by the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
§ 2-10.2. Municipal Judge.
It shall be the duty of the judge to hold municipal court in the Borough
Hall or other specified place at regular intervals as required by the
administrative director of the Superior Court of New Jersey. The judge shall
sit and hear all violations of Borough ordinances, motor vehicle violations
and any other violations which he is permitted to hear by virtue of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey. The term of office of the judge shall be set
at the time of appointment by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council both as to term and person to occupy the office.
§ 2-10.3. Clerk of Municipal Court.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk of the municipal court to comply with all
provisions of Revised Rules of the Superior Court of New Jersey and any
and all other duties imposed by the administrative director of the Superior
Court. The Clerk shall aid the judge in the pursuit of municipal court
business. The term of office of the municipal Clerk shall be one year and the
appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council.
§ 2-10.4. Borough Attorney.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Attorney to advise the Mayor and Council
on any and all legal matters involving the welfare of the Borough at large as
well as its citizens and to provide any legal advice requested, and prepare
any and all legal documents required for the conduct of the Borough's
§ 2-9.9 ENGLEWOOD § 2-10.4
AO:10
business. The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term
of one year with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-10.5. Borough Prosecutor.
There is hereby created the position of Borough Prosecutor. It shall be the
duty of the prosecutor to prosecute any and all cases before the municipal
court of the Borough whether they be violations of Borough ordinances,
violations of the motor vehicle and traffic act of the State of New Jersey
or any other offenses which are permitted to be tried before the municipal
court by the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and the Revised Rules of the
Superior Court of New Jersey.
The Borough Prosecutor shall serve a term of one year and the position shall
be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, the appointment to be made on January 1 of each year or as soon
thereafter as the Borough Council shall hold a reorganization meeting.
The Prosecutor appointed under this section shall receive an annual
retainer as stated in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-10.6. Assistant Tax Collector.
It shall be the duty of the assistant tax collector to aid the tax collector in
the performance of any and all duties imposed upon the tax collector by
ordinance of the Borough or statute of the State of New Jersey. The assistant
tax collector shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of one year with the
advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-10.7. Borough Auditor.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Auditor to audit the books and accounts
of the Borough and supply such advice as is necessary for the proper
conduct of the Borough's business. The Borough Auditor shall be appointed
for a term of one year by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council.
§ 2-10.8. Borough Engineer.
The position of Borough Engineer may be filled by an individual,
partnership, firm or corporation. It shall be the duty of the Borough
Engineer to provide all necessary engineering data pertaining to any and all
Borough improvements whether presently installed or to be installed in the
future; further the Borough Engineer shall serve in an advisory capacity to
the respective administrative boards of the Borough whenever engineering
advice is necessary, and the Borough Engineer shall prepare all plans, maps
and related data. The Borough Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor
for one year with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.9
AO:11
§ 2-10.9. Building Custodian.
It shall be the duty of the building custodian to maintain the Borough Hall
and its surrounding grounds in a neat, clean, orderly and safe condition,
and to perform such minor repairs as are necessary and as may be ordered
by the chairman of the committee on buildings and grounds. The building
custodian shall serve for a term of one year and shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-10.10. Assistant Building Custodian.
It shall be the duty of the assistant building custodian to aid and assist the
building custodian in the performance of the functions herebefore set forth.
The assistant shall be appointed for the same term and in the same manner
as set forth under the building custodian.
§ 2-10.11. Operator of the Pump Stations.
It shall be the duty of the operator of the pump stations to maintain the
buildings and premises and pumping machinery in a good and workable
fashion and to do all necessary cleaning and repairing thereof and to
perform all duties as directed by the chairman of the sanitation committee.
The operator of the pump stations shall serve for a term of one year and
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-10.12. Superintendent of Public Works. [Ord. #87R, S1m; Ord.
#9213, S I; Ord. #2009-15; Ord. No. 2015-11]
The position of Superintendent of Public Works shall be on a full time basis
and it shall be the duty of the Superintendent to supervise and control the
operations of the Department of Public Works and the Road Maintenance
Department, at the direction of, and with the advice of the Mayor and
Council. The Superintendent shall perform any and all functions referred to
him by the Mayor and Council. The Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works shall be certified and have all other qualifications and legal
requirements as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154(a) et seq.
The Superintendent of Department of Public Works who has served
continuously in that position for five years or more, shall not be removed
there from for political or other reasons except for good cause, upon written
charges filed with the municipal Clerk and after a public, fair and impartial
hearing.
The Superintendent may be retired when he or she has obtained the age of
65.
§ 2-10.12A. (Reserved)
§ 2-10.9 ENGLEWOOD § 2-10.13
AO:12
§ 2-10.13. Road and Truck Maintenance Men. [Ord. #87R, § 1n]
There are hereby created the position of first and second assistant road and
truck maintenance men. These positions shall be filled on a full time basis
and it shall be the duty of the holders of these positions to assist and carry
out all directions of the director of road maintenance and to perform all
necessary and reasonable repairs to any Borough-owned equipment. The
assistants shall serve for a period of one year and shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-10.14. (Reserved)2 [Ord. #87R, S1o; Ord. #2010-03; reserved by
Ord. #2010-09]
§ 2-10.15. (Reserved)3 [Ord. #87R, S1p; Ord. No. 2016-01]
§ 2-10.16. Administrative Assistant. [Ord. #87R, § 1q]
It shall be the duty of the administrative assistant to assist the Borough
Clerk and the heads of the various administrative boards in the Borough
and perform any and all functions so ordered by the Borough Council;
further the administrative assistant shall serve in a full time capacity and
be present at the office of the Borough Clerk at hours to be specified by
resolution of the Mayor and Council. The administrative assistant shall be
appointed for a term of five years by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council.
§ 2-10.17. Building Subcode Official. [Ord. No. 87R § 1d]
It shall be the duty of the Building Subcode Official to perform all functions
set forth and required of him in the building code of the Borough and
further to perform any and all functions outlined in any of the Borough as
well as any duties prescribed by the Revised Statutes of New Jersey. The
Building Subcode Official shall serve for a period as prescribed by law and
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-10.18. Board of Assessors. [Ord. No. 87R § 1e]
The board of assessors shall consist of three members and they shall
perform all duties prescribed for them under R.S. 40:87-17 through R.S.
40:87-20. The assessors shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council and shall serve for the periods of time set forth
in the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
2. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2-10.14, Local Assistance Board previously codified
herein was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-09.
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2-10.15, Recreation Director was deleted by Ord. No.
2016-01. See § 2-30 for Recreation Director.
§ 2-10.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.19
AO:13
§ 2-10.19. Salaried Positions.
The following salaried positions are established for all salaried, appointed
and elected officers and employees within the Borough. The salaries shall
be determined by the annual salary ordinance.
a. Mayor.
b. Council persons.
c. Borough Clerk.
d. Administrative secretary.
e. Tax collector.
f. Assistant tax collector.
g. Tax search officer.
h. Tax office Clerk.
i. Tax assessor.
j. Borough Attorney.
k. Secretary to planning board.
l. Secretary to board of adjustment.
m. Secretary to shade tree commission.
n. Secretary to board of health.
o. Municipal court judge.
p. Deputy court Clerk.
q. Court Clerk.
r. Violations Clerk.
s. Plumbing Subcode Official.
t. Fire Prevention Official.
u. Superintendent of Department of Public Works.
v. Department of Public Works Employees.
w. Prosecutor.
x. Public defender.
y. Construction Code Official.
z. Construction Subcode Official.
§ 2-10.19 ENGLEWOOD § 2-10.19
AO:14
§ 2-10.20. Unspecified Terms.
In any instance where a term of office is not specifically set forth within
the terms of this section or shall any such term of office be inconsistent
with any provisions of the Revised Statutes creating such office, the latter
shall govern and in general the Revised Statutes shall govern any term not
specifically covered.
§ 2-10.21. Position Not Required to Be Filled.
Nothing herein shall require that any position named herein be filled or any
one appointed thereto unless required by statute.
§ 2-10.22. Zoning Code Enforcement Official; Established.
The office of zoning code enforcement official of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs be and he hereby is established and designated as the official charged
with enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 291, Public Law 1975, and
the zoning ordinance and regulations of the Borough.
§ 2-10.23. Public Defender.
aa. Secretary to Construction Official.
bb. Board of Health Inspector.
cc. Fire Subcode Official.
dd. Administrator of Public Assistance.
ee. Police officers.
ff. Recycling Coordinator.
gg. Recreation Director.
hh. Assistant Recreation Director.
ii. Youth Coordinator.
jj. Police secretary.
kk. Director of Civilian Defense.
ll. School crossing guards.
a. All persons applying for representation by the municipal public
defender or court approved counsel shall pay an application fee of not
more than $200, but only on an amount necessary to pay the costs of
municipal public defender services. In accordance with guidelines
promulgated by the Supreme Court, the municipal court may waive any
required application fee, in whole or in part, only if the court
determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by
the applicant that the application fee represents an unreasonable
§ 2-10.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.23
AO:15
§ 2-11. JOINT PURCHASING AGREEMENT.
§ 2-11.1. Title.
This section shall be known and may be cited as the joint purchasing
agreement of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 2-11.2. Contract Authorized.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor be and he
is hereby authorized to enter into a joint purchasing agreement with the
lead agency or any other contracting unit within the County of Bergen or
adjoining counties for the purchase of work, materials, and supplies.
§ 2-11.3. Compliance with Provisions of Local Public Contract Law.
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of
the Local Public Contract's Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1, et seq.) and all other
provisions of the revised statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-11.4. Awarding of Contracts.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
from awarding contracts of purchase, with or without advertising,
individually and on its own behalf, and without regard to any agreement to
burden on the person seeking representation. The municipal court may
permit a person to pay the applicable fee over a specific period of time
not to exceed four months.
b. Funds collected pursuant to Subsection a of this section shall be
deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the chief financial officer
of the municipality or in the case of a joint municipal court in a manner
agreed to by the constituent municipalities. Such fund shall be used
exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of a
municipal public defender including when required, expert and lay
investigation and testimony.
c. The municipal court may waive any application fee, all or in part, if it is
deemed within the municipal budget.
d. If it is determined by the Division of Local Government Services during
its annual review of a municipal budget that the amount of money in a
dedicated fund established pursuant to this section exceeds by more
than 25%, the amount which the municipality expended during the
prior year providing the services of a municipal public defender, the
amount in excess of the amount expended shall be forwarded to the
Criminal Disposition and Review Collection Fund administered by
Victims of Crime Compensation Board.
§ 2-10.23 ENGLEWOOD § 2-11.4
AO:16
be executed by and between the lead agency and the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs.
§ 2-12. FEES AND RULES FOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
The Borough has constructed, erected and now maintains recreational
facilities throughout the Borough for the benefit of the residents of the
Borough and certain of these recreational facilities entail costs for
maintenance thereof and for personnel to supervise and conduct
recreational programs and facilities.
It is the desire of the Mayor and Borough Council to authorize the
Councilman acting as head of the recreation committee to set reasonable
fees in recoupment of all or part of the costs for the use thereof and to
promulgate rules and regulations governing the use of such recreational
facilities. The Councilman designated by the Mayor and Council to be in
charge of the recreation committee of the Borough is hereby authorized to
set reasonable fees for the use of any and all recreational facilities of the
Borough, and further, to promulgate rules and regulations governing the
use of any and all recreational facilities of the Borough and to take such
steps as are necessary to inform the public of the fee schedule and the rules
and regulations so promulgated.
§ 2-13. POLICE DEPARTMENT.4
§ 2-13.1. Created. [Ord. No. 2018-10; amended 4-15-2020 by Ord.
No. 20-01]
§ 2-13.2. Duties.
The police department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs; direct and control
traffic; provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies;
and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers. (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-152)
a. Table of Organization: There is hereby created in and for the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs a Police Department, which shall consist of up to one
Chief of Police, up to two Captains, up to seven Lieutenants, up to five
Sergeants and up to 13 patrol persons, for a total of up to 28 sworn
officers.
b. Vacancies: Vacancies in the Police Department may be filled at the
discretion of the Mayor and Council.
4. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2017-12 which created the position of Public Safety Director was
repealed by Ord. No. 2018-08.
§ 2-11.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.3
AO:17
§ 2-13.3. Designation of Appropriate Authority.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall be
designated as the appropriate authority as provided in the New Jersey
Statutes. The appropriate authority shall be responsible for the overall
performance of the police department. The appropriate authority shall
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
police department and for the discipline of its members.
The Mayor and Council shall have the exclusive right to preside and
adjudicate all matters in regard to any hearings held pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-148. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118)
§ 2-13.4. Chief of Police.
The chief of police shall be the head of the police department and shall
be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the appropriate
authority, the chief of police shall:
§ 2-13.4A. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2018-07 adopted Promotional
Procedures for Position of Chief of Police which were subsequently
repealed by Ord. No. 2018-17]
§ 2-13.4.1. (Reserved)5
a. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the police
department and any special emergency directive for the disposition and
discipline of the department and its members and officers;
b. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
police department;
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
d. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the police department to be exercised under the chief's
direction and control; and
e. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the police department during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the appropriate authority. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118)
f. In the event that there is a vacancy in regard to the position of chief of
police or the chief of police is disabled and unable to act, then in that
event the Mayor and Council may appoint an acting chief of police until
such time as the vacancy is filled or the chief of police is able to resume
his duties. The person appointed as acting chief must at least hold the
rank of lieutenant in order to be able to be appointed acting chief of
police. Disability shall be defined as being unable to perform his usual
duties as chief for a period of 21 consecutive work days or more.
§ 2-13.3 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.5
AO:18
§ 2-13.5. Hours. [Ord. #55, S7; Ord. #7509; New; Ord. #2006-17]
Hours of duties and tours of patrol and rules and regulations shall be fixed
by the chief of police whose duty it shall be to advise the members of the
force.
§ 2-13.6. Appointments and Promotions. [Ord. #55, S8; New; Ord.
#2006-17]
§ 2-13.7. Qualifications. [Ord. #55, S9; New; Ord. #2004-19; Ord.
#2007-01, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122 and N.J.S.A. 40A: 14-127]
No person shall be appointed to the police department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The appropriate authority may also
require that an applicant for appointment to the police department shall
successfully complete a physical, mental and psychological examination.
a. Appointments. All persons appointed to the police department shall be
recommended by the police committee to the Mayor and Council for
final action and appointment. The police committee shall evaluate the
candidates for appointment and may call upon the chief of police or
acting chief of police for his guidance and advice and may, pursuant to
same, charge him with the duty of having an appropriate examination
given to the candidates to determine their qualifications.
b. Promotions. The police committee shall recommend to the Mayor and
Council for final action and appointment all persons to be promoted in
rank. They shall have the right to solicit the advice and suggestions of
the chief of police in regard to persons to be considered for promotion,
but they shall not be limited to persons whom the chief of police
suggests. The police committee and the Mayor and Council shall
evaluate the candidates and make a determination as to whom they
wish to appoint. In regard to making such determinations, they shall
give due consideration to the member or members suggested for
promotion in regard to length and merit of the candidate's service and
qualifications and preference shall be given according to seniority and
service, if appropriate, pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey
and specifically N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129. In the event that the Mayor and
Council do not wish to promote the candidate recommended by the
police committee, it shall have the right to appoint a person of their
choice provided that they adhere to the prerequisites provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129 and any other applicable statutes.
5. Editor's Note: Provisions regarding the Deputy Police Chief were adopted and amended by
Ord. Nos. 9003 and 2016-17 and subsequently repealed by Ord. Nos. 2018-10 and 20-01.
§ 2-13.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.8
AO:19
§ 2-13.8. Hiring Policies and Procedures.6 [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 1]
POLICY: The selection process is generally acknowledged as a key event in
the operational effectiveness of a law enforcement agency.
This policy sets forth the basic principles that are necessary to identify
individuals who best possess the skills, knowledge and abilities necessary
for an effective, respected law enforcement agency. The selection process
begins when an application is accepted by the department and ends when
the newly appointed officer successfully completes the probationary period.
This policy applies to all members of the Englewood Cliffs Police
Department.
§ 2-13.8.1. Procedure - Sworn Positions/Patrol Officers. [Ord. No.
2016-11 § 2; amended 7-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08; 4-15-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-03]
a. Phase One.
1. When a vacancy exists, the Chief of Police shall forward a request
to the Borough Council through the Borough Administrator to
advertise in the local newspaper(s).
(a) The advertisement shall be posted in the local newspaper(s) for
a duration to be determined by the Borough Council and will
include the filing deadline for applications.
(b) In the alternative the Chief of Police may choose to utilize an
outside contractor (such as PoliceApp) that handles the
registration, advertisement, fee collection and other items to
the extent that such outside or contractor is authorized,
certain items contained in the First Phase (found in this
subsection) shall be handled by the outside contractor and
need not be handled in accordance with Subsection A2.
2. First Phase Preliminary Applications shall be given out and
collected at police headquarters by the desk officer on duty. The
Mayor and Council, with the input of the Chief of Police, shall
determine the information contained on this form (See Appendix
A7). Applications must be picked up in person by the applicant at
police headquarters and returned in person by the applicant to
police headquarters. If an applicant is unable to pick up and/or
return the application in person at police headquarters for any
reason, the applicant may contact the Chief of Police and request
that alternative arrangements be made. The Chief of Police will
consider such requests on a case-by-case basis.
6. Editor's Note: The Appendices A, B and C referred to herein may be found in the Borough
Offices.
7. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 2-13.8 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.8.1
AO:20
3. When an applicant is given an application, the time, date and
location of the written test will be attached.
4. When the desk officer gives an applicant an application, the
dispatcher shall complete the information on the Applicant List
Form, including the application number, date taken and name of
applicant.
5. When the application is returned, the desk officer on duty shall:
(a) Enter the date and time the application was returned next to
the applicant's name and also enter a check in the designated
area to indicate that a money order or certified check was
received with the application.
(b) Collect the application and attach the money order or certified
check that is made payable to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
(1) The fee charged to cover the cost of the examination will
be $125.
(c) Give the applicant a numbered test booklet from the New
Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police and record the
booklet number next to the applicant's name on the application
and on the Applicant List Form.
(d) The desk officer shall provide the application, with the money
order or certified check attached, to the Borough
Administrator with a copy in the Chief's mailbox.
6. When the applications are received by the Borough Administrator,
he or she shall check to ensure that the appropriate fee has been
rendered and attached to the application and provide copies to the
Police Committee.
(a) All original applications are to be forwarded to the Borough
Administrator.
(b) The Borough Administrator shall forward the checks or money
orders to the appropriate Borough financial representative.
(c) The Borough Administrator shall forward the prepared
purchase order for the cost of the applicant testing to the New
Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police.
7. The Borough Administrator or designee shall arrange for the
testing locations for the written, physical and oral testing phases.
(a) The Borough Administrator or designee will be responsible for
making all the proper notifications to the applicants.
8. Eligibility.
(a) Must be a citizen of the United States.
§ 2-13.8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.8.1
AO:21
(b) Education/military.
(1) A Bachelor's Degree or an Associate's Degree or 60
semester college hours plus at least two years of
satisfactory employment shall be preferred; or
(2) Military service having a minimum length of two years
active duty in the armed forces and having been honorably
discharged from the military.
(c) Must be of good moral character.
(d) Must be at least 21 but not more than 35 years of age as of the
date of the appointment, except as provided by law in the case
of veterans.
(e) Must not have been convicted of a crime.
(f) Must possess a valid New Jersey driver's license. Applicant
must not have had license suspended or revoked within a fiveyear
period immediately preceding the date of application.
(g) Must be able to pass a medical and physical examination.
(h) Must be able to pass a psychological examination.
(i) Must take and pass a drug test.
(j) Must complete a background check including fingerprint
submissions for records check.
(k) Must be able to read, write and speak the English language
well and intelligently.
b. Phase Two - Written Examination.
1. Each applicant (meeting the minimum standards described above)
shall undergo a written examination for the position of police
patrolman as administered by the New Jersey Association of Chiefs
of Police.
(a) The top 30 candidates from the written examination shall
advance to the Physical Assessment.
2. The applicant must be present at the testing location on the date
and time specified. If the applicant does not report to the testing
location as specified, he/she shall be ineligible for further
consideration for the current vacancy.
3. Written test scores shall be submitted directly to the Chief of Police
by a representative of the New Jersey State Association of Chiefs of
Police. The Chief shall provide a copy of the test scores to the Police
Committee through the Administrator.
§ 2-13.8.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.8.1
AO:22
4. All applicants that take the written examination will be notified in
writing of his/her written test score.
5. The test scores will remain on file and may be used by the Borough
for hiring purposes for a period of three years from the date on
which the test scores were compiled by the New Jersey State
Association of Chiefs of Police.
6. If an applicant has taken the New Jersey State Association of Chiefs
of Police examination for another agency, he/she may request a
waiver to apply his/her test score to the current testing list and be
exempt from taking the test again. The request for such waiver
must be made in writing and shall be submitted to the Chief of
Police and the Borough Administrator for the test waiver approval.
His/her test score must be current.
(a) For the purpose of this section, current shall mean that the
applicant had taken the written test within one year prior to
the posted test date for the position of patrol officer with the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
c. Physical Agility Testing.
1. Following completion of the written examination, the top 30
candidates must submit to preliminary physical agility testing to
ensure they meet the minimum standards for consideration as a
Borough Patrol Officer.
d. Successful Candidate(s).
1. A candidate or candidates will be chosen after the written
examination and physical assessment by the Police Committee.
2. A cumulative average comprised of the written examination scores
and physical assessment scores shall be used to determine the top
20 candidates. At this point, the top 20 candidates shall be entitled
for a preliminary round of interviews to be conducted by a
committee formed by the Chief of Police and including the Borough
Administrator.
3. Following the first interview, the top 10 candidates will be notified
in writing and will be given a "Conditional Offer of Employment"
(See Appendix C8) before proceeding to the next step in the
selection process, Phase Three, Background Investigation. Special
Note: ADA and NJLAD requirement, must be "conditional offer of
employment."
e. Medical Examination. Following the issuance of a conditional offer of
employment, successful candidates will move on to the medical
examination.
8. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 2-13.8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.8.1
AO:23
1. The Englewood Cliffs Police Department shall pay for a candidate
to be examined.
(a) The Police Committee shall designate the physician and
arrange for the appointment.
2. The physician shall be provided with the department medical
examination form and instructed to complete the appropriate
sections.
3. The completed medical form is to be picked up from the physician
by the officer assigned and reviewed by the Police Committee.
4. Any other medical problem, other than traces of CDS in the
candidate's system, are to be thoroughly reviewed and a
determination made as to the candidate's fitness for police work in
accordance with the requirements of the ADA. A candidate may be
disqualified at this level with just cause.
5. All medical records are to be treated as confidential with access
limited in accordance with the ADA requirements; the medical
records should be kept in a separate file.
f. Phase Three - Background Investigation.
1. When the candidate(s) has successfully passed Phases One and
Two of this policy and therefore has received a conditional offer of
employment, a background investigation is to be initiated.
(a) If a candidate is disqualified at this phase, the next eligible
candidate on the list will be provided a conditional offer of
employment and moved up to position number 10 on the list. A
total of 10 candidates will move to the next phase (oral
interview #2) of the selection process.
(b) Any candidate that fails to progress to the next phase of the
selection process will be notified in writing. The cause of the
ineligibility to proceed to the next phase will be disclosed.
2. The background investigation will be conducted by an officer
designated for such duties by the Chief of Police (the Police
Committee shall be notified of the officer upon whom this
responsibility falls) on all candidates for all positions within the
Englewood Cliffs Police Department prior to appointment and will
include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) A review of the candidate's application to confirm/verify
meeting eligibility requirements for the position applied for;
(b) A check of the applicant's driving history, if driving is a
requirement of the position;
(c) A fingerprint check for criminal record;
§ 2-13.8.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.8.1
AO:24
(d) Candidates for sworn positions shall be checked against the
New Jersey Central Drug and Domestic Violence Registries;
(1) All candidates for police officer shall be subject to a
criminal history check prior to the selection phase paying
particular attention to acts of domestic violence, sexual
assault, stalking, elder abuse, or child abuse, including a
check of the Domestic Violence Registry to determine the
existence of any active restraining orders and to
determine if there is a history of domestic violence.
(2) Police officer candidates shall be interviewed about any
history of acts of domestic violence, sexual assault,
stalking, elder abuse, or child abuse and past or present
restraining orders and their disposition.
(3) Those police officer candidates with a history of
perpetrating acts of domestic violence, sexual assault,
stalking, elder abuse, or child abuse shall be identified and
declared ineligible for employment as police officers.
(e) Verification of at least three personal references.
g. Phase Four - Oral Interviews.
1. The Police Committee, Chief of Police and designees, and other
council members as designated by the Police Committee may
administer the second oral interview phase.
2. The top 10 candidates who have not been disqualified from the
background investigation shall be selected to move on to this
phase.
3. If a candidate is not selected from the first group of 10 applicants
during the oral interview, the next group of five applicants will
move to the oral interview phase.
4. The Police Committee, through the Borough Administrator or
designee, shall notify each candidate that has qualified to report for
an oral interview.
(a) Notification shall be made at least three days prior to the
scheduled interview.
(b) The candidate shall be notified of the following:
(1) Date.
(2) Time.
(3) Location.
5. A candidate may be disqualified at this level with just cause by the
Oral Interview Panel.
§ 2-13.8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.8.1
AO:25
6. Within 10 days of the oral interview, the candidate must undergo a
drug evaluation and provide blood and urine for testing which must
be conducted by a state police approved laboratory.
h. Psychological Evaluation and Drug Testing. Candidates successfully
completing Phase One through Phase Four will move on to the
psychological evaluation.
1. The Englewood Cliffs Police Department shall pay for a candidate
to be evaluated.
(a) The Police Committee shall designate the forensic psychologist
and arrange for the appointment.
2. The candidate shall be notified of the evaluation at least three days
in advance and will be notified of the following:
(a) Time.
(b) Location.
(c) Name of forensic psychologist.
(d) Date.
3. The psychological evaluation is designed to provide the department
with dimensional information about a candidate that will assist in
the selection process.
4. The Police Committee and Chief of Police shall review the
psychological evaluation report. A candidate may be disqualified at
this level with just cause.
5. Blood and urine analysis is to be conducted of any applicant at this
time. If a candidate testing reveals any trace of a controlled
dangerous substance in their system, without a valid prescription
for same, they shall be disqualified from the selection process.
i. Selection.
1. The Police Committee may classify all duly qualified applicants to
be filled in the following classes:
(a) Residents of Englewood Cliffs.
(b) Other residents of Bergen County.
(c) Other residents of the state.
(d) All other qualified applicants.
2. Within each classification duly qualified applicants who are
veterans shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are
provided by law.
§ 2-13.8.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.8.1
AO:26
§ 2-13.8.2. Procedure - Non-Sworn Positions. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 3]
3. The Police Committee will make its recommendation(s) to the
Mayor and Council for appointment.
a. Eligibility - Police Records Clerk/Secretary.
1. Citizen of the United States.
2. High school graduate or General Equivalency Degree (GED).
3. At the time of appointment, must be a resident of New Jersey and
possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
4. At least 18 years of age.
5. Must be able to pass a psychological exam.
6. Must be able to pass a medical exam.
7. Must be able to pass an oral interview.
8. Must not have been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty
or any indictable crime listed in Title 2C of the New Jersey Criminal
Code.
9. Must take and pass a drug test.
10. Must pass a complete background check including fingerprint
submission for a records check.
11. Must be of good moral character.
b. Eligibility - School Crossing Guard/Police Matron.
1. Citizen of the United States.
2. Minimum of high school diploma or GED.
3. At the time of appointment, must be a resident of New Jersey and
possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
4. At least 18 years of age.
5. Must be able to pass a psychological exam.
6. Must be able to pass a medical exam.
7. Must be able to pass an oral interview.
8. Must not have been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty
or any indictable crime listed in Title 2C of the New Jersey Criminal
Code.
9. Must pass a complete background check including fingerprint
submission for a records check.
§ 2-13.8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.8.2
AO:27
§ 2-13.8.3. Fees Related to Employment in the Police Department.
[Ord. No. 2017-01]
The following non-refundable fees are hereby established and due and
payable to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs at the time of services rendered:
10. Must be of good moral character.
c. Eligibility - Police Dispatcher (Telecommunication).
1. Citizen of the United States.
2. High school graduate or General Equivalency Degree (GED).
3. At the time of appointment, must be a 9-1-1 Telecommunicator and
Emergency Medical Dispatch certified (APCO) or equivalent that
meets New Jersey state criteria.
4. At least 18 years of age.
5. Must be able to pass a psychological exam.
6. Must be able to pass a medical exam.
7. Must be able to pass an oral interview.
8. Must not have been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty
or any indictable crime listed in Title 2C of the New Jersey Criminal
Code.
9. Must take and pass a drug test.
10. Must pass a complete background check including fingerprint
submission for a records check.
11. Must be of good moral character.
**EMTs and New Jersey Class II Special Officers preferred but not
mandatory.
d. Selection Process.
1. The position and requirements are advertised in a county-wide
newspaper (i.e. Bergen Record) and posted on the Borough
website.
2. Applicants will be required to complete a job application.
3. Prospective candidates will be selected and interviewed by the
Chief of Police. The number of applicants selected will vary
depending on the number of positions to be filled.
4. Selected candidate(s) will be recommended to the Mayor and
Council for appointment.
§ 2-13.8.2 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.8.3
AO:28
§ 2-13.9. Oath. [Ord. #55, S11; Ord. #117R; New]
Before entering upon the duties of his office and within 10 days after
his appointment, each member of the police department shall take and
subscribe an oath of affirmation to support the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of New Jersey, and to faithfully, impartially
and justly perform all the duties of his office and shall file such oath of
affirmation with the Clerk. Upon failure to take such oath, the office shall
be deemed vacant.
§ 2-13.10. Probationary Appointment. [Ord. #55, S12; New]
No person shall be given or accept a permanent appointment as a police
officer in the Borough unless such person has first been given a
probationary appointment to such office for a period of one year and has
successfully completed a police training course at a school approved and
authorized by the police training commission in the Department of Law
and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 56 of the Laws of 1959.
§ 2-13.11. Conduct.
Any member of the department shall be subject to reprimand, loss of pay,
suspension from duty, reduction in rank or dismissal or removal from the
department according to the nature and aggravation of his offense in the
manner provided by law for any of the following:
a. The fee of $125 shall be incurred and due and payable to the Borough
by each individual applicant who receives an application for
employment with the Police Department as a Police Officer.
a. Intoxication whether on duty or off and whether in uniform or not.
b. Drinking any intoxicating liquor while on duty or in uniform.
c. Willful disobedience of orders.
d. Using indecent, profane, harsh or uncivil language to any persons while
on duty.
e. Disrespect to a superior officer.
f. Unnecessary violence to a prisoner or any other person.
g. Sleeping while on duty.
h. Absent from duty without leave.
i. Leaving his beat or assignment without good reason.
j. Immorality, indecency or lewdness.
k. Violation of any criminal law or penal ordinance.
§ 2-13.8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.11
AO:29
l. For conduct conductive of lack of good order and/or discipline of the
police department.
m. For conduct unbecoming an officer and gentleman.
n. For refusing to do police duty of any kind whenever necessity requires
whether on patrol or elsewhere and whether in uniform or not.
o. Not properly patrolling post.
p. No officer or employee of the police department shall be or become a
member of any fraternity, association, organization, corporation or
combination of persons or associations or corporation that has among
its or their purposes antagonism or opposition to any person because of
religion, race or color.
q. Neglecting or refusing to pay just debts.
r. Publicly and unfavorably commenting on the official action of a superior
officer.
s. Revealing to any person not a member of the force any proposed police
action or movements or provisions of any official order.
t. Making any false statement in application to the force.
u. Incompetency, lack of energy, or incapacity, either mental or physical.
v. Neglect of duty.
w. Each member on reporting for duty must be neat and clean in his
personal clothing. If in uniform he shall be in conformity to the
regulations hereinafter set forth: the uniform shall be clean, well
pressed, worn neatly and buttoned.
x. Members are forbidden to receive or accept a reward or present of any
kind directly or indirectly, for any act in the performance of his duty
without permission being first had and obtained of the chief of police.
y. No member shall be permitted to solicit for any attorney to become
surety for anyone charged with the commission of a crime or to release
a person from custody after arrest except as provided by law.
z. Members are required to report to the chief of police or, in his absence,
to the officer in charge, any change in residence at least 12 hours
before it takes place.
aa. Members of the force shall promptly turn over to the chief of police or
officer in charge all lost, stolen or recovered property or evidence
whatsoever coming into his possession, taking receipt for the same.
bb. Members of the force, while on duty at trials in court on police cases,
shall wear the full regulation uniform unless excused by the chief of
§ 2-13.11 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.11
AO:30
§ 2-13.11A. Hearing of Disciplinary Matters Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and N.J.S.A. 14-147, all hearings in regard
to disciplinary matters instituted pursuant to these statutes, must be
determined by the appropriate authority.
It is hereby defined that the appropriate authority is the Mayor and Council.
The appropriate authority may, in its discretion, appoint a hearing official to
provide all disciplinary actions needed pursuant to either statute.
In those instances where the appropriate authority has appointed a hearing
officer, the hearing officer shall preside over all hearings in accordance with
the laws.
At the conclusion of the proceeding, the hearing officer shall make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council who shall have the final
authority to determine the charges.
§ 2-13.12. Suspension; Removal; Fines; Reduction in Rank.
No member or officer of the police department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the
police department's rules and regulations. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147)
§ 2-13.13. Outside Employment.
Each and every member of the police department shall devote his whole
time and attention to the business of the department. The Mayor and
Council, upon application of any member for permission to do so, may
authorize such member of the police department to engage in outside
or additional employment which does not conflict or interfere with his
proper performance of his duties as a policeman. Although certain hours are
allotted to the respective members for the performance of duty on ordinary
occasions, at all times they shall be prepared to act immediately on notice
that their services are required.
§ 2-13.14. Rules Governing Employment of Off-Duty Police Officers.
police. Plainclothes officers appearing in court in police cases shall
wear their badge on the left breast of their outermost garment.
a. Definitions as used herein:
1. POLICE OFFICER – Shall mean any regular police officer of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
2. EMPLOYER – Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation,
business entity or other organization, other than the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs, which employs a police officer to perform the
§ 2-13.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.14
AO:31
services of a security guard, traffic control officer or plainclothes
surveillance officer.
3. OFF-DUTY – Shall mean all periods of time when a police officer is
not scheduled for a tour of duty by the Englewood Cliffs Police
Department.
4. SECURITY GUARD – Shall mean a position of employment
involving the wearing of an Englewood Cliffs Police Uniform or the
carrying of a firearm or other dangerous weapon as defined by
N.J.S.A. 2A:151-41.
5. TRAFFIC CONTROL OFFICER – Shall mean a position of
employment involving the wearing of an Englewood Cliffs Police
Uniform while directing traffic within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs.
6. PLAINCLOTHES SURVEILLANCE OFFICER – Shall mean a
position of employment involving the wearing or carrying of an
Englewood Cliffs Police Badge or the carrying of a firearm or other
dangerous weapon as defined by N.J.S.A. 2A:151-41.
7. WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE – Shall mean all
forms of insurance, including self-insurance, required under
N.J.S.A. 43:15-1 et seq.
8. WHILE IN THE EMPLOY OF THE EMPLOYER – Shall mean all
times when a police officer is scheduled for and does work for the
employer as a security guard, traffic control officer or plainclothes
surveillance officer.
b. No employer shall employ an Englewood Cliffs Police Officer while offduty
to perform the services of a security guard, traffic control officer
or plainclothes surveillance officer without having first filed with the
Borough Clerk a certificate of workmen's compensation insurance.
c. No employer shall employ an Englewood Cliffs Police Officer while offduty
to perform the services of a security guard, traffic control officer
or plainclothes surveillance officer without having first filed with the
Borough Clerk a certificate of comprehensive general liability
insurance in the amount of not less than $200,000 for one person and
$500,000 for any one occurrence with respect to injuries and damages
suffered or caused by police officers while in the employ of the
employer.
d. No certificate of insurance required by this subsection be deemed filed
with the Borough Clerk unless it has been first approved by the
Borough Attorney.
e. All policies of insurance evidenced by any certificate filed hereunder
shall be maintained by the employee in full force and effect at all times
while any police officer is employed by such employer. Upon the change
§ 2-13.14 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13.14
AO:32
§ 2-13.15. Special Law Enforcement Officers.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs may appoint
from time to time special law enforcement officers in accordance with
New jersey Statutes for terms not exceeding one year. They shall possess
and exercise all the powers and duties provided by said statutes during
their term in office, but shall not be continued as regular members of
the police department and shall not be entitled to tenure. The chief of
police may authorize special law enforcement officers when on duty to
exercise the same powers and authority as regular members of the police
department including the carrying of firearms and the power of arrest.
(N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.)
§ 2-13.16. Fees in Regard to Traffic Control. [Ord. No. 2013-05; Ord.
No. 2015-07; Ord. No. 2017-14; 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
or renewal of any such policy of insurance, the employer shall forthwith
file with the Borough Clerk a new and current certificate of insurance
in compliance with the foregoing provisions.
f. Any employer who employs a police officer while off-duty to perform the
aforesaid services without first having complied with the requirements
of this subsection shall be subject to a fine of $500 or imprisonment of
one day, or both, for each day that it employs the police officer.
g. No police officer shall accept any outside employment without first
obtaining, in addition to all other requirements herein, the express
permission of the chief of police.
h. Any police officer who accepts or continues employment while off-duty
with an employer which has not complied with the requirements of this
subsection shall be deemed in violation of the rules and regulations of
the police department and shall be subject to appropriate discipline
thereunder. The police officer shall, prior to accepting or continuing offduty
employment, ascertain from the prospective employer, whether it
has complied with the provisions hereof. If the employer has not yet
complied, the police officer shall not accept the prospective off-duty
employment.
a. Upon notice to the Borough of construction, road work, or any event
(public or private) upon or near the public roadways located within the
Borough and adjoining facilities, the Chief of Police or his designee
shall determine whether or not is necessary to have a police officer
present during said period of time and/or a patrol car, if necessary, and
if it is determined that the same is necessary, there shall be fees
charged as follows:
1. $105 per hour or part thereof for an off-duty police officer, with an
initial charge for a minimum of four hours;
§ 2-13.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.16
AO:33
§ 2-13A. TOWING AND STORAGE.9
§ 2-13A.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards, regulations and rates
for the towing and storing of motor vehicles pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50
concerning the towing and storage of motor vehicles without the consent of
the owner.
§ 2-13A.2. Definitions.
LICENSEE — Shall mean towing operator.
2. $35 per hour or part thereof for the presence of a police vehicle,
with an initial charge for a minimum of four hours;
3. Time in excess of the initial minimum four hours shall be charged at
the same hourly rate for the next two-hour period or part thereof.
Time in excess of six hours shall be charged thereafter at the same
hourly rate for the next two-hour period or part thereof. Time in
excess of eight hours shall be charged thereafter at the same
hourly rate for each one-hour period or part thereof;
4. An administrative fee in the amount of 7% of the total fees incurred
under this § 2-13.16. Five percent of the administrative fee shall be
dedicated to the Borough's Police program, Drug Abuse Resistance
Education ("DARE"), or to such other of the Borough's public
educational programs as may be approved by the Borough
Administrator or, in the Administrator's absence, by the Mayor and
Council.
b. These fees shall be paid by the appropriate contractor, utility company,
public or private vendor or the person requiring said work within 30
days of receipt of an invoice.
c. The appropriate contractor, utility company, public or private vender,
shall give prior notice to the Borough, at least 24 hours before, of their
intent to perform work upon the public highways of the municipality
and adjoining facilities. However, in the event of an emergency, such
time notice shall be waived.
d. In the event that the contractor, utility company, public or private
vendor cancels the notice to provide police officers and/or a police
vehicle, a cancellation notice shall be given by same to the Borough
Police Department at least two hours before the designated starting
time. If said notice is not given or not given on a timely basis, there will
be a fee of $420 assessed per cancellation, plus the administrative fee
set forth in § 2-13.16(a)(4) above.
9. Editor's Note: This section was adopted as Subsections 2-13.15 — 2-13.35. It was
renumbered for codification purposes.
§ 2-13.16 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13A.2
AO:34
OWNER — Shall mean a person, firm, corporation or other entity who owns,
leases and/or operates, parks or abandons a vehicle on the roads, highways
or property, public or private, within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, which
vehicle by reason of being disabled or being unlawfully upon said roads,
highways or property, public or private, requires towing services.
POLICE — Shall mean the Police Department of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs and/or state police and/or county police or such other police as may
have jurisdiction upon the roadways on which the vehicle may be found in
said Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
TOW TRUCK — Shall mean a vehicle driven by mechanical power and
employed for the purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing
any and all kinds of vehicles or parts of vehicles which are unable to
be operated under their own power, for which a service charge or fee is
exacted. The definition of "tow truck" shall also include the use of a flatbed
"tow truck."
TOWING OPERATOR — Shall mean a person, firm, corporation or other
entity engaged in the business of providing tow truck services and storage
services for vehicle towed, which services are made available to the general
public upon such rates, charges and fees as determined by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and which towing operator is
licensed under the provisions of this section.
WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF OWNER — Shall mean the removal or towing
of a vehicle without the owner's personal selection or designation as to
whom the tower shall be.
§ 2-13A.3. Towing of Vehicle Without Consent of Owner.
Whenever it shall appear that it shall be necessary for the police to order
the removal or towing of a motor vehicle within the confines of the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs without the consent of the owner, the following rules
and regulations shall take place: Said vehicle shall be towed only by the
person duly authorized and licensed by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs to
tow and store said vehicles.
§ 2-13A.4. License Required.
No towing operator covered by Subsection 2-13A.1 hereinbefore set forth
under the heading "Purpose" shall engage in the business of providing
tow truck services without the consent of the owner within the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs without obtaining a license in accordance with the
provisions of this section and pursuant to this Ordinance with the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 2-13A.5. Licensing Standards.
a. The licensee must be of good business character and reputation.
§ 2-13A.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13A.5
AO:35
b. A licensee must have at least three years experience, as a sole
proprietor, partner or as an employee in the towing of vehicles in order
to be considered for the issuance of a license.
c. The licensee shall submit proof of ownership by record title of the
required tow truck and flatbed tow truck. A copy of the registration for
each vehicle and copies of current and valid insurance policies and
cards shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk.
d. Equipment requirements. No license shall be issued to a towing
operator who does not own or lease for utilization in his or its business
the following equipment, which equipment shall be inspected by the
chief of police or his authorized representative prior to a license being
issued and a report of said inspection furnished to the Borough Council.
Said equipment shall be designated as follows:
1. Two a minimum of one light-duty wrecker and one flatbed for
vehicles under 10,000 pounds.
2. Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include a
universal towing sling; except flatbed, J-hooks and chains; one
snatch block for three-eighths-inch to one-half-inch cable; two hightest
safety chains; auxiliary safety light kit to place on rear of towed
vehicle; four-lamp or three-lamp revolving amber light or lamp
bars; toolbox with assortment of hand tools; rear working lights
located to clear towed vehicle; blocking choke for wrecker while
working; safety cones; shovels and broom; steering wheel lock or
tie-down. All towing vehicles must be equipped with at least one
five pound ABC-type fire extinguisher, safety chains, substances for
application to small liquid spills, and stiff push brooms to clean up
debris at scene.
3. All tow trucks must be properly lettered on both sides as provided
by law.
4. All trucks and equipment will be maintained and operated in
accordance with all existing traffic regulations and in a safe and
prudent manner and may be inspected for such condition by the
police at any time, wherever located. Any deficiency in such
condition reported by the police to the licensee shall be promptly
corrected and any failure to correct may be cited as a violation of
the license pursuant to this section.
5. A truck driver will request police assistance during the course of
servicing when he finds it necessary to turn around, back up, tow in
the opposite direction, cross the median, etc.
e. General area. The towing operator shall provide a general storage yard,
with not less than 15 secured parking spaces as outlined under
Subsection 2-13A.12, Rates, Subsection a, of this section. The towing
operator shall further have it its disposal a secured indoor storage
§ 2-13A.5 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13A.5
AO:36
facility to house at least one vehicle at the request of the police
department.
1. Towing companies shall not remove any motor vehicles from
storage without first notifying the Englewood Cliffs Police.
2. The towing company shall notify the Englewood Cliffs Police of any
vehicles that are found to be abandoned or not claimed within 14
days (two weeks) after being stored.
3. All towing companies will submit a copy of receipts of all vehicles
towed and stored to the Englewood Cliffs Police "Traffic Bureau" at
the end of every month for accurate accountability.
f. General standards.
1. The storage facilities shall have proper sign identification upon the
same prominently displaying all fees in accordance with this
section and shall be kept clean so as to be reasonably
accommodating to persons of the Borough or others who may come
upon said premises shall be located within two miles of the borders
of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for all authorized towing
pursuant to this section. All vehicles towed pursuant to this section
shall be stored in secured parking spaces unless otherwise
designated by the owner.
(a) The required storage area shall be located within two miles of
the Borough's boundaries. The hours of recovery of vehicles
shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. weekdays and 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Recovery of vehicles on holidays or at
any other time will be arranged by vehicle owner and tow
company.
2. A tow operator shall not be charged with a call if the owner
designates the tow operator.
3. All aiding operators and their drivers shall be fully trained and
knowledgeable in the operation of all required equipment.
4. All towing operators shall complete the application for towing
license and list all drivers who will be operating their tow trucks.
5. Towing operator employees who drive vehicles on the Borough
roads or highways traversing said Borough must have a driver's
license with no restrictions or conditional endorsements, except a
condition requiring glasses; they shall be of good moral character,
mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times.
Possession by a driver of commercial driver's license, as required
by N.J.S.A. 39:10 et seq., is mandatory.
6. All towing operators must be available for service on a twenty-fourhour,
seven-days-a-week basis without exception.
§ 2-13A.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13A.5
AO:37
7. It shall be the obligation of the towing operator to immediately
notify the police in the event that said towing operator is wholly or
partially not operational due to mechanical failure of his vehicle or
personnel insufficiency. It shall be the responsibility of the towing
operator to provide a replacement driver and equipment.
8. If a request for towing service is made by the Englewood Cliffs
Police Department and then canceled, prior to the tow truck driver
hooking up the vehicle, there will be no charge to either the owner
of the vehicle or the Englewood Cliffs Police Department.
9. The towing operator will not be responsible for towing services
unless directed by the Englewood Cliffs Police Department.
10. The towing operator will be responsible for all vehicles and
contents in their custody that were towed off the roadway under
the direction of the police. An inventory shall be made by members
of the Englewood Cliffs Police Department at the scene to note the
contents of each vehicle.
11. The towing operator will cooperate with other operators in the case
of emergency services at the scene of accidents and/or disasters.
12. No vehicle will be removed from the Borough roads or highways
traversing said Borough without proper authorization from the
police at the scene or the owner of the vehicles, as the case may
be.
13. All vehicles impounded or confiscated will not be released or
disposed of without proper vehicle report form, duly executed by
proper police department personnel or as provided in N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1 et seq.
14. The towing operator will dispatch, within the time period permitted
by this chapter, a tow truck(s), when requested by the desk officer
to respond to a police-requested call for service.
15. All disputes between towing operators, the public at the scene and/
or owners will be reported to the police chief or his designee, who
will act as a mediator and attempt to resolve their differences in a
civil and lawful manner. No driver of a towing operator will create a
disturbance on the highway.
16. The police officer investigating the incident is in complete charge
of the incident scene, and all drivers shall comply with the officer's
instructions.
17. All towing operators shall maintain insurance coverage no less than
the following schedule:
(a) Garage liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less
than $500,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and
§ 2-13A.5 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13A.5
AO:38
property damage) per occurrence including premises
operations and products/completed operations.
(b) Automobile liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be
less than $500,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and
property damage) per occurrence.
(c) Garage keepers legal liability insurance Physical damage
insurance policies shall be specifically endorsed to provide
"direct primary" insurance, where applicable, for vehicles in
tow, possession of, or storage on property owned or controlled
by the contractor. Limit of said coverage shall be not less than
$100,000.
(d) Excess umbrella insurance. Limit of liability shall be not less
than $1,000,00 provided protection in excess of the $500,000
garage and auto liability coverage. Note: this requirement may
be waived if the limits of liability in sections (a) and (b) above
are not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit.
(e) On all liability policies, the municipality shall be added as an
additional insured, and insurance certificates shall indicate
such coverage as primary coverage notwithstanding any
insurance carried by the municipality.
(f) Workers compensation insurance. Statutory coverage,
including employers liability coverage with a limit of at least
$500,000/$500,000/$500,000 in accordance with State Law.
(g) The contractor shall indemnify the municipality and the public
against any loss due to injuries, accidents or damages or any
character whatsoever where any such damage is the result of
act or omission of the contractor, his agents or employees in or
due to the execution of the work called for under the contract.
(h) Certified copies of all insurance policies provided above or
certificates thereof satisfactory to the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs shall be furnished forthwith. Each such policy or
certificate shall contain a provision that it is not subject to
change, cancellation or nonrenewal unless 30 days' prior
written notice via certified mail/return receipt shall have been
given to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs by the contractor's
insurer. These must be received 30 days prior to
commencement of work.
(i) The providing of any insurance required herein does not
relieve the contractor of any of the responsibilities or
obligations assumed by the contractor for which the contractor
may be liable by law or otherwise.
(j) If any policies contain deductibles or copayments, it shall be
the responsibility of the contractor or pay such sums at the
§ 2-13A.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13A.5
AO:39
§ 2-13A.6. License Fees.
§ 2-13A.7. Application and Term of License.
same time a claim is settled by the contractor's insurance
company.
(k) If any policies contain limits of liability with an aggregate limit,
the contractor or the contractor's insurance company shall
provide the municipality — quarterly during the policy period
— a statement of evidencing the limits of liability required
under the contract to be in force.
(l) Failure to provide and continue in force such insurance as
required above shall be deemed a material breach of the
contract and shall cause an immediate termination thereof.
(m) All policies shall be written in either a company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey or a New Jersey eligible
Surplus Lines Company, with a minimum Best rating of A-X.
They shall be written on an ISO (Insurance Service Office) form
or better.
18. It is understood and agreed by towing operator that police shall in
no way be labile to the towing operator for any services whatsoever
which may be rendered to motor vehicles, and the towing operator
will look only to the driver or last registered owner of such vehicles
for compensation.
19. The main office and storage facilities of any towing operator shall
be located within two miles of the borders of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
a. The following schedule of fees is hereby adopted for obtaining a towing
operator's license pursuant to this section:
1. Application fee: $100.
2. License fee: $200 per licensed operator.
b. Fees paid pursuant to this subsection shall not be refundable for any
reason.
a. Form: required information. An application for a license shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain all information
necessary to evidence the applicant's identity and legal address,
compliance with the requirements of this section and the ability to
perform the towing services and storage services contemplated by this
section.
b. Filing. Applications shall be filed with the Borough Clerk together with
a certified check for the application fee. The Borough Clerk shall give
30 days public notice in an official newspaper of the Borough of the date
§ 2-13A.5 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13A.7
AO:40
§ 2-13A.8. Number of Operators; Rotation.
§ 2-13A.9. General Rules and Regulations.
on which the license applications are to be received pursuant to this
section.
c. Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be for a term of one year.
Said one-year period, regardless of the date of application, shall
commence on January 1 of the year of said application. Application shall
be made at least 30 days prior to the January 1st next succeeding the
year for which the application is made except in regard to the
applications connected with the original passage of this section. In that
event, applications shall be made within 30 days after the effective date
of this section.
a. Each of the approved licensees shall be placed on a list of rotating basis
by the chief of police. A calendar shall be prepared designating each
day on the calendar as the day that a licensed tow truck operator is
responsible. A licensed towing company may substitute another
company for the date scheduled for the towing company if the
substitute company is on the licensed towing list. Failure to respond
shall be grounds for suspension of towing license.
b. The licensed tow company must be available to tow cars on a 24 hours a
day basis. If the company on duty is not available on a particular day
then the next listed company will be called. Unavailability on the date
scheduled, without a substitute company will be considered a violation
of the license.
c. A licensed towing company will be responsible for cleaning any debris
left at the accident scene.
d. A response time of 15 minutes will be expected from each licensed
towing company called by the police department. If the towing company
on duty fails to respond within the time period the next licensed towing
company will be called. Failure to respond within the stated time frame
will be considered a violation of the license.
e. All licensed towing companies will provide road service calls as
required by the police department. Such calls shall include jump
starting vehicles, changing of tires, providing of fuel, opening locked
vehicles and similar services. Such services will only be performed if
they can be done so safely, as determined by the police officer on the
scene. The fee for these services shall be at a fair rate: $50.
a. All towing services shall respond to a call in any part of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs within 15 minutes. If a towing service does not
respond within 15 minutes of a call, the towing service next on the list
shall be called and entitled to provide services as needed, and the first
towing service shall lose any claim to compensation.
§ 2-13A.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13A.9
AO:41
§ 2-13A.10. License Suspension or Revocation.
§ 2-13A.11. License Transfer.
No controlling interest in a license issued pursuant to this section shall be
assigned, transferred or sold, except on specific approval of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, and, upon cessation of activity
or authority under the license through revocation or otherwise, the license
shall be determined null and void. In no event shall any such license be
posted as collateral. At the time of application for said license, the towing
operator shall complete and submit, on Borough forms, a statement of
ownership. Any controlling interest transfer of ownership in a licensee's
business, be it actual transfer or stock ownership, without Borough
approval, shall render the license void. In the event of sale or transfer, the
b. No towing operator operating under the license issued hereunder shall
employ any sworn officers of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for the
purpose of towing under this chapter.
c. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs Police Department shall maintain a
record of calls to licensed towing operators under this chapter.
d. Such additional rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Borough Council pursuant to this section shall take effect after
notification of such rules and regulations upon all holders of licenses as
towing operators. Service shall be made by forwarding these rules and
regulations by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee
at the address listed in his most recent application.
a. The Borough Council shall have the right to suspend or revoke any
license issued under this section for good cause, upon written
complaint of the chief of police of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
following his determination that there is probable cause for revocation
or suspension based upon violation of this chapter. Written notice of
such complaint and the basis of the complaint shall be entitled to a
hearing before the Borough Council prior to final determination of the
complaint by the Borough Council. If, upon full hearing, the Borough
Council decides that there have been violations, then a majority vote of
those present and voting may terminate or suspend said license. In the
event that a request for a license is denied in the first instance the
applicant whose request for a license has been denied shall be afforded
an opportunity to determine the reason for the denial, and the
procedure for the same shall be the same as hereinbefore set forth for
suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
b. The licensee or applicant pursuant to Subsection a shall file his request
for a hearing before the Mayor and Council with the Borough Clerk by
certified mail within 15 days of the receipt of the proposed notice of
suspension or revocation or denial of his application for a license as the
case may be. The Mayor and Council shall hold the necessary hearing
and shall act within 60 days thereafter.
§ 2-13A.9 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13A.11
AO:42
new application, if any, shall make a new application and pay fees and be
approved by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
§ 2-13A.12. Rates.
a. The following daily rates are applicable within the purposes and intent
of this section for storage of vehicles towed from public property:
1. Secured storage with 15 spaces: $35.
2. Inside secured storage: $50.
b. The following daily rates are applicable within the purpose and intent of
this chapter for storage of vehicles towed from private property:
1. A limit of $35 per day for the first 30 days of storage per vehicle.
2. A limit of $35 per day for the 31st day of storage and any day
thereafter.
c. Maximum fees for towing vehicles from both public or private property,
by tow truck or flatbed. The following shall comprise a list of the
maximum fees for towing vehicles in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
(automobiles - 1 through 5):
1. Daytime (8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.): $50.
2. Nighttime (6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.): $60.
3. Sundays and holidays; $60.
4. Winching for other than a normal tow: $25. If a winch is needed to
complete the tow and if more than 30 minutes is needed to
complete the tow, then $75 per hour will be charged related to the
time used and difficulty encountered.
5. Trucks and buses: customary, $125 per hour.
d. Towing charges.
1. Passenger vehicles $100.
2. Flat bed tow $100.
3. Commercial vehicle/large truck customary rate $125 per hour
(2007).
4. Road service (i.e. jump start, tire change, lockout $50.
5. Winching off property (rolled vehicles, etc.) $100.
6. Motorcycles or motor scooters $65.
Hourly rate: $100.
§ 2-13A.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13A.12
AO:43
§ 2-13A.13. Classification as Vehicle.
One-half ton trucks and vans will be classified as vehicles for the purpose of
this section.
§ 2-13A.14. Promulgation of Rules and Regulations: Copies to
Towing Companies.
The Borough Council or its designated representative shall promulgate
additional rules and regulations when necessary, as set forth under
Subsection 2-13A.9, General Rules and Regulations. Copies of said rules
and regulations shall be made available to all towing companies.
§ 2-13A.15. Towing into Police Department Lot Restricted.
No vehicles are to be towed into the police department parking lot unless
specifically ordered by the police department. Vehicles under police
investigation will be towed free of charge.
The tow company shall charge only one day storage for each twenty-fourhour
period to commence from the time of arrival of the tow truck at the
scene upon notification by the police department.
e. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, as amended, all towers licensed under
this section will provide a statement that regulations and fee schedules
are available to the general public during the normal business hours of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
All towing companies are responsible for heavy duty tows during their
on duty status even if the towing company must sub-contract for the
service. The rates should be what are customary and fair. The on-duty
tower is completely responsible.
The on duty tow shall provide towing and road service for police and
other municipal vehicles pursuant to the following rate:
In Englewood Cliffs $20
Outside of Englewood Cliffs $30
If after 30 days from the date of towing the vehicle remains unclaimed,
then it shall be deemed abandoned and the Borough shall be entitled
to take such action as is permitted under N.J.S.A. 39:10A (Abandoned
Vehicle Law). The towing company shall not be entitled to collect
further charges i.e. storage charges, etc. The towing company shall
notify the police department at the end of the 30 days of the date of the
towing, that the vehicle has not been claimed and shall not be entitled
to any further storage charges unless the owner has authorized same.
§ 2-13A.12 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13A.16
AO:44
§ 2-13A.16. Security for Towed Vehicles Required.
All authorized garages will maintain reasonable security for all towed
vehicles to safeguard against vandalism and theft, as more specifically
set forth under Subsections b and c under Subsection 2-13A.5, Licensing
Standards.
§ 2-13A.17. Department of Motor Vehicles Information.
The police department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall provide,
when requested, towing operators with the Motor Vehicle Commission
information regarding registered owners and lienholders. This information
requested and given shall be in conformance with N.J.S.A. 39:10A et seq.
and shall not in any way violate the confidentiality that is reposed in the
police department.
§ 2-13A.18. Implementation.
Under the adoption of this section, the Borough Clerk shall give 30 days'
public notice of the receipt of the license application pursuant to this
section. Public notice shall be given by publication in an appropriate
newspaper circulated within the Borough.
§ 2-13A.19. License-Issuing Authority.
The license-issuing authority shall be the Mayor and Borough Council of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 2-13A.20. Violations and Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
judge of the municipal court and further subject to revocation of license by
the Mayor and Council. If such revocation is proposed the licensee shall be
notified at least 15 days beforehand and be entitled to a hearing before the
Mayor and Council pursuant to Subsection 2-13A.10.
§ 2-13A.21. Submission of Section to Division of Consumer Affairs.
The governing body shall submit a copy of this section including the
schedule of rates contained thereto to the Division of Consumer Affairs
within 90 days of the adoption of this section.
§ 2-13A.22. Removal of Vehicle from Private Property by Private
Towing Company. [Ord. No. 2015-08]
a. A private property towing company should not remove a motor vehicle
from private property without the consent of the owner or operator of
the motor vehicle, unless;
§ 2-13A.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13A.22
AO:45
1. The private property towing company has entered into a written
contract with the owner of the private property to provide private
property towing services;
2. The owner of the private property has posted a sign, in a
conspicuous place at each vehicular entrance, at least 36 inches
high and 36 inches wide stating:
(a) The purposes for which parking is authorized and the times
during which such parking is permitted;
(b) The unauthorized parking is prohibited and unauthorized
motor vehicles will be towed at the owner's expense;
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the private
property towing company that will perform the private
property towing;
(d) The charges for the private property towing and storage of
towed motor vehicles;
(e) The street address of the storage facility where towed motor
vehicles can be redeemed after payment of the posted charges
and the times during which a motor vehicle may be redeemed;
and
(f) That a consumer may contact the Division of Consumer Affairs
by calling 1-800-242-5846, prompt number 4;
3. The property owner has authorized the private property towing
company to remove the motor vehicle; and
4. The private property towing company tows the motor vehicle to a
secure storage facility having the capacity to receive it that is
nearest to the site from which the motor vehicle is towed.
b. The provisions of Subsection a above shall not apply if a motor vehicle is
parked:
1. On a lot or parcel on which is situated a single-family unit;
2. On a lot or parcel on which is situated an owner occupied multi-unit
structure of no more than six units; or
3. In front of any driveway or garage entrance where the motor
vehicle is blocking access to that driveway or entrance.
c. The provisions of Subsection a2 above shall not apply if the private
property from which the motor vehicle is to be towed is a residential
community in which parking spaces are assigned to community
residents and;
1. The assigned spaces are clearly marked as such;
§ 2-13A.22 ENGLEWOOD § 2-13A.22
AO:46
§ 2-14. VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-14.1. Age for Volunteer Firemen.
Persons over the age of 18 years may, following their 18th birthday,
participate as volunteer firemen in the volunteer fire department of the
Borough subject to the rules and regulations of the volunteer fire
department.
§ 2-14.2. Borough to Provide Life Insurance Coverage.
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall provide each active member in good
standing of the Englewood Cliffs Fire Protection Company No. 1 with life
insurance coverage in the amount not to exceed $10,000. Said coverage
shall include dismemberment benefits.
§ 2-14.3. Maintenance of Coverage.
Each present or future member of the Englewood Cliffs Fire Protection
Company No. 1 who retires in good standing after at least 20 years of
service, shall be provided with $10,000 of life insurance. Said amount of
coverage shall be maintained by the Borough until the former member
reaches the age of 70, at which time, the amount of life insurance shall be
reduced to $3,000 which shall be thereafter maintained on the said former
member for life.
§ 2-14.4. Death Benefits.
2. There is documented approval from the private property owner
authorizing the removal of the motor vehicle; and
3. A sign is posted in a conspicuous place at all vehicular entrances
that:
(a) States that unauthorized parking in an assigned space is
prohibited;
(b) States that unauthorized vehicles will be towed at the owner's
expense; and
(c) Includes information, or a telephone number, enabling the
motor vehicle owner or operator to obtain information as to the
location of the towed motor vehicle.
d. The exemption in Subsection c above shall not apply to a private
parking lot or parcel owned or assigned to a commercial or other
nonresidential entity located in the residential community.
a. In the event of the death of any active or former active member of the
Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Fire Department with at least seven years of
qualified service, who is not entitled to the death benefits of the New
Jersey State Firemen's Association, that member's or former member's
§ 2-13A.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14.4
AO:47
§ 2-14.5. Retirement Bonus.
family or next of kin, or estate, shall be entitled to receive from the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs an amount equal to the death benefits
provided by the New Jersey State Firemen's Association in such case.
b. Benefits set forth herein shall accrue to members or former members of
the volunteer fire department with at least seven years of qualified
service as of the effective date of this subsection. (August 21, 1984)
c. Those members or former members of the volunteer fire department
who are entitled to death benefits provided by the New Jersey State
Firemen's Association shall not be entitled to the benefits provided by
this subsection.
d. The official in charge of the volunteer fire department shall annually file
with the municipal Clerk, a verified list of all active members of the
volunteer fire department. The list shall contain the names and
residences and the amount of years of service of each member of the
department.
e. In the event of the volunteer fire department being disbanded and
replaced by a paid or part-paid fire department, the amount of years of
service to the volunteer fire department shall be credited to each
individual member in determining the benefits accorded to such
member under statutes made and provided for in such cases.
a. Qualifications for eligibility.
1. Member in good standing of the Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Fire
Department;
2. Retirement after a minimum of 20 years of fire department service
in Englewood Cliffs; and
3. State certification as an exempt fireman that may be waived by
majority vote of Council.
b. Rate of retirement bonus. Yearly bonus rate for individuals shall be
equal to that year's clothing allowance fixed by the Mayor and Council.
c. Time of pay-out. Shall be at the same time the normal clothing
allowance is paid out to active fire department members.
d. Claim for bonus by retirees. Each qualified retiree shall make a claim in
writing to the Borough Clerk by submitting a claim voucher at least 30
days prior to the time of bonus for clothing allowance and no later than
30 days after the time of bonus for clothing allowance. No bonus shall
be granted to any retiree unless a voucher claim in the amount
allocated is received by the Borough Clerk signed by the retiree, stating
present address. Upon the death of the retiree, during the period of
January 1 to December 31 of a given year, any bonus due to a retiree
shall be paid to his/her estate. Thereafter, all payments shall cease.
§ 2-14.4 ENGLEWOOD § 2-14.5
AO:48
§ 2-14.6. Monetary Compensation.
Any active member of the Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Fire Department
(except as limited hereinafter), who shall respond to 35% of the total
alarms, calls or drills for which the fire department is dispatched during any
month, shall be entitled to an additional allowance, above and beyond any
other monetary benefit allowed by ordinance, in an amount equal to $300
per month.
Volunteer firefighters who are full time employees of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs and who, by virtue of their specific job titles, are permitted
to respond to alarms, calls or drills while on duty in such employment must
respond to 40% of such alarms, calls or drills in any month to be entitled to
the aforesaid payment.
For purpose of this subsection, no member of the police department of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs, then on a tour of duty, and responding to a fire
alarm, shall be given credit toward the 35% requirement, for that particular
response.
§ 2-14A. LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM (LOSAP) FOR
THE ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT AND
VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS.
§ 2-14A.1. Length of Service Awards Program Created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of
the volunteer firefighters and volunteer ambulance corps for their loyal,
diligent, and devoted services to the residents of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs.
§ 2-14A.2. Contributions to Plan; Administration of Plan.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs pursuant to P.L. 1977
c.388; and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the
laws of the State of New Jersey; the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, and this
ordinance.
§ 2-14A.3. Criteria for Contributions.
Commencing January 1, 2001, LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions
to each eligible member that meets the criteria as follows:
e. Availability of funds. Funding for this subsection shall be incorporated
in the Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Department yearly municipal budget.
a. For the Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Fire Department:
§ 2-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14A.3
AO:49
§ 2-14A.4. Cost of Program.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows for the
Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Fire Department:
For regular annual services: $23,000 per year.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows for the
Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Ambulance Corps:
For regular annual services: $11,150 per year.
§ 2-14A.5. Point Schedule for Volunteer Service.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the volunteer fire company and volunteer ambulance
corps in accordance with the following schedule:
SCHEDULE A
ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS FIRE DEPARTMENT ELIGIBILITY POINT
SYSTEM
Points
Department Chiefs 15
Captain, Lieutenant, Engineer 10
Active Former Chief (5 points per term) 5
Qualified Driver (5 points per apparatus) 15
State or County Training Certification 10
House Duty (3 points) 3
Years of Service:
1. One hundred points are required for a member to be eligible for an
annual contribution;
2. Five years of service are required for vesting:
3. The annual contribution shall be $1,150 per eligible member;
4. The LOSAP shall not provide for any prior years of service.
b. For the Englewood Cliffs Volunteer Ambulance Corps:
1. 100 points are required for a member to be eligible for an annual
contribution;
2. Five years of service are required for vesting;
3. The annual contribution shall be $1,150 per eligible member;
4. The LOSAP shall not provide for any prior years of service.
§ 2-14A.3 ENGLEWOOD § 2-14A.5
AO:50
SCHEDULE A
ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS FIRE DEPARTMENT ELIGIBILITY POINT
SYSTEM
Points
5 years 10
10 years 20
15 years 30
20 years 40
25 years and over 50
Response to fire calls:
0-10% 0
11-20% 20
21-30% 30
31-40% 40
41-50% 50
51-60% 60
61% and above 70
SCHEDULE B
ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS.
ELIGIBILITY POINT SYSTEM
Category Points
Position:
Captain 25
1st & 2nd Lieutenants 15
All Other Elected Officers 15
Committee Members 5
Activity:
Ambulance Shifts — 2 Shifts = 1 point 1
Holiday Coverage — per shift 5
Regular Business Meetings 2
Drills 2
Longevity — per year of service 1
Special Events determined by Captain 5
Borough Events requiring coverage 5
§ 2-14A.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14A.5
AO:51
SCHEDULE B
ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS.
ELIGIBILITY POINT SYSTEM
Category Points
Sports Events requiring coverage 5
Training:
A. Blood Borne Pathogens 5
B. CPR Certification 5
C. EMT Certification 5
D. Other 5
§ 2-15. CODE OF ETHICS.
§ 2-15.1. Preamble.
Proper administration of the government of the Borough requires that all
Borough officials and employees and members of all boards be independent
and impartial; that public office should not be held for personal gain; that
the public have confidence in the Borough government; and whenever
there exists an actual or partial conflict between the private interests of a
Borough official or employee, and his duties as such official or employee,
the proper administration of the affairs of the Borough is impaired; and the
public interest requires that a code of ethics be adopted as a standard of
conduct for the officials and employees of the Borough.
§ 2-15.2. Definitions.
As used in this section.
§ 2-15.3. Information Required; to be Filed by Borough Clerk.
a. OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE – Shall mean and include:
1. Mayor and Councilmen.
2. Borough Clerk, Borough Treasurer, Borough Attorney, Borough
Engineer, Borough Auditor, and the assistant or assistants to any of
them.
3. Any other elected or appointed officer, official or employee of any
board, commission or agency and advisory board, whether paid or
unpaid, created by the Mayor or the Borough Council except
members of the Police Department and Volunteer Fire Department
of the Borough.
a. Each individual to whom the code of ethics is applicable shall, by
January 31 of each year, or within 30 days of his appointment,
§ 2-14A.5 ENGLEWOOD § 2-15.3
AO:52
§ 2-15.4. Incompatible Employment.
No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or
render services for private interests when such employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend
to impair his independence of judgement or action in the performance of his
official duties.
§ 2-15.5. Disclosure of Confidential Information.
No official or employee shall without proper legal authorization, disclose
confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of
the Borough; nor shall be use such information to advance the financial or
other private interest of himself or others. The Borough Council shall pass
a resolution as shall be necessary, determining what information shall be
deemed confidential for the purpose of this section.
whichever event shall occur sooner, furnish to and file with the Borough
Clerk the following information on a form prescribed by the Borough
Council.
1. The name and address of the firm by whom he is employed or with
whom he is associated.
2. The type of business or profession which such firm is engaged in,
or, if said individual is self-employed the nature of his business or
profession.
3. Any business or professional relationship whether direct or indirect
which he or his firm then has or which he or the firm had within the
prior thirty-six-month period with the Borough or with any firm or
individual residing or doing business in said Borough.
4. The lot and block and common street address of each and every
parcel of real property within the Borough in which the individual
in question has an ownership interest, either directly or indirectly,
and the extent of such interest.
b. In the event any of the information or data furnished pursuant to
Subsection a above shall change, a supplementary information form
setting forth such change or changes shall be filed by each individual to
whom the code of ethics is applicable within 15 days after the
occurrence of such change or changes.
b. No official or employee shall solicit, negotiate for or promise to accept
employment with any person with which he is engaged in behalf of the
Borough in the transaction of business or which is or may be affected by
his official action.
§ 2-15.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-15.6
AO:53
§ 2-15.6. Gifts and Gratuities.
No official or employee shall accept any gift or gratuity, whether in the
form of service, loan or promise, or in any other form, from any person
the acceptance of which may tend to influence him in the discharge of his
official duties in behalf of the Borough.
§ 2-15.7. Representing Private Interests Before Borough Agencies
or Courts or in Litigation.
No official or employee shall represent private interests before the Borough
Council or before any board, commission, or agency of the Borough. He
shall not represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the
interests of the Borough in any litigation to which the Borough is a party.
§ 2-15.8. Contract with the Borough.
Any official or employee who has a financial interest in any transaction
or contract with the Borough, or in the sale or purchase of real estate,
materials, supplies, or services to or from the Borough, shall make known
to the Mayor and Council in writing such interest in any matter on which he
may be called to act in his official capacity. He shall refrain from voting upon
or otherwise participating in the transaction or the making of such contract,
sale or purchase.
§ 2-15.9. Interest in Legislation.
§ 2-15.10. Improper Use of Official Position.
No official or employee shall use his official position to obtain a personal
discount or any preferential or favored treatment or any rights, benefits,
advantages or privileges, for himself or for any other person.
§ 2-15.11. Violations.
a. No Councilman or member of the governing body or of any agency
thereof shall vote for the adoption or defeat of any legislation or for the
payment or nonpayment of any indebtedness owing or allegedly owing
by the Borough in which he has any financial or other personal interest,
direct or indirect, nor shall any official or employee recommend or
lobby for the adoption or defeat of any legislation or for the institution
or defense of any legal or quasi legal action whatever in which he has or
may have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect.
b. Any official or employee who has or may have such interest in such
legislation, indebtedness or action, and who participates in discussion
with or gives an official opinion of the Borough Council or agency with
respect thereto, shall disclose on the records of the Borough Council or
agency the nature and extent of such interest.
§ 2-15.6 ENGLEWOOD § 2-15.11
AO:54
§ 2-15.12. Disclosure.
In the event that any official or employee discloses in writing to the Council
any possible involvement by that individual with regard to a possible
violation of this section prior to the time that the individual engages in the
action, then no charges shall be brought against the individual provided
that the individual does not vote for, participate in, lobby for, or attempt to
influence any Borough board, agency, official and/or employee in which the
individual might have any possible involvement.
§ 2-15.13. Immunity.
Any person filing charges pursuant to Subsection 2-15.12 shall not be
exempt from the libel and slander laws of the State of New Jersey by reason
of his filing thereof; nor shall any of the charges filed by an individual
pursuant to Subsection 2-15.12 be considered as privileged under the libel
and slander laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-15.14. Charges Invalid.
In the event that any action complained of has been approved by or has
been taken pursuant to a State statute, or local ordinance, or if the action
has been approved by the courts of the State of New Jersey, then no charges
a. In the event that any official or employee of the Borough does not
comply with the standards set forth in this section, a charge of the
violation of this section may be instituted by the Borough Council or any
individual when he has knowledge or information indicating that a
violation exists. Such charge or charges shall be in writing, under oath,
and shall be signed by the person charging a violation thereof as the
case may be and shall contain a clear and concise statement of the facts
alleged to constitute such violation. Such charge or charges shall be
filed with the Borough Clerk on a form prescribed by the Borough
Clerk. The Borough Council shall promptly set a date for formal hearing
of the charges and shall serve a copy of the charges on the accused and
shall advise him, in writing, of the date and place of such hearing at
least 10 days prior thereto. At such hearing charges shall be presented
and evidence in support thereof shall be received and the accused shall
be offered an opportunity, either personally or by counsel, to crossexamine
the witnesses to be heard and to present evidence on his own
behalf.
b. As soon as practicable after conclusion of the hearing, but not later
than 30 days, the Borough Council shall render a written decision on
the charges and shall mail a copy thereof to the accused and file a copy
with the Borough Clerk.
c. In the event that the accused shall be the Mayor or member of the
Borough Council, said accused shall not take any part in the
deliberations of the Borough Council with respect to the hearing.
§ 2-15.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-15.14
AO:55
of possible violation of this section shall be brought against any officer or
employee of the Borough.
§ 2-15.15. Violations.
Upon a final finding, in accordance with the procedures prescribed in
Subsection 2-15.12 of a violation of any of the provisions of this section by
any appointed official or employee, the Mayor and Borough Council may
suspend, demote or dismiss such official or employee in accordance with
applicable statutory authority of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-15.16. Compliance a Condition of Employment.
Compliance with this section shall be deemed a condition of employment or
continued employment for all Borough employees and appointed officials.
§ 2-16. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-16.1. Preamble.
The Mayor and Borough Council have determined that there shall be a
centralized system of payment of claims by all departments of the Borough
and that there shall be a standard administrative procedure for all Borough
payments, in order to:
§ 2-16.2. Detailed Statement.
Any person claiming payment from the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall
first submit a detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such
claim to the responsible executive agency, specifying particularly how the
bill or demand is made up, and a certification of the party claiming payment
that it is correct. No bills, claim or demand shall be considered for payment
unless the voucher has attached to it (or includes) a certification or affidavit
or a department head or of his duly designated representative, having
personal knowledge of the facts that the goods have been received by or
the services rendered to the Borough and that those services or goods are
consistent with any existing contract or purchase order. All vouchers to be
submitted in addition to the certification or affidavit of the department head
or of his duly designated representative shall be signed by a member of the
Council committee in charge of the department in which the expenditures
is to be made and a member of the finance committee.
a. Establish proper internal control for expenditures and commitments of
Borough funds; and
b. Provide a reliable basis for preparation of annual budgets; and it is the
intention of the Mayor and Council to establish accountability and
delegate responsibility and authority for the administration and
implementation of these objections.
§ 2-15.14 ENGLEWOOD § 2-16.3
AO:56
§ 2-16.3. Clerk to Accept and Examine.
The bill or claim duly certified shall be presented to the Borough Clerk
for inclusion in the agenda of the next immediate formal meeting of the
Borough Council and it shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to examine all
bills or claims submitted for payment to ascertain if proper administrative
procedures have been followed. All claims or bills to be considered by the
Borough Council shall be made available to every member of the Borough
Council at least three full days prior to formal action by that body.
§ 2-16.4. Rejecting Claims.
Claims shall be considered by the Borough Council which shall approve the
same, except that the Borough Council may reject any claim presented to it
stating the reason for such rejection. Any tie votes may be broken by vote
of the Mayor. Any disapproved claim shall be referred back to the Borough
Clerk with such instructions as the Borough Council may give at the time of
disapproval.
§ 2-16.5. Claims Recorded by Clerk.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes or through any appropriate claims register indicating that the
Borough Clerk has by formal action approved the same with appropriate
record as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records pertaining
to approved and disapproved bills or claims shall be available for public
inspection.
§ 2-16.6. Required Signatures; Recording in Account Books.
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he or she
shall forthwith prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof, which
checks shall be signed by the Mayor and thereafter signed by the treasurer
and Borough Clerk. After preparing checks for the payment of claims, he
shall record them in proper books of account and thereafter mail the check
to the claimants.
§ 2-17. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL
OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
a. Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Englewood Cliffs,
hereinafter known as "the Borough" shall, upon the request of any
present or former official, employee or appointee of the Borough
provide for indemnification and legal defense of any civil action brought
against said person or persons arising from an act or omission falling
within the scope of their public duties.
b. The terms of this section and the definition of official, employee and
appointee are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the
purposes of this section except that these terms shall not mean: a) any
person who is not a natural person; b) any person while providing goods
§ 2-16.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17
AO:57
§ 2-18. BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-18.1. Position Established: Duties. [Ord. #8805, SI]
The position of Borough Administrator as hereby created and the
employment of a person to fill such position is hereby authorized. Borough
Administrator shall assist the Mayor and Council, provide a liaison between
the governing body and the various departments, under the supervision
and control of the Mayor and Council, and shall fulfill such other duties as
or services of any kind under any contract with the Borough except
an employment contract; c) any person while providing legal or
engineering services for compensation unless said person is a full-time
employee of the Borough; and d) any person who, as a condition of his
or her appointment or contract, is required to indemnify and defend the
Borough and/or secure insurance.
c. The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Borough who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved: a) acted or
failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had an interest; b)
acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized
by law; and c) acted or failed to take action in good faith. For purposes
of this section, the duty and authority of the Borough to defend and
indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim against said
person.
d. The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of
punitive damages, penalties, or fines, but may provide for the legal
defense of such claims in accord with the standards set forth herein.
The Borough may refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification
of any civil action referred to herein if the Mayor and Council
determines that: a) the act or omission did not occur within the scope of
a duty authorized or imposed by law; b) the act or failure to act was the
result of actual fraud, willful misconduct or actual malice of the person
requesting defense and indemnification; or c) the defense of the action
or proceeding by the Borough would create a conflict of interest
between the Borough and the person or persons involved.
e. In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Borough may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee if the Mayor and Council concludes that such
representation is in the best interest of the Borough and that the person
to be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set
forth in this section.
f. Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Borough.
§ 2-17 ENGLEWOOD § 2-18.1
AO:58
shall be specifically assigned by said Mayor and Council from time to time,
including, but not limited to, the following:
§ 2-18.2. Appointment: Term of Office. [Ord. #8805, SII]
Said Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice
and consent of the Borough Council for the term of one year, beginning
January 1 of each year.
§ 2-18.3. Qualifications for Appointment. [Ord. #8805, SIII]
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities and qualifications with special regard to training
and experience in government affairs.
§ 2-18.4. General Duties. [Ord. #8805, SIV; Ord. No. 2016-12]
The duties of the Borough Administrator shall be such that they shall
not infringe upon the duties, rights and powers of other Borough officers
designated by statute or by Borough ordinance. The Borough Administrator
shall be responsible to the Mayor and Council for the proper and efficient
administration of the Borough's affairs. The office of the Borough
Administrator may be held by the same person who holds the title of
Borough Clerk at the discretion of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-18.5. Compensation. [Ord. #8805, SV]
The Borough Administrator shall receive the compensation as fixed from
time to time by ordinance by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-19. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
a. Attend all meetings as directed by the Mayor and Council:
b. Be responsible for the coordination of intradepartmental operations,
and manage the daily operation of Borough Hall by coordinating and
supervising the clerical staff;
c. Make recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning budgets,
purchasing procedures, administrative procedures, personnel and
other matters concerning operation of the Borough;
d. Act as liaison between the Borough and county. State and Federal
agencies, with respect to application for funds and/or services needed
or required by the Borough;
e. Aid in the preparation of the budget by alerting department heads
concerning submission of their portion thereof;
f. Review all requisitions from departments for materials, equipment and/
or supplies.
§ 2-18.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-19.1
AO:59
§ 2-19.1. Establishment. [Ord. #8901, SI]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10, there is hereby
established within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, the position of chief
financial officer.
§ 2-19.2. Appointment. [Ord. #8901, SII]
The chief financial officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council.
§ 2-19.3. Term. [Ord. #8901, SIII]
The chief financial officer shall be appointed for a term of one year.
§ 2-19.4. Compensation. [Ord. #8901, SIV]
The Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs is hereby
amended so as to make budgetary allocation for the chief financial officer,
whose compensation shall be determined each year.
§ 2-19.5. Qualifications. [Ord. #8901, SV]
The chief financial officer shall have the qualifications and certifications
set forth by applicable statutory law, including, but not limited to, those
prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 2-19.6. Duties.
The chief financial officer shall be responsible for the administration and
financial management of the Borough, including but not limited to,
preparation of municipal budgets, preparation of financial statements,
preparation of long-term capital budgetary and planning considerations,
preparation or review of annual debt statements, attendance to short-term
and long-term investments, approval and/or review of disbursements,
attendance to record keeping for all cash receipts and cash disbursements,
preparation of year end journal adjustment, reconciliation of bank accounts,
coordination with the Borough auditor, review and recommendation
regarding the Borough audit, administration of escrow and trust funds,
review of collection procedures, and coordination with the tax collector.
§ 2-20. DEPUTY MUNICIPAL CLERK.
§ 2-20.1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135, there is hereby
established, within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, the office of deputy
municipal Clerk.
§ 2-19.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-20.2
AO:60
§ 2-20.2. Method of Appointment.
The deputy municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council.
§ 2-20.3. Term.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed for a one year term on or
after January 1st of each year and shall serve until his or her successor
qualifies.
§ 2-20.4. Compensation.
The deputy municipal Clerk shall be entitled to the compensation as set
forth, and as determined by the Mayor and Council, as part of the yearly
salary ordinance.
§ 2-20.5. Duties and Functions.
The deputy municipal Clerk shall be responsible for all of the obligations
and duties as set forth by applicable Statutory provision, and those assigned
to him/her by the municipal Clerk. In addition, the deputy municipal Clerk
shall fulfill all functions and duties of the office of the municipal Clerk in
the latter's absence or disability, and shall also have all of the powers of the
office of the municipal Clerk under those circumstances.
§ 2-21. MUNICIPAL HISTORIAN.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs. County
of Bergen and State of New Jersey, the position of municipal historian.
Said position is established in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:10A-4. The municipal historian shall serve without compensation, but the
governing body shall annually appropriate such funds as may be necessary
to reimburse said historian for expenses. The municipal historian shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council, and shall have all of the powers
and responsibilities set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:10-7.
§ 2-22. SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
§ 2-22.1. Definition.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT – Is defined as: unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct based on
gender when:
a. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual's employment; or
b. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
§ 2-20.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.1
AO:61
§ 2-22.2. Policy.
All employees, female or male, shall be permitted to work in an environment
free from all forms of unlawful discrimination and conduct which can be
considered harassing, coercive or disruptive, including sexual harassment.
Sexual harassment is a form of employee misconduct which undermines
the integrity of the employment relationship. Sexual harassment debilitates
morale and interferes with work productivity and, therefore, will not be
tolerated.
§ 2-22.3. Procedure.
c. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment including, but not limited to:
1. Gender harassment: Generalized gender-based remarks and
behavior.
2. Seductive behavior: Inappropriate, unwanted, offensive physical or
verbal sexual advances.
3. Sexual bribery: Solicitation of sexual activity or other sex-linked
behavior by promise of reward.
4. Sexual coercion: Coercion of sexual activity by threat of
punishment.
5. Sexual assault: Gross sexual imposition such as touching, fondling,
grabbing or assault.
a. Supervisory. In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment,
supervisory personnel are required to insure adherence to and
compliance with this policy; and, upon being informed of possible
sexual harassment, are required to take appropriate immediate action
in response, including informing employees of their right to file a
discrimination complaint with the administrator.
b. Employee. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a
third party, to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question
is offensive and unwelcome. However, failure to do so does not preclude
filing a complaint. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all
alleged incidents of sexual harassment to the Administrator.
c. Contents of Filing. The complaint filed must include the following
information:
1. The name and department of the complainant;
2. The name and department of the charged party;
3. The nature and circumstances, in detail, of the alleged sexual
harassment, including but not limited to, the injuries or
§ 2-22.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-22.3
AO:62
§ 2-22.4. Investigation of Filed Complaints.
A complaint of sexual harassment shall be investigated by the administrator
in a timely manner and shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 2-22.5. Confidentiality.
To the extent possible, the sexual harassment investigative proceedings will
be conducted in a manner to protect the confidentiality of the complainant,
the alleged harasser and all witnesses. All parties involved in the
proceedings will be advised to maintain strict confidentiality, from the initial
meeting to the final decision, to safeguard the privacy and reputation of all
involved.
§ 2-22.6. Retaliation.
It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to take reprisals against
any person because she/he has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any
proceeding under this policy. Threats, other forms of intimidation, and/or
consequences suffered by the complainant, the names of any
witnesses to such actions and the duration of the actions
questioned; and
4. Whether such harassment has been previously reported to a
supervisor or other person, and if so, when and to whom.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from providing other
information or documents they believe are essential to the fair adjudication
of their case.
The initial complaint may be made orally or in writing. If the complaint is
made orally, the administrator shall reduce same to a written document,
which shall, if it is deemed accurate, be signed by the complainant.
d. The Borough Administrator is hereby designated as the sexual
harassment officer. The chief financial officer of the Borough is hereby
designated as the alternate officer. Persons who, by reason of the
circumstances, are uncomfortable directing a complaint to the
administrator may report same to the alternate officer.
a. Interviewing the complainant in detail;
b. Interviewing all potential witnesses, including those persons who may
have knowledge of similar incidents;
c. Interviewing the charged party in detail;
d. Reviewing municipal files for similar incidents involving the
complainant and the charged party;
e. Assessing the presence or absence of corroborative evidence for either
party.
§ 2-22.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.6
AO:63
retaliation against the complainant or any other party based on involvement
in the complaint process may be cause for disciplinary action.
§ 2-22.7. Protection of All Parties.
All complaints will be addressed by the personnel administrator. The alleged
harasser will be notified once a formal complaint is filed with the
administrator. A finding of no probable cause as a result of an investigation
does not necessarily establish that an accusation is false. However, this
policy shall not be used to intentionally bring frivolous or malicious charges
against an employee.
§ 2-22.8. Disciplinary Action.
Disciplinary action for employees found in violation of this policy may be
progressive in nature, but not required to be, and may include:
§ 2-22.9. Exhaustion of Remedies.
To the extent permitted by law, the Borough will not be liable for damages
obtained as a result of a decision of a non-local agency or court of superior
administrative remedies described herein.
§ 2-22.10. Training.
Employees of the Borough shall be provided with training, by a person
trained to lead or implement such training, which shall include a detailed
discussion of the following:
§ 2-22.11. False Accusations.
Since a charge of sexual harassment is a grave and serious one, false
accusations of sexual harassment are, and will be treated as, a disciplinary
a. Written reprimand;
b. Suspension (with or without pay);
c. Demotion;
d. Termination;
e. Referral to the criminal justice system.
a. A detailed explanation of what constitutes sexual harassment;
b. The procedures for filing a sexual harassment charge;
c. The procedures to be followed in the investigation of a sexual
harassment charge;
d. Management's obligation regarding incidents of sexual harassment;
e. Record keeping requirements.
§ 2-22.6 ENGLEWOOD § 2-22.11
AO:64
offense and will result in a level of punishment appropriate for a person
actually engaging in such behavior.
A person who knowingly and/or recklessly fails to give truthful testimony to
the administrator shall also be guilty of having made false accusations.
§ 2-23. REIMBURSEMENT BY VOUCHER IN REGARD TO USE OF
THE PUBLIC LIBRARY.
§ 2-23.1. Reimbursement by Borough. [Ord. #2000-12]
§ 2-24. RETURNED CHECKS.
§ 2-24.1. Service Charge.
Whenever check payable to any account of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
is returned for insufficient funds, a service charge of $25 per transaction
shall be added to the account. The service charge shall be paid and credited
before any other payment on the account is accepted and credited.
§ 2-24.2. Delinquency to Become Lien.
Unpaid service charges shall become delinquent and, when applicable, a
lien against property, to be enforced in the same manner as other liens.
§ 2-24.3. Chronic Offender.
A person whose returned checks become chronic, as determined by the
chief financial officer, may thereafter be required to pay in cash or by
certified check or cashier's check.
a. Any resident of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs may seek application to
any library within the County of Bergen and upon payment of the
necessary fees to belong to said library shall be entitled to
reimbursement by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for the full sum of
monies charged to said residents up to $150 per card.
b. As a prerequisite for reimbursement, a proof of payment to said library
must be presented to the Borough Clerk of Englewood Cliffs with an
appropriate voucher issued by the municipality for the expense of same.
c. Each resident shall be limited to one card per annum and a
reimbursement not to exceed $150.
d. Upon presentment of said proof of payment and voucher to the Borough
Clerk of Englewood Cliffs, reimbursement shall be paid to the resident
within 90 days of said submission.
e. The reimbursement of fees to residents shall be permitted only if the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs does not have an agreement with another
public library system to provide library services to the Borough
residents.
§ 2-22.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-25
AO:65
§ 2-25. AUTHORIZING THE FIRE DEPARTMENT PARTICIPATION IN
THE EAST BERGEN FIRE MUTUAL AID ASSOCIATION.
a. Municipality of Englewood Cliffs Fire Department is authorized to
participate in the East Bergen Firefighters Mutual Aid Association
(EBFMAA).
b. For the purpose of this Agreement, the EBFMAA consist of the following
municipalities:
1. Cliff side Park.
2. Edgewater.
3. Englewood.
4. Englewood Cliffs.
5. Fairview.
6. Fort Lee.
7. Leonia.
8. Palisades Park.
9. Ridgefield.
10. Tenafly, and
11. Other municipality(s) or agency(s) as may meet the criteria for
admission as set forth by the EBFMAA.
c. Whenever in the opinion of the fire chief or incident commander of a
fire or other emergency situation within the jurisdiction of the fire
department additional equipment or manpower is needed in Englewood
Cliffs to control an emergency situation, the EBFMAA can be contacted
to supply such equipment and manpower,
d. Whenever a member town of the EBFMAA requests assistance
Englewood Cliffs Fire Department will supply the requested assistance
if the fire chief or incident commander feels sufficient resources remain
within the municipality or steps have been taken to supply such
resources to provide local fire protection coverage.
e. The fire chief or incident commander can provide assistance as
requested by municipalities outside the EBFMAA group if such requests
fall within the guidelines of Applicable State Statutes, County
Guidelines or Office of Emergency Management (OEM) requests if the
fire chief or incident commander feels sufficient resources remain
within the town or steps have been taken to supply such resources to
provide local fire protection coverage.
f. Englewood Cliffs Fire Department shall contribute to the EBFMAA
mission statement so as to provide a broad array of fire services with
§ 2-25 ENGLEWOOD § 2-25
AO:66
§ 2-26. PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
§ 2-26.1. Titles Established.
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall by ordinance establish titles for
public employment by the Borough and salary ranges for the Borough
employees. (Said titles shall conform to the New Jersey Civil Service Act and
regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of Personnel).
§ 2-26.2. Adoption of Policies and Procedures.
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall by resolution adopt and amend from
time to time personnel policies and procedures including rules concerning
the hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of
employment, and regulations required to comply with applicable federal
and state employment related law. The personnel policies and procedures
adopted pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials,
appointees, employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent
contractors of the Borough.
§ 2-26.3. Implementation and Enforcement of Policies and
Procedures.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible to implement and enforce the
personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized pursuant
to this section. If there is a conflict between said personnel practices and
any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel
services contract or federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that
contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, the practices adopted
pursuant to this section shall prevail.
§ 2-27. PUBLIC RECORDS.
§ 2-27.1. Fees for Copies of Public Records.
competence and professionalism and to provide a safe environment for
firefighters and the people of our communities thought the effective
and efficient utilization of the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) as adopted by the New Jersey State Division of Fire Safety and
the EBFMAA dispatching procedures.
g. For an out-of-county response, the EBFMAA will follow the New Jersey
Fire Service Resource Emergency Deployment Act. Refer to Section
52:14E-18/Out-of-County Fire Service Resources.
h. The Mayor and Council shall by resolution, make rules and regulations
governing the participation of the Englewood Cliffs Fire Department in
the EBFMAA and may also by resolution authorize the execution of such
agreements, the performance of such other acts and the expenditure of
such funds as may be required to effectuate the purposes of this
agreement.
§ 2-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-27.1
AO:67
§ 2-27.2. Designation of Deputy Custodian of Government Records.
§ 2-27.3. Municipal Court Discovery Fees.
a. Photo copies. The following fees shall be charged for making
photocopies of any documents for which no other charge has been
established by ordinance or state statute:
1. First page to tenth page: $0.75 per page.
2. 11th page to 20th page: $0.50 per page.
3. 21st page and over: $0.25 per page.
b. Audio tapes. The fee for duplicating audio tapes of meetings of a public
agency of the municipality shall be the cost of duplicating the tape.
c. Computer records. The fee for duplicating computer records eligible for
disclosure under the law onto CD disks shall be $5 per disk.
d. Special service charge. Whenever the nature, format, manner of
collation or volume of government record requested to be copied
involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to
accommodate the request, the special service charge allowed to be
charged in accordance with this law shall be the overtime rate of the
employee(s) of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs directed by the
custodian of government records to respond to the specified request,
provided the work is performed outside regular business hours, in
addition to both the direct actual costs of duplicating and requested
record requiring extraordinary duplication methods and those
requested records to be duplicated by regular routine means readily
available within the operation of the municipality. The requestor shall
have the opportunity to review and object to the charges prior to their
being incurred, as provided by P.L. 2001, c. 404.
e. Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the
municipality to furnish copies of any privileged documents or those
documents designated as advisory, consultative or deliberative as
defined within the law, or other documents that are not deemed public
information in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
a. The Borough Clerk, as the custodian of government records, may in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. appoint the following:
1. Deputy custodian of government records for documents pertaining
to police department matters.
a. All requests for discovery in the matters pending in the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs shall be submitted through the municipal prosecutor.
b. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs for the discovery provided:
§ 2-27.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-27.3
AO:68
§ 2-28. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS OF
EMPLOYEES AND VOLUNTEERS OF NON-PROFIT YOUTH
SERVICING ORGANIZATIONS AND/OR EMPLOYEES AND
VOLUNTEERS INVOLVED WITH BOROUGH SPONSORED
PROGRAMS INVOLVING MINORS.
§ 2-28.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
BOROUGH-SPONSORED PROGRAMS — Shall mean any program
sponsored by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs Recreation Commission or the Englewood Cliffs Little League.
CENTRAL ATHLETIC COUNCIL — Shall mean the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs Little League, a nonprofit organization organized for the purpose
of promoting Little League baseball and operated under the auspices of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and/or the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
Recreation Commission.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — Shall mean a
determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and/or fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division and/or the State
Bureau of Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION OR CHRI — Shall mean
information collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and
stored in the computerized data bases of the New Jersey State Police
1. $0.75 per page for each of the first 10 pages photocopied.
2. $0.50 per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
3. $0.25 per page for each of the pages photocopied thereafter.
4. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
5. $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
6. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
7. Duplication of videotapes constitute an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
8. On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
c. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs, e.g. another police department, the actual
costs paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
§ 2-27.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-28.1
AO:69
SBI Criminal History Information System, the National Law Enforcement
Telecommunications System or other states' computerized repositories
containing criminal history record information consisting of identifiable
descriptions and notations of arrests, indictments, or other formal criminal
charges, and any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions,
dismissals, correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Police
Department.
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSES — Shall mean any purpose, other
than administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints or name search
requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or permitted
by a Federal or State statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance, resolution or by this section,
to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of criminal
history record information.
NONPROFIT YOUTH SERVING ORGANIZATION OR ORGANIZATION —
Shall mean any corporation, association or other organization established
pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey
Statutes, or other law of this State, but excluding public and non-public
schools, and which provides recreational, cultural, charitable, social or
other activities or services for persons younger than 18 years of age, and is
exempt from Federal income taxes.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION OR FBI — Shall mean the New Jersey
State Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c.65 (N.J.S.A. 52:1-12 et
seq), a bureau within the Division of State Police.
§ 2-28.2. Request for Criminal Background Checks; Costs.
a. The Borough requires that all employees and volunteers, 18 years of
age and older, of a nonprofit youth serving organization, request
through the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Recreation Commission and/
or the Englewood Cliffs Little League, that the State Bureau of
Identification conduct a criminal history record background check on
each prospective and current employee or volunteer of the
organization.
b. The Division of State Police shall inform the department and the
individual whether the person's criminal history record background
check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense set forth
in Subsection 2-28.4 of this section.
c. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs Recreation Commission and/or the
Englewood Cliffs Little League shall conduct a criminal history record
background check only upon receipt of the written consent to the check
from the prospective or current employee or volunteer.
d. The Borough shall bear the costs associated with conducting the
criminal history record background checks.
§ 2-28.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-28.3
AO:70
§ 2-28.3. Submission, Exchange of Background Check Information.
§ 2-28.4. Conditions Under Which a Person is Disqualified from
Service.
a. Prospective or current employees and volunteers of non-profit youth
serving organizations and/or employees and volunteers of Boroughsponsored
programs involving minors shall submit their name, address,
fingerprints, other required information and written consent to the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs Recreation Commission and/or the
Englewood Cliffs Little League for the criminal history record
background check to be performed. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs
Recreation Commission and/or the Englewood Cliffs Little League shall
submit this documentation to the State Bureau of Identification.
b. The department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting criminal
history record background checks pursuant to this section.
c. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs Recreation Commission and/or the
Englewood Cliffs Little League may, in their discretion, engage the
services of a third party independent agency or a volunteer group
authorized by the chief of police to conduct the criminal history record
background checks authorized under this section.
a. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses.
1. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:-12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in chapter 35 of title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except Paragraph (4) of Subsection (a) of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
2. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
person's offenses described in Subsection a1 of this section.
§ 2-28.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-28.4
AO:71
§ 2-29. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR ALL
EMPLOYEES, VOLUNTEERS AND APPOINTEES OF THE BOROUGH.
§ 2-29.1. Definitions.
BOROUGH ENTITY — Shall mean the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as well
as any board, commission or other instrumentality thereof.
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECK — Shall mean a determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross referencing that person's
name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of the New Jersey State Police.
§ 2-29.2. Disqualifying Crimes Pertaining to Borough Entity
Positions.
3. To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the determination concerning the
accuracy of the criminal history record.
4. To grant exceptions where appropriate.
b. Findings. Not later than 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
criminal background check appeal panel shall issue its findings of fact
and the panel's decision to the employee/volunteer involved in the
appeal and to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Recreation Commission
and/or the Englewood Cliffs Little League who shall act in accordance
with the panel's decision.
a. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
1. Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such as assault,
reckless endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq.,
such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq., such as sexual assault;
or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as robbery.
2. Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.,
such as endangering the welfare of a child.
3. Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
4. Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
§ 2-28.4 ENGLEWOOD § 2-29.2
AO:72
§ 2-29.3. Criminal History Background Check Required.
§ 2-29.4. Procedure.
Any crime of the fourth degree or conspiracy to commit or an attempt to
commit any of the aforesaid crimes.
For purposes of this section, a conviction exists if the individual has been
convicted at any time under the law of this State or under any similar
statutes of the United States or any other state or nation for a substantially
equivalent crime or other offense.
a. No person shall be hired or appointed to any paid or unpaid office or
employment with any Borough entity without first consenting to and
undergoing a criminal history record background check.
b. All persons under the age of 18 shall answer the following questions in
regard to background checks:
1. Have you ever been charged with an act of juvenile delinquency?
2. Have you ever been adjudicated delinquent?
c. Every person serving in any paid or unpaid office or employment with a
Borough entity shall be required to undergo a periodic criminal history
background check at least every five years.
d. All applicants shall sign a consent to permit the police to obtain a motor
vehicle abstract of their driving record.
a. The individual applying for a position or an individual appointed to a
board or commission of the Borough entity, whether salaried,
compensated by stipend, or as a volunteer, shall submit his or her name
and address to the Borough's chief of police or his designee and shall
agree to being fingerprinted in accordance with applicable State and
federal laws, except those appointed to statutory positions whose
liability shall be controlled by said statute.
The following shall be exempt from this section: all persons covered
under Ordinance 2007-17, § 2-28 entitled "Criminal History
Background Checks" of employer and volunteers of non-profit youth
service organizations. Applicants and members of the Englewood Cliffs
Police Department pursuant to said statute.
b. The chief of police or his designee is hereby authorized to exchange
fingerprint data with and receive criminal history record information
from the State Bureau of Investigation in the Division of New Jersey
State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and share that
information with persons or body responsible for hiring or appointing
the individual to the paid or unpaid office or employment.
c. No individual shall be disqualified from employment or service on the
basis of the information disclosed by the criminal history background
§ 2-29.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.4
AO:73
§ 2-29.5. Confidentiality of Criminal History Background
Information. [Ord. #2011-14, S5; Ord. #12-10, S5]
§ 2-29.6. Cost. [Ord. #2011-14, S6; Ord. #12-10, S6]
The Borough shall bear the cost of conducting criminal history background
checks as required pursuant to this section.
§ 2-29.7. Inapplicability; Preemption. [Ord. #2011-14, S7; Ord.
#12-10, S7]
check performed pursuant to this section without first having an
opportunity to challenge the accuracy of the disqualifying information
in the following manner.
Upon a criminal history background check and a motor vehicle abstract
check having been performed, the results of that check shall be
submitted to the police chief who shall then call for a meeting of
the committee to determine the qualification or disqualification of the
applicant or employee. If the committee decides that there is sufficient
information to call for the disqualification of the employee or applicant,
the employee or applicant shall be notified that the committee will
conduct a hearing concerning same and any person shall have the right
to appear. This proceeding shall be heard no less than 10 nor more than
30 days after the committee has decided to call for qualifications. At the
conclusion of the hearing the committee shall render an opinion as to
whether or not the applicant or employee shall qualify or disqualify. The
applicant or employee upon disqualification shall be entitled to appeal
to the Mayor and Council with 10 days of the decision of the committee
and a further hearing shall be held within 30 days thereafter.
The qualifying committee shall consist of the police chief or his
designee, the Mayor, the president of the Council, the committee head
of the committee for which the employee has applied or is actually
working and the administrator.
a. Any and all criminal history information obtained by the chief of police
or his designee pursuant to this section shall be filed in a secure
manner as determined by prevailing physical circumstance or
applicable technological device. This information shall not be made
available to the public and shall be exempt from public disclosure under
common law of the New Jersey Open Public Records Act.
b. The Borough shall limit the use of criminal history only as it pertains to
the individual for who it was obtained and for the purpose it was
required by virtue of this section. Under no circumstances will such
criminal history information be disseminated to persons or entities not
authorized to receive such records.
a. The provisions of this section shall not apply to elected municipal office
holders of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs unless voluntarily agreed to
§ 2-29.4 ENGLEWOOD § 2-29.7
AO:74
§ 2-30. RECREATION.
§ 2-30.1. Recreation Director. [Ord. No. 2016-01]
by the individual elected official. In the event that an elected individual
volunteers to undergo the criminal history background check, the cost
therefore will be the responsibility of the elected official and not be
subject to reimbursement by the Borough.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any position, office or
employment for which New Jersey State Law requires individuals to
undergo a criminal history background check as condition of
employment or office.
c. Any person appointed to any statutory position shall be subject only to
the provision of said statute which shall be applicable to their
appointment.
a. Creation of Position. There hereby is created the position of the
Recreation Director.
b. Appointment, Term. The Recreation Director shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council; and the term of the
office of Director shall be at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. Any
vacancy in this office shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and
Council.
c. Compensation. The Recreation Director shall receive a salary
established by the Mayor and Council in the Non Union Salary
Ordinance.
d. Duties. The Recreation Director shall supervise and administer
recreation and park activities and facilities. The Director shall be
supervised by the Borough Administrator and shall collaborate with the
Recreation Committee and Recreation Advisory Board. The duties of
the Director shall include:
1. Prepare and submit annual department budget, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council;
2. Prepare an annual Recreation Department calendar of events and
deadlines;
3. Operate and promote the Borough's recreational and park
programs;
4. Promote a safe environment for recreation and park programs and
facilities;
5. Manage and inspect all recreational facilities;
6. Manage, inspect and maintain/order all recreational equipment
and services;
§ 2-29.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30.1
AO:75
§ 2-30.2. Recreation Advisory Board. [Ord. No. 2016-01]
7. Inform residents of all recreational programs;
8. Recommend and screen all potential department staff members
and coaches for approval by the Recreation Committee, to ensure
the promotion of fair, safe and unbiased playing and coaching
environment;
9. Supervise all recreation and parks employees;
10. Liaise with all program directors, league directors, coaches and
other volunteers;
11. With the advice of the Recreation Advisory Board, establish rules
and regulations applicable in programming and use of parks and
recreational facilities, provided that such rules and regulations are
subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council;
12. Cause all programs and volunteers to be in compliance with
background checks or credential programs, as may be in effect by
Borough ordinance from time to time;
13. At each regular meeting of the Recreation Committee, report to the
Committee the status of recreation programming and park facilities
and such other matters as the Committee may request;
14. Attend each regular meeting of the Recreation Advisory Board,
provide the Advisory Board members with requested materials and
information and provide a quarterly Recreation Department report
to the Advisory Board;
15. Ensure compliance with the Recreation and Parks Code of Conduct
by effectively communicating and by enforcing the code as
appropriate;
16. The Recreation Director shall maintain communication with other
municipal bodies, such as the library and the schools, to minimize
duplication of efforts and to foster joint programs.
a. Creation. There hereby is created a Recreation Advisory Board in the
Borough.
b. Composition; Terms of Office. The Recreation Advisory Board shall
consist of seven members, and two alternates all of whom shall be
required to be residents of the Borough. One member shall be selected
from the membership of one of the sports leagues and shall be
considered the Sports Representative. Appointments to the Advisory
Board shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The regular term of a member shall be four years. However the
initial members of the Advisory Board shall have staggered terms, with
three initial members having terms of three years and four members
have terms of four years. The terms of the alternates shall be for two
§ 2-30.1 ENGLEWOOD § 2-30.2
AO:76
§ 2-30.3. Studies, Recommendations and Reports. [Ord. No.
2016-01]
years. In the event a vacancy occurs on the Advisory Board, the term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment. A member's position on the Advisory Board may
be deemed vacated by the Mayor and Council if such member fails
to attend three consecutive regular monthly meetings of the Advisory
Board. The Chairperson of the Borough's Recreation Committee shall
be the Council liaison and a voting member of the Recreation Advisory
Board.
c. Organization.
1. The Recreation Advisory Board shall annually elect a Chairperson
by January 31st. The term of office shall be one calendar year. The
Chairperson shall prepare the agenda for all Advisory Board
meetings;
2. The Recreation Advisory Board shall meet no less than six times per
year and as needed when called by the Advisory Board Chair;
3. The Recreation Advisory Board may establish subcommittees, as
necessary, to assist the Advisory Board in meeting its needs.
d. Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Recreation Advisory Board
shall include:
1. The Recreation Advisory Board shall liaise with the Recreation
Director and the Recreation Committee Chairperson regarding
programs, the development of new initiatives, and the management
of existing programs;
2. The Recreation Director shall advise the Recreation Advisory Board
of the annual budget for the Recreation Department after the
approval by the Governing Body;
3. The Recreation Director shall maintain communications with
recreational quasi — municipal organizations in order to coordinate
the use of facilities, and establish consistent policies and
cooperation among various groups;
4. The Recreation Advisory Board shall develop guidelines for the
recreational use of playgrounds and recreational facilities in the
Borough, consistent with rules governing the use thereof as may be
adopted from time to time by the Mayor and Council;
5. The Recreation Director/Recreation Advisory Board shall
encourage and plan special entertainment activities for all the
citizens of the Borough throughout the year.
a. The Recreation Director may make recommendations to the Borough
Administrator as to the establishment of any new staff positions it
§ 2-30.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30.3
AO:77
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. PENALTY.
§ 3-1.1. Maximum Penalty.
For violation of any provisions of this chapter, any other chapter of this
revision, or any other ordinance of the Borough where no specific penalty
is provided regarding the section violated, the maximum penalty, upon
conviction, shall be one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding
$1,000, or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or to a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days at the discretion of the
municipal court judge. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 3-1.2. Separate Violations.
Except as otherwise provided every day in which a violation of any provision
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 3-1.3. Application.
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a
nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular
case or violation.
deems necessary for the successful operation of the Borough's
recreation programs. The responsibility for the having of such
employees shall be vested with the Borough Administrator; with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council. Any such employee shall
be under the immediate supervision of the Recreation Director, who, in
turn, shall be under the Borough Administrator.
b. As assigned by the CFO, the Recreation Director shall prepare and
submit to the Borough Administrator a proposed budget for the
Borough's recreation program. Prior thereto, the Recreation Director
shall obtain and review budget requests from each of the various
recreational program organizations, which shall be used in the budget
preparation notice.
c. The Recreation Committee and Director shall also study matters as may
be referred to it by the Mayor and Council, and shall report its findings
and conclusions thereon in writing to the Mayor and Borough Council
as soon as reasonably possible.10
10.Editor's Note: Former § 2-31, Public Contracts, adopted 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-18,
was repealed 2-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02.
§ 2-30.3 ENGLEWOOD § 3-2
AO:78
§ 3-2. (RESERVED)11
§ 3-3. NOISE.
§ 3-3.1. Prohibited.
No person shall knowingly and willfully cause to be made or created any
noise so unreasonable in nature and so loud and disturbing and unnecessary
as to disturb the peace and comfort of the Borough and its citizens, and to
be detrimental to the life, safety, welfare and health of any such individuals.
§ 3-3.2. Defining Qualifications and Types of Noise That Are
Prohibited.
For the purposes of defining the general qualifications and types of noises
which are hereby prohibited unless otherwise provided for, the following
are enumerated:
a. The unnecessary sound of any horn or signal device on any motor
vehicle or vehicle of any description while the vehicle is stationary or
moving. For the purpose of defining "unnecessary," it is the intention of
this section that the normal warning signals used by such vehicles are
not to be included or prohibited herein.
b. The operation of any radio or phonograph where the volume is such as
to disturb the repose of any person or persons between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
c. The use of any loud speaker or amplifier on any vehicle using the public
streets, unless such vehicle is licensed as hereinafter set forth.
d. The unreasonable and/or indiscriminate use of musical instruments
such as horns, trumpets, whistles and allied instruments so as to
disturb the repose of any person or persons.
e. The use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle of any kind or description
whether on public or private property, which vehicle is so out of repair,
so loaded, or in a condition so as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding and rattling noises, and the excessive noises
connected with the loading and unloading of any vehicle carrying
crates, bales, boxes or other containers.
f. Unnecessary noises emanating from erection, excavation, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building or other type of construction other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and
9:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. on weekends and legal holidays, except in case
of emergency wherein the public health and safety are involved, and in
such cases then only under the supervision of the Borough Police.
11.Editor's Note: Section 3-2. "Litter, Trash, Abandoned Vehicles," previously contained
herein, has been repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 8925. For provisions pertaining
to "Littering" and also "Abandoned Vehicles," see § 10-3 of this Municipal Code.
§ 3-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.3
AO:79
§ 3-3.3. License Required for Public Celebration.
In the case of religious, military, civic or political celebrations or other
gatherings in public places, parade or motorcade licenses shall be issued as
hereinafter set forth.
Whenever any provision of this section provides for a license or permit to
be issued, the permit shall be issued by the Borough Clerk after proper
application made in writing to the Mayor and Council, which application
shall explain in full detail the reason and purpose for the application.
Thereafter, the Mayor and Council by proper motion or resolution shall
authorize the Borough Clerk to issue the permit upon the payment of a fee
of $25. In cases of religious, charitable or nonprofit organizations, this fee
may be waived by the Mayor and Council upon proper application made in
writing at least two weeks prior thereto.
§ 3-4. HITCHHIKING.
§ 3-4.1. Preamble.
The practice of hitchhiking, "thumbing rides" and other methods of
soliciting free transportation from passing vehicles has proven to be an
activity which causes substantial danger to its participants.
§ 3-4.2. Hitchhiking Prohibited.
Any person hitchhiking, thumbing rides, and/or going upon the public
streets and/or highways and soliciting free transportation from any passing
vehicle within the Borough shall be deemed to be a disorderly person and
shall be subject to arrest and the penalty set forth in section 3-1.
§ 3-5. RECREATIONAL FACILITY PERMITS.
§ 3-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § a]
This section contains the procedures for the use of recreational facilities,
fields, parks and other public spaces within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs. The purpose of this section is to assure that usage, access, and
distribution of all recreational sites are in accordance with Borough
regulations. The primary use of Borough recreational facilities and parks
is for resident recreational activities. The Borough may permit additional
activities if not in conflict with other community use and/or proper
maintenance of the facility.
§ 3-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § b]
As used in this section:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
BOROUGH-APPROVED RECREATIONAL SPORTS ASSOCIATIONS — Shall
mean those entities that have been officially recognized, by ordinance or
§ 3-3.3 ENGLEWOOD § 3-5.2
AO:80
agreement, as being charged with the responsibility of planning, promoting,
organizing and operating specific recreational sports programs on behalf of
the Borough, for the benefit of the Borough, its residents and, in certain
instances, the residents of neighboring communities.
COUNCIL — Shall mean the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
GROUP — Shall mean four or more persons.
ORGANIZED GROUP — Shall mean as defined herein.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person or persons to whom a facility use
permit is issued.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, group, firm, partnership, association,
team, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Shall mean and include the Borough's
facilities, fields, parks and other public spaces located within the Borough,
including, but not limited to, Witte Field Recreational Area, Irving Avenue
Playground, Woodland Park and/or West Bayview Avenue Basketball Courts,
the Borough's tennis courts and any other park, reservation, playground,
recreational center or any other area in the Borough owned, maintained or
used by the Borough, and devoted to active or passive recreation.
RESIDENT ORGANIZATIONS — Shall mean any person, group, firm,
partnership, association, team, corporation or organization of any kind
whose membership is comprised of 80% or more of Englewood Cliffs
residents.
§ 3-5.3. Permit availability. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
The Borough's Recreational Facilities are available for use by Persons and
Groups who make requests for such use. The determination of issuance
of a use permit will be based upon resident priority, efficient scheduling,
coordination of uses, regular maintenance, rehabilitation of a facility after
a specific use, availability and weather. Applications are not required for
the use of Recreational Facilities by Borough residents except as required
herein. A Person or Group that has reserved a particular Recreational
Facility and is in possession of a permit shall receive priority over others
lacking such a permit.
§ 3-5.4. Permits Required. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
A Permit shall be required for the use of any Recreational Facility under any
of the following circumstances:
a. When there are Organized Groups (as defined herein) of more than four
participants or when 50 or more spectators in attendance;
b. When any equipment is to be installed temporarily at the Recreational
Facility including, but not limited to, goals, nets and lining of the field of
play. No permanent installations of equipment may be made;
§ 3-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.4
AO:81
§ 3-5.5. Time for Submission of Application for Permit. [Ord. No.
2017-05 § c]
c. When any Recreational Facility will be used for any sport or purpose
other than for which it was specifically created;
d. When the Recreational Facility is to be used by an Organized Group for
games, practices or activities. Games, practices and/or activities will be
considered as being undertaken by an Organized Group if:
1. There is a coach, referee, umpire or other official present; or,
2. Teams are part of a league; or,
3. Teams have uniforms; or,
4. There is a charge for any team, player or participant for team
participation; or,
5. There are trophies, medals or other prizes offered to individuals or
teams; or,
6. Spectators are invited;
e. When the game or event is sponsored by a business or organization;
f. When a Person or Group elects to reserve a Recreational Facility for
exclusive use for a specific period of time;
g. When the Recreational Facility will be used for sports or other training,
exercise, instruction or other activity conducted by an individual paid to
provide said services;
a. All applications of a Use Permit must be made a minimum of 30
calendar days in advance of the time requested.
b. Fields are generally available from March 15 thru November 30 of each
year.
1. The time for presenting applications for use of a Recreational
Faculty shall be made as follows:
(a) No earlier than February 1, for use during the period covering
March 15 thru June 15;
(b) No earlier than May 1, for use during the period covering from
June 16 thru August 15; and,
(c) No earlier than July 1, for use during the period covering
August 16 thru November 30.
2. Submission dates may be changed subject to Borough offices being
closed for recognized Borough holidays or weekends.
§ 3-5.4 ENGLEWOOD § 3-5.6
AO:82
§ 3-5.6. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
The application for use of a Recreational Facility may be downloaded from
the Borough's website or may be obtained from the Recreation Director
or Borough Clerk during the Borough's business hours. A Person or Group
seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application with the Recreation
Director consistent with the terms set forth on the permit. The application
should be submitted or mailed to the Borough Clerk's Office, Attn.:
Recreation Director, Borough of Englewood Cliffs, 482 Hudson Terrace,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632.
§ 3-5.7. Standards for Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
Standards for issuance of a Recreational Facility permit by the Recreation
Director shall include, but not be limited to, the following findings:
a. That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the general public enjoyment of the Recreational Facility;
b. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation;
c. That the proposed activity or use shall be consistent with the outlined
priority of uses contained herein;
d. That the proposed activity and use shall not have an adverse effect upon
the condition of the Recreational Facility;
e. That the proposed activity is not reasonably anticipated to incite
violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
f. That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome
expense or police supervision by the Borough;
g. That the Recreational Facility has not been reserved for other use at the
date and time requested in the application;
h. That the Recreational Facility has not been scheduled for maintenance
or for rest in order to promote the preservation of its condition;
i. That the applicant has not had a previous permit revoked and/or has not
been found to have violated this chapter in connection with previous
use;
j. That the proposed use will not result in an unreasonable burden or
hazard due to lack of parking for the expected participants and
spectators;
k. Such other factors particular to and/or reasonably related to the permit,
Recreational Facility, or proposed activity.
§ 3-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.8
AO:83
§ 3-5.8. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
Proof of insurance is required to be submitted with certain Recreational
Facility permit applications.
§ 3-5.9. Indemnification and Waiver. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
a. Formal organizations (e.g., Little League, Boy Scouts, athletic leagues,
AAU teams, travel teams, businesses, athletic camps, etc.) that wish to
use a Recreational Facility must maintain and provide proof of adequate
insurance. An original, executed certificate of insurance is required at
the time of application. Informal groups, however, are free to use the
facilities without insurance coverage, contingent upon the execution of
an indemnification and waiver which is more particularly described
below. Insurance requirements may also be waived for Boroughsponsored
or approved meetings or events. Determination as to
whether a group is formal or informal will be made by the Recreation
Director. Factors will include, but are not limited to, incorporation
status, size of membership, frequency of gatherings and existing
insurance.
b. Those permittees required to have insurance must present satisfactory
evidence (an original, executed certificate of insurance) of insurance
protection for participants, spectators, coaches and the public.
Satisfactory evidence of insurance shall mean commercial general
liability insurance from an insurer licensed to do business in the State
of New Jersey, with limits of liability in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence and aggregate. The policy must provide
coverage for the permittee's activity at the Recreational Facility and
shall state such activities on the certificate of insurance. The certificate
of insurance shall name the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as an
additional insured for the duration of the permit.
a. All permittees must sign a waiver in which they agree to waive and
relinquish all claims and causes of action of every kind which they have
or may have against the Borough of Englewood Cliffs arising out of the
use of the Recreational Facility resulting in personal injury and/or
property damage. All permittees must acknowledge that they assume
all risks in connection with the use of the Recreational Facility.
b. All permittees must indemnify the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for any
and all liability of loss and against all claims or actions based upon or
arising out of damage or injury (including both) to persons or property
caused by or sustained in connection with the applicant's use of the
Recreational Facility and the defense of any such claims or actions,
whether the liability, loss or damage is caused by or arises out of
negligence of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, or any of the agents,
employees or otherwise. The permittee must further agree to reimburse
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, its agents, employees or otherwise,
for any and all expenses, attorney's fees and/or costs incurred in the
enforcement of this waiver and indemnification.
§ 3-5.8 ENGLEWOOD § 3-5.9
AO:84
§ 3-5.10. Procedure for Consideration of Application; Deposit. [Ord.
No. 2017-05 § c]
§ 3-5.11. Permittee Obligations and Responsibilities. [Ord. No.
2017-05 § c]
c. The permittee's signature on and execution of the waiver and
indemnification form shall explicitly mean and be interpreted to mean
that the permittee is binding all participants in the permitted activity.
d. The form of waiver and indemnification may be downloaded from the
Borough's website or may be obtained from the Borough Clerk during
regular business hours.
a. Any application for a permit and all required documentation shall be
submitted to the Recreation Director, who shall review and make a
decision of approval or disapproval. The Recreation Director may
consult with the Borough Council's Recreation Committee and/or the
Borough Administrator regarding any permit. Review and decision on
any permit may also be submitted to the Mayor and Council to be
considered at a public meeting of that body.
b. Whenever an application for a permit raises any concerns about safety,
crowd control, parking or any matter concerning the public health,
safety and welfare, same shall be submitted to the Police Department,
which shall notify the Recreation Director within five business days of
any considerations for approving or rejecting the application.
c. The Recreation Director shall contact the applicant to advise of the
application's disapproval or approval and any special conditions
attached to an approved permit. If the application is approved, the
applicant will also be advised of the usage fees along with payment
instructions. Usage fees are not refundable unless deemed otherwise by
the Borough Council.
d. The Recreation Director, in his discretion, may require that a permittee
provide a returnable deposit of $200, in addition to other fees and costs.
This deposit will be used to cover any damage to Borough property or
cleaning required due to the use of the facility by the permittee.
Permittees will be notified, in writing, by the Recreation Director, if any
such charge will be assessed against the deposit. If no charges are
assessed after the event, the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee.
e. Upon receipt of payment in full and all required paperwork, a permit
will be issued to the applicant. No one will be permitted to use any field
without a permit.
a. A permittee shall be bound by all Recreational Facility rules and
regulations and all Federal, State and local laws and regulations though
the same were inserted in such permits.
§ 3-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.11
AO:85
§ 3-5.12. Revocation of Issued Permit. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
The Recreation Director and/or the Borough Council shall have the
authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or
ordinance or upon good cause shown. The Recreation Director and/or the
Borough Council may also revoke a permit which has been issued upon
discovery of a material misrepresentation of fact on the application.
§ 3-5.13. Priority of Applications for Permits. [Ord. No. 2017-05 § c]
Approval of applications for permits for the use of Recreational Facilities
shall be based upon priority given to Englewood Cliffs residents. The
following order of priority shall apply:
b. The Person or Group to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all
loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of
the negligence of the Person or Group to whom such permit shall have
been issued. The person or Group to whom the permit is issued shall be
responsible for:
1. Ensuring that all participants and spectators adhere to
Recreational Facility rules and regulations; and,
2. Ensuring that the Recreational Facility is in safe and usable
condition prior to allowing players or participants to proceed and to
report unsafe conditions to the Borough not later than one day
after its use; and,
3. Ensuring that upon conclusion of the use, the Recreational Facility
is left in the same condition as it was found, including removal of
any equipment and cleanup and proper disposal of any garbage.
a. Meetings or events directly sponsored by the Borough for Borough
purposes, inclusive of the Borough's recreational sports programs via
the Borough-approved recreational sports associations;
b. Meetings or events directly sponsored by Borough advisory boards and
committees.
c. Meetings or events directly sponsored by Borough departments for
Borough purposes.
d. Meetings or events held for the discussion of Borough issues.
e. Resident youth recreational activities, leagues or service organizations
that are made up exclusively of Englewood Cliffs residents.
f. Resident adult recreation activities, leagues or service organizations
that are made up exclusively of Englewood Cliffs residents.
g. Board of Education related activities.
§ 3-5.11 ENGLEWOOD § 3-5.13
AO:86
§ 3-6. USE OF RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
§ 3-6.1. Closing Hours. [Ord. No. 2017-16 § d]
§ 3-6.2. Dogs and Other Animals at Recreational Facilities. [Ord.
No. 2017-16 § e]
h. Nonresident youth recreation activities, leagues or service
organizations.
i. Nonresident adult recreation activities, leagues or service
organizations.
j. All other uses.
a. All Borough Recreational Facilities shall be officially closed to all
persons between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and one-half
hour before sunrise, except as provided herein.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or upon any of the Borough's
Recreational Facilities between one-half hour after sunset and one-half
hour before sunrise, as published by the Astronomical Applications
Dept., U.S. Naval Observatory, for the rise and set for the sun for the
current year for Edgewater, New Jersey.
c. The above prohibition shall not apply to those individuals who are
present for the following:
1. Official Borough business;
2. To attend a Borough-sponsored event;
3. Under a duly-issued permit by the Borough Recreation
Department; or,
4. With the written permission of the Mayor and Council or the
Borough Administrator.
d. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of between $50 and $100 for the first offense, between $100 and
$200 for the second offense, and for third and subsequent offenses, a
minimum fine of $350 but not exceeding $1,000, as shall be determined
by a Municipal Court Judge.
a. All dogs and other animals are prohibited at all Borough Recreational
Facilities, except as provided herein.
b. Dogs shall be permitted only at the following locations and with the
limitations described herein:
1. Dogs shall be allowed on the paved walkways from Johnson Avenue
and from Floyd Street to the circular paved path within the Witte
Field Recreational Area;
§ 3-5.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-6.2
AO:87
§ 3-6.3. Bicycling, Roller Skating, Skate Boarding and Vehicles.
[Ord. No. 2017-16 § f]
§ 3-6.4. Borough Tennis and Basketball Courts. [Ord. No. 2017-16
§ h]
2. All dogs must be leashed with a leash that shall not be more than
six feet in length;
3. All dogs must be accompanied by a person who is 12 years of age or
older, who must maintain control of the dog at all times and shall
take care to avoid injury to person or property;
4. All dogs must be duly licensed by the Borough.
c. All persons accompanying dogs shall be required to remove all animal
feces immediately and dispose of same in a sanitary manner.
d. This section may be enforced by the Borough Board of Health or its
designee, the Borough Police Department or the Borough
Superintendent of Public Works his/her designee.
e. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of between $50 and $100 for the first offense, between $100 and
$200 for the second offense, and for third and subsequent offenses, a
minimum fine of $350 but not exceeding $1,000, as shall be determined
by a Municipal Court Judge.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any bicycle, skateboard, roller
skates, moped, mini-bike, or any motorized, electric or self-propelled
vehicle of any kind, which use shall be prohibited at all Borough
Recreational Facilities and at the Upper School and North Cliffs School
owned by the Borough Board of Education, except as provided herein.
b. Bicycles shall be permitted only on the circular path and other paved
areas at the Witte Field Recreational Area with the limitations
described herein, provided that all bicycle wheels shall not be more
than 28 inches in circumference and are operated only by persons who
are 18 years of age or younger.
c. All bicycle operators within the Witte Field Recreational Area shall be
responsible for maintaining control at all times and shall take care to
avoid injury to person or property.
d. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of between $50 and $100 for the first offense, between $100 and
$200 for the second offense, and for third and subsequent offenses, a
minimum fine of $350 but not exceeding $1,000, as shall be determined
by a Municipal Court Judge.
a. Tennis and basketball courts are reserved for the use of Englewood
Cliffs residents and their guests.
§ 3-6.2 ENGLEWOOD § 3-6.4
AO:88
§ 3-6.5. Fees for Participation in Recreation Department Programs.
[Ord. No. 2017-16 § i]
b. No private lessons shall be permitted unless approved by the Borough
Recreation Director through issuance of a permit.
c. The Borough tennis and basketball courts shall be used for no purpose
other than for playing tennis with conventional tennis equipment or
playing basketball with conventional basketball equipment.
d. Courts must be relinquished after one hour of play.
e. Hanging from the basketball nets or rims is strictly prohibited.
f. All courts and the surrounding areas are under surveillance. Any
individuals found to be in violation of this section will be directed to
leave the Borough property.
g. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of between $50 and $100 for the first offense, between $100 and
$200 for the second offense, and for third and subsequent offenses, a
minimum fine of $350 but not exceeding $1,000, as shall be determined
by a Municipal Court Judge.
a. All fees shall be paid at the time of submission of registration for a
program.
b. Program Fees. The following fees are set for the following programs
and shall be charged and paid for any individual participating in
Recreation Department programs or activities.
Program Participant Fee
Girls Softball $125
Golf $150
Soccer $150
Soccer Tots $75
Tennis $150
Tae Kwon Do $150
Boys Basketball K-8 $150
Girls Basketball K-8 $150
Summer Camp $350
c. The Recreation Director may add limited programs or special events
and may charge a reasonable fee per participant. Such fee shall be set
by the Borough Administrator in consultation with the Council
Recreation Committee Chair and the Recreation Director and shall be
reasonably related to the cost of the limited program or event to the
Borough.
§ 3-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-6.5
AO:89
§ 3-6.6. Fees for Use of Tennis Courts. [Ord. No. 2017-16 § j]
§ 3-6.7. Fees for Use of Fields at Recreational Facilities. [Ord. No.
2017-16 § k]
d. A late fee of $50 will be added to the registration fee for those
participants registering after the publicized registration date.
a. Family:
$25 per family for use of one tennis court by one family from the months
of April 1 through November 30. Each use limited to one continuous
hour.
This fee will be increased to $35 per family effective on January 1, 2018.
This fee will be increased to $45 per family effective on January 1, 2019.
b. Seniors:
62 years of age or older - $10 per person for use of one tennis court by
one senior from April 1 through November 30. Each use limited to one
continuous hour.
a. Each application for a permit to use a Recreational Facility shall be
accompanied by all required fees, except as stated herein. If a permit is
denied, all fees shall be refunded to the applicant, except as stated
herein.
b. Application Fee. Each application shall be accompanied by an
Application Fee in the amount of $25, which shall be non-refundable.
The Application Fee shall be waived for all Borough entities that apply
for a permit.
c. Field Use Fee.
1. There shall be no Field Use Fee charged to the Borough, Borough
entities or Borough Departments.
2. For purposes of this section, a "day" is defined as a continuous
period of seven hours occurring between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., as requested by the applicant in the application and as
approved in an issued permit.
3. Each application shall be accompanied by all applicable Field Use
Fees in the amounts stated below:
(a) For Borough-Approved Recreational Sports Associations:
Use of one field for the entirety of the applicable sport season:
$500.
(b) For any Group:
§ 3-6.5 ENGLEWOOD § 3-6.7
AO:90
Use of one field on a per hour basis: $100 per hour.
(c) For any Organized Group:
Use of one field on a per hour basis: $100 per hour.
(d) For any sports group that does not meet the criteria for
"Resident Group":
Use of one field on a per hour basis: $150 per hour.
(e) For any private or public For-Profit corporate or other entity:
$500 per field per day;
$350 for the Borough Tennis Courts per day; and/or
$350 for the Borough Basketball Courts per day.
(f) For any Non-Profit corporate or other entity (subject to official
issued Federal IRS 501(c) letter):
$250 per field per day;
$175 for the Borough Tennis Courts per day; and/or
$175 for the Borough Basketball Courts per day.
4. Security deposit fee.
(a) The Recreation Director, in his/her discretion, may require that
a permittee pay a refundable security deposit of up to $1,500,
in addition to other fees. The refundable security deposit shall
be paid by the permittee before or at the time of issuance of the
permit.
(b) This deposit shall be applied to pay for any damage to Borough
property or cleaning required due to the use by the permittee.
The Recreation Director and/or the DPW at the Recreation
Director's request, shall inspect the particular field within a
reasonable period of time after the close of the event or use to
determine if any damage or cleaning is necessary.
(c) If charges are to be assessed against a security deposit, the
Recreation Director shall notify the permittee in writing that
such has been determined and shall properly document the (i)
the conditions causing the need for charges to be assessed;
and (ii) all expenses, receipts and payments made. Any balance
of the security deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. If no
charges are assessed after the permittee's use, the deposit
shall be refunded to the permittee. All refunds shall occur as
soon as reasonably possible after approval by the Borough
Administrator or the Mayor and Council.
§ 3-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-7
AO:91
§ 3-7. OUTDOOR PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, BOAT
AND TRAILERS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park or to permit
to remain on any residential property in any zone, outside the garage or
any other accessory building on such residential property for any part of
the day for seven consecutive days or for any part of a day on any 28
days or more during any given calendar year, any commercial vehicle, boat,
trailer, boat trailer, motor home, camper, or motorized recreational vehicle
designed for overnight occupancy. Twenty-eight days shall be considered
as the maximum days allowed within one calendar year that these vehicles
pursuant to this section may park.
§ 3-8. POSTING SIGNS AND NOTICES.
§ 3-8.1. Nuisance Declared.
Any sign, notice or advertisement on any of the trees, telegraph, telephone
or electric light poles, public drinking fountains or public bulletin boards
mutilating the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 3-8.2. Violations.
Any person placing or causing to be placed, any sign, notice or
advertisement (except such notices as are posted according to law,
ordinance or direction of the Mayor and Council) on any tree, telephone,
telegraph or electric pole, public bulletin board, or who shall mutilate any
such tree, pole, drinking fountain or bulletin board, shall be liable to the
penalty stated in section 3-1.
§ 3-9. HUNTING; USE OF FIREARMS.
§ 3-9.1. Hunting Prohibited.
No person shall gun or hunt with firearms, air guns, spring guns or other
missile-projecting devices within the confines of the Borough.
§ 3-9.2. Discharging Guns Prohibited.
No person shall shoot or discharge any air gun, spring gun, pistol or other
missile-projecting device or contrivance, within the confines of the Borough.
No person shall, within the confines of the Borough, fire or discharge any
cannon, gun, pistol, revolver or firearm of any kind, nature or description,
whether the same be loaded with blank or full charge.
§ 3-9.3. Exceptions.
Subsection 3-9.2 shall not apply to any military ceremony or exercise, nor
to any peace officer while on duty, nor to such citizens of the Borough
to whom a permit to carry weapons shall have been issued, pursuant to
N.J.R.S. 2:176-44.
§ 3-7 ENGLEWOOD § 3-10
AO:92
§ 3-10. OPERATION OF MOPED OR MINI-BIKES ON BOROUGH
PROPERTY.
§ 3-10.1. Areas Prohibited.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate any mopeds, mini
bikes or any motorized or partially motorized vehicle of any kind on
property owned by the Borough or the Board of Education of the Borough
including but not limited to the areas known as Johnson Avenue Field (Fred
H. Witte Memorial Field), Irving Avenue Playground, Upper School, North
Cliff School, and South Cliffs School.
§ 3-10.2. Prohibiting the Use of Bicycles, Mopeds, or any Other Self-
Propelled or Motorized Vehicles on the Fitness Path Surrounding
Johnson Field.
§ 3-11. (RESERVED)12
§ 3-12. RESIDENT AND VISITOR PARKING ON CERTAIN
DESIGNATED PUBLIC STREETS.
§ 3-12.1. Authorization.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough is hereby authorized and empowered
to establish and designate restricted parking, on public streets, for use
by residents of the Borough and their visitors. The governing body shall
determine, by amendment and supplement to this section, and with the aid
of the police department, which streets shall be designated and posted as
"Resident Permit Parking Only." Thereafter, it shall be unlawful to park, or
allow to stand, any motor vehicle without a permit as hereinafter provided.
a. No person shall use, operate or permit the use of any vehicle, including,
but not limited to, bicycles, mopeds, other self-propelled electrical or
motorized vehicles on the Fitness Path surrounding Johnson Field, in
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
1. Exception. Bicycles shall be permitted on the fitness path
surrounding Witte Field and any other paved areas provided the
wheels are under 28 inches and are operated by persons 18 years
or under.
b. Any person who violates this section or knowingly participates in a
violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $100 for the first offense thereof. For subsequent violations
of this section, a municipal court magistrate shall set the appropriate
penalty in accordance with law.
12.Editor's Note: Section 3-11. "Brush, Hedges and Other Plant Life Near Intersections of
Public Roadways," previously contained herein, has been repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 8925. For provisions pertaining to "Brush, Hedges and Other Plant Life
Near Intersections of Public Roadways" see § 10-3 of this Municipal Code.
§ 3-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-12.2
AO:93
§ 3-12.2. Residential Permit Parking Only. [Amended 3-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-05]
§ 3-12.3. Visitor Permits.
§ 3-12.4. Expiration of Permits.
The residential parking permits shall be valid in perpetuity unless changed
by this section.
§ 3-12.5. Temporary Service Vehicles.
Service vehicles and commercial vehicles which are providing temporary
services to residents located in resident parking only areas shall not be
subject to the parking restrictions created hereunder, and the police
department is hereby authorized to exempt such vehicles from the
restrictions authorized herein.
§ 3-12.6. Enforcing Agency.
a. Residential parking permits shall be issued by the Police Department.
The Police Department should record the names and driver's license.
b. Permits may be obtained by applying directly to the Police Department
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
except for holidays. The resident applying for said permit must display
a valid New Jersey Driver's License and a vehicle registration for the
vehicle which the permit is being issued for.
c. Parking permit stickers located on a residential motor vehicle will
permit the vehicle to be parked on the Borough streets, unless
otherwise posted. No vehicle shall park on any residential street
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless it displays a Borough parking
permit sticker in accordance with signs located on the borderlines of
Borough property.
d. The residential permit parking sticker shall be placed on the left rear
window of the vehicle only.
a. Four visitor permits shall be issued to each resident and household
located on any public street, or adjacent streets, which has been
designated "Resident Permit Parking Only."
b. Visitor permits are authorized only for visitors to residents of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs. It shall be unlawful to loan, lease or sell
such permits or use them for any purpose not permitted by this section.
c. Persons who violate the provisions of this section are subject to a fine of
$25 and possible loss of permits.
a. The police department is hereby authorized as the enforcing agency,
and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4 et seq., is empowered to
§ 3-12.2 ENGLEWOOD § 3-12.6
AO:94
post such signs as are required to notify the public of the regulations
effectuated hereby.
b. Signs advising the public of the "Residential Permit Parking Only" shall
be located in the following places:
1. Hudson Terrace - Northbound.
2. 8th Street.
3. 7th Street.
4. 6th Street.
5. US 9W - Northbound.
6. 3rd Street.
7. 2nd Street.
8. 1st Street.
9. Camner Street.
10. Leighton Street.
11. Rossett Street.
12. Hammett.
13. Cliff Road.
14. John Street.
15. Dillingham Place.
16. Summit Street/Palisade Avenue - Southbound.
17. Palisade Avenue/Summit Street - Eastbound S/E Corner.
18. Summit Street/Palisade Avenue - Northbound.
19. Martin Court.
20. Beverly Road.
21. Stratford Road.
22. Dorchester Road.
23. Palisade Avenue/Hudson Terrace - Southbound.
24. Palisade Avenue/US 9W - Westbound N/E Corner.
25. Pershing Road.
26. Chestnut Street.
§ 3-12.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-12.6
AO:95
§ 3-12.7. Streets Designated for Restricted Parking.
All public streets are hereby designated as "Residential Permit Parking
Only." An exception to this section shall be commercial vehicles parked in
front of homes where services are rendered.
§ 3-12.8. Violations and Penalty.
No person shall park or otherwise cause its vehicles to stand on any street
designated "Residential Permit Parking Only" unless there is conspicuously
displayed, on or in the vehicle, a valid and current parking sticker issued
by the Borough. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the following fines:
27. Booth Avenue.
28. Lyncrest Road.
29. Johnson Avenue - From Woodland Street.
30. US 9W South - North of Sage Road.
31. Alpine Court (John Street to Sherwood Avenue), both sides. [Added
3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
32. Pershing Road (Summit Street to West Borough Line), both sides.
[Added 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
33. Dillingham Place (Sylvan Avenue to Floyd Court), both sides.
[Added 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
34. Ostermeier Way off of Dillingham, both sides. [Added 3-13-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-05]
35. Demarest Avenue (Floyd Street to Sylvan Avenue), both sides.
[Added 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
36. Middlesex Avenue (Arthur Avenue to Center), north side. [Added
3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
37. Van Nostrand Avenue (Sylvan Avenue to Driveway of Parkway
Toyota), north side. [Added 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
38. Van Nostrand Avenue (120 Van Nostrand Driveway to Ash Street),
south side. [Added 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
39. Charlotte Place (Sylvan Avenue to Rose Street), north side. [Added
3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
40. Clifton Terrace (both sides). [Added 3-13-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-05]
41. Floyd Street, both sides, from Palisade Avenue to Roslyn Avenue.
[Added 4-15-2020 by Ord. No. 20-02]
§ 3-12.6 ENGLEWOOD § 3-12.8
AO:96
§ 3-12.9. Severability.
The terms of this section are hereby declared to be severable. Should any
portion or provision be declared invalid or unconstitutional, said finding
shall not affect other portions or provisions hereof.
§ 3-12.10. Other Parking Ordinances.
The provisions of other Borough parking ordinances, as codified in Chapter
7 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough, are hereby ratified and
confirmed. Should any inconsistencies exist between the provisions of this
section and other traffic or parking ordinances, the provisions of this section
shall govern.
§ 3-12.11. Effective Date.
The provisions of this section shall take effect immediately upon final
passage according to law.
§ 3-13. PLACEMENT OF COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS,
ADVERTISEMENTS AND FLYERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES
PROHIBITED.
§ 3-13.1. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or other entity, to place, or cause to be
placed, any commercial advertisement, handbill, pamphlet, flyers, circular
or leaflet in or upon any motor vehicle which is parked either on a public
street or in a private parking lot open to the public. For purposes of this
section "commercial" shall be defined as related to the promotion of buying/
selling of goods or services for profit or for business purposes.
§ 3-13.2. Exceptions.
Excepted from the prohibition of this section are:
§ 3-13.3. Prima Facie Rebuttable Presumptions.
a. For first offenses, the violator shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$25, nor more than $50.
b. For subsequent offenses, the fine shall be not less than $50.
The municipal court clerk shall keep a record of all violators of this
section, for the aforesaid purpose.
a. The issuance of traffic summons by government agents.
b. Placement by owners or operators in or upon a vehicle owned or
operated by said person; and
c. Placement with the consent of the owner or operator.
§ 3-12.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13.3
AO:97
§ 3-13.4. Penalties.
Each violation of this section shall be an offense, punishable by a fine of not
less than $10 and not more than $250, and/or by a term of imprisonment for
up to 90 days, in the discretion of the municipal court judge. Each separate
motor vehicle upon which a commercial advertisement, handbill, pamphlet,
flyer, circular or leaflet is placed, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 3-13.5. Enforcement.
§ 3-14. NEWSPAPER DELIVERIES.
§ 3-14.1. Notification to Newspapers.
In the event that any resident of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs desires
that a newspaper or other written publication not be delivered, either
temporarily or permanently, to that resident's home, the resident shall
notify the newspaper, publication or distribution business, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of that fact. A copy of the notification letter shall
also be sent to the Borough Clerk.
a. A person not the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall be
presumed not to have the consent of the owner or operator of the motor
vehicle;
b. The owners and management of the business being advertised by said
material, shall be presumed to have caused the placement in violation
of this section; and
c. Where a person is found placing a commercial advertisement, handbill,
pamphlet, flyer, circular or leaflet on a motor vehicle, and there are
identical commercial advertisements, handbills, pamphlets, flyers,
circulars or leaflets found upon other motor vehicles in the immediate
vicinity it shall be presumed that said person also placed said material
on said other motor vehicles.
a. Any person observing a violation of this section may sign a complaint
against the offender;
b. Any law enforcement agent of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs,
including, but not limited to, police officers, health inspectors, sanitary
inspectors, housing inspectors, agents and officers of the department of
public works who are authorized to issue parking tickets, and
environmental agents, may sign a complaint against the offender upon
information and belief, and when using the form of complaint and
summons prescribed by the administrative director of the courts,
pursuant to Rule 7:3-1(b) and Rule 1:32-2, may serve the summons
upon the defendant and thereafter, without unnecessary delay, file the
complaint with the Englewood Cliffs Municipal Court.
§ 3-13.3 ENGLEWOOD § 3-14.2
AO:98
§ 3-14.2. Compliance by Newspaper.
Any business or distribution entity which fails within two days after
notification, to comply with the written instructions of the resident
requesting the cessation of the newspaper delivery, shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
§ 3-14.3. Violations.
Any business or entity which is found to be in violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 for the first offense thereof. For
subsequent violations of this section, the municipal court magistrate shall
set a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000.
§ 3-15. DRUG FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-16. ROLLER SKATING AND SKATEBOARDING.
§ 3-17. FEEDING OF UNCONFINED WILDLIFE.
a. The Mayor and Council hereby adopt the attached "School Map", dated
December, 1987, prepared by Boswell McClave Engineering, as the
official map of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs delineating those areas
of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs that are situated within a 1,000-foot
radius of any school.13
b. Such areas are hereby designated to be Drug Free School Zones.
c. The police department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs be and is
hereby authorized and directed to post any and all signage allowed by
statutes made and provided for in such cases.
a. Each such person operating a bicycle, roller skates, a skateboard or any
similar self-propelled device shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practical.
b. Each such person operating a bicycle, roller skates, a skateboard or any
similar self-propelled device shall travel no more than two abreast when
traffic is not impeded but otherwise shall ride in a single file.
c. In any event, if any such person operating a bicycle, roller skates, a
skateboard or any similar self-propelled device operate same in such a
manner as to interfere with or interrupt the passages of motor vehicles
upon the roadway, such person shall be considered in violation of this
section and the violation so of any section of this section shall constitute
a nuisance and the person creating such nuisance shall be subject to
penalties of not more than $100.
13.Editor's Note: The above mentioned School Map is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 3-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-17.1
AO:99
§ 3-17.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 3-17.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 3-17.3. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, any wildlife, excluding
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or
rehabilitation center, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education
centers).
§ 3-17.4. Enforcement.
§ 3-17.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $100 or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 10 days, or both.
§ 3-18. LITTER CONTROL.
a. This section shall be enforced by the police department or the
superintendent of the department of public works or his designee of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 3-17.1 ENGLEWOOD § 3-18.1
AO:100
§ 3-18.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 3-18.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap
or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or flowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, saw milling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container suitable for the depositing
of litter.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 3-18.3. Prohibited Acts and Regulated Activities.
§ 3-18.4. Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the police department or the
superintendent of the department of public works or his designee of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
b. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this ordinance, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this section.
§ 3-18.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-18.5
AO:101
§ 3-18.5. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.
§ 3-19. SMOKING AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
PROHIBITED.
§ 3-20. SEX OFFENDER-FREE ZONE.
a. Prohibition against smoking of cigarettes and use of tobacco products.
Smoking of cigarettes and use of tobacco products within public parks,
playgrounds, ball fields, school grounds and public buildings
surrounding public property shall be prohibited within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
b. Definitions.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND SURROUNDING PROPERTY — Shall mean
any public buildings, including the municipal buildings, ambulance
corps buildings, department of public works buildings, fire department
buildings and any other buildings and any property surrounding said
buildings, except those areas designated by the Mayor and Council by
signs permitting smoking.
PUBLIC PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND BALL 201FIELDS — Shall mean
any place or area within the Borough upon which the public is invited
or upon which the public is permitted and where children gather for
recreational activities, but shall not include the parking lot associated
with those places.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — Shall mean any grounds upon which a school is
located excepting parking lots.
c. Penalties. Any person who has been found to have violated this section
shall be subject to the following:
1. For a first offense, issuance of a written warning and an
explanation of the purpose of this section;
2. For a second offense, the issuance of a written warning and the
requirement that the offender participate in community service
projects as determined by the Health Officer of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs in the amount of up to 10 hours;
3. For a third offense, a fine of up to $100 and the requirement that
the offender participate at his or her own expense in an educational
program determined by the Health Officer of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs concerning the dangers of smoking and tobacco
use.
§ 3-18.5 ENGLEWOOD § 3-20.1
AO:102
§ 3-20.1. Findings.
The Borough Council finds that:
§ 3-20.2. Definitions.
§ 3-20.3. Sex Offenders Residency Prohibition: 1,000 Feet. [N.J.S.A.
30:5-6.1, et seq. or N.J.S.A. 18A:6-7.1b.]
a. There is community concern regarding the need to secure the safety of
children from convicted sex offenders; and
b. There are presently no State laws in the State of New Jersey which
prohibit convicted sex offenders from residing or living or loitering near
areas where children regularly meet and congregate; and
c. Because there is no uniform statewide standard prohibiting convicted
sex offenders from residing or living or loitering near areas where
children regularly meet and congregate, municipalities are addressing
the issue through the enactment of ordinances providing those
restrictions; and
d. The Borough Council finds that, in order to protect the welfare of
children, it is necessary to restrict places within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs where convicted sex offenders may reside, live or
loiter.
a. CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER – Shall mean a person who is required to
register as a sex offender under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2.
b. RESIDENCE -Shall mean the place where a convicted sex offender
sleeps, which may include more than one location, and may be mobile
or transitory.
a. No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of
any crime as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a result of said
conviction is required to register with the proper authorities pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and Notification of Release of
Certain Offenders, shall be permitted to reside or live within 1,000 feet
of any school; library; municipal building; public park, tot lot, active or
passive recreation area or open space; playground; child care center or
church, or property designated for such use in the Borough master
plan.
b. A convicted sex offender who resides or lives within 1,000 feet of any
school; library; municipal building; public park, tot lot, active or passive
recreation area or open space; playground; child care center or church,
or property designated for such use in the Borough master plan shall
have 60 days from receipt of written notice of the prohibition set forth
herein to move. Failure to move to a location which is in compliance
with this section within that time period shall constitute a violation of
this action.
§ 3-20.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-20.3
AO:103
§ 3-20.4. Prohibition of Sex Offender in Places Frequented by
Children.
§ 3-20.5. Penalty.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not exceeding $1,000
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 3-21. RETROFITTING OF EXISTING STORM DRAIN INLETS ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY.
c. This section shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to enactment of this section.
d. No convicted sex offenders convicted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2 shall
be employed by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs or any of its agencies
or subparts. This section applies to new hires after adoption of this
section.
e. No convicted sex offender shall be employed, paid or unpaid within the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs in the capacity of coach, trainer,
instructor, supervisor, caretaker or teacher of any kind to minors.
a. No convicted sex offender shall be present in or on any school, public
park, tot lot, active or passive recreation area or open space;
playground; child care center or church, or property designated by
Council as a public park, tot lot, active or passive recreation area or
open space; playground; child care center, church or school, or
property frequented by children.
b. No convicted sex offender shall be permitted to knowingly loiter on a
public way within 300 feet from a school, public park, tot lot, active or
passive recreation area or open space; playground; child care center or
church, or property which has been designated by the Council as a
public park, tot lot, active or passive recreation area or open space;
playground; child care center, church or school, or property frequented
by children.
c. If a police officer reasonably believes that a convicted sex offender is in
a public park, tot lot, active or passive recreation area or open space;
playground; child care center or church, or school, or property which
has been designated by the Council as a public park, tot lot, active or
passive recreation area or open space; playground; child care center,
church or school, or property frequented by children, the officer shall
require the convicted sex offender to provide his or her name and
address to determine if he or she is on the New Jersey Sex Offender
Registry.
§ 3-20.3 ENGLEWOOD § 3-21.1
AO:104
§ 3-21.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 3-21.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying storm water. In municipalities with combined
sewer systems, MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are
sewer systems that are designed to carry sanity sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect storm water runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 3-21.3. Prohibited Conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 3-21.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-21.3
AO:105
Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and
floatable materials; or is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in
Subsection 3-21.4 below prior to the completion of the project.
§ 3-21.4. Design Standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in Subsection 3-21.3 following standard to
control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets.
For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection 3-21.4c below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect storm
water from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body under
that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
§ 3-21.3 ENGLEWOOD § 3-21.4
AO:106
§ 3-21.5. Enforcement.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the police department and/or the
department of public works of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 3-21.6. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
§ 3-22. MAINTENANCE OF OUTDOOR DUMPSTERS AND OTHER
REFUSE CONTAINERS: COVERS REQUIRED; DISCHARGE
PROHIBITED.
§ 3-22.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to storm water to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and/or
the waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 3-22.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities);
or a bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 3-21.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-22.2
AO:107
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying storm water. In municipalities with combined
sewer systems, MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are
sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and
to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 3-22.3. Prohibited Conduct.
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does
not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ 3-22.4. Exceptions.
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g. furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup)
§ 3-22.2 ENGLEWOOD § 3-22.5
AO:108
§ 3-22.5. Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the police department and/or the
department of public works of Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 3-22.6. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND JUNK DEALERS.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions.
§ 4-1.2. License Required.
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall engage in the
usual activities of a solicitor, peddler or junk dealer, without first having
obtained a license to engage in such activity from the borough clerk.
§ 4-1.3. Application, Fingerprint, Photograph.
All applications for licenses shall be in writing on forms furnished by
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, signed by the applicant or the agent of
the applicant and presented to the borough clerk. The said application
shall state the name of the applicant, the correct name under which the
business is being operated, the residence of the applicant, and such other
pertinent information as may be considered necessary to properly consider
the application. No application shall be granted unless the applicant shall
provide the borough clerk with a certificate indicating that he has been
fingerprinted by the chief or other proper police officer of the Borough of
a. SOLICITOR – Shall mean any person (1) selling goods by sample or
taking orders for future delivery with or without accepting an advance
of payment for the goods; or (2) requesting charitable contributions
either by oral request or by the delivery of printed material; or (3)
offering personal services, by the solicitor or any other third party, for
compensation, either direct or indirect.
b. PEDDLER – Shall mean any person who goes from place to place to
traveling on the streets from house to house and carries with him
goods, wares, or merchandise of any description for the purpose of
selling and delivering them to purchasers.
c. JUNK DEALERS – Shall mean any person who goes from place to place
by traveling on the streets from house to house purchasing old papers,
rags, metals, or any other type of junk material.
§ 3-22.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.3
AO:109
Englewood Cliffs. The applicant shall also provide a recent photograph, not
more than one year old, of passport size, which may be exhibited upon
request during the pursuit of his business.
§ 4-1.4. Expiration of License.
All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall expire on May 31 of each
year.
§ 4-1.5. Fees.
Fees for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows: $5
per day: $25 per month; $100 per six months; or $200 per year; or a
proportional amount for the fractional part thereof.
§ 4-1.6. Violations.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall
pay a fine not exceeding $200 for each offense or shall be imprisoned for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 4-1.7. Revocation of License.
All licenses issued hereunder may be revoked at any time by the issuing
authority for failure or refusal on the part of the licensee to comply with the
terms, conditions and provisions of this section. Said license, when issued,
shall be displayed by the licensee on request at all times when actually
engaged in canvassing, soliciting, distributing, or calling from house to
house within the borough limits of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 4-1.8. Canvassing, Hours Permitted.
Licensees shall have the right to canvass within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs only on weekdays and Saturdays during the hours from 10:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. and shall conduct themselves in a lawful manner at all times.
§ 4-2. COIN OPERATED VENDING MACHINES.
§ 4-2.1. Purpose.
This section shall not apply to vending machines for the sale of bottled or
unbottled beverages, fruit juices, milk, soup, coffee, or food such as cake,
pastry, pie, sandwiches, ice cream or popcorn or syrup drinks or the like, the
sale of which items through vending machines being expressly controlled
by ordinance passed by the Englewood Cliffs Board of Health on December
9, 1963. It being the purpose of this section to supplement the control over
vending machines imposed by the board of health ordinance aforesaid.
§ 4-1.3 ENGLEWOOD § 4-2.2
AO:110
§ 4-2.2. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person as herein defined to distribute, place
or locate, or to continue to have placed or located, or in the possession of
any person who is the owner, occupant, tenant, lessor, lessee, or licensee of
any premises located within the confines of the borough any coin operated
vending machines, jukeboxes or the like, coin operated amusement devices
and other machines for dispensing cigarettes, cigars or other forms of
tobacco, or dispensing any other items of merchandise, either of a
perishable or nonperishable nature, without first having obtained a license
from the borough clerk.
§ 4-2.3. Definitions.
As used in this section.
§ 4-2.4. License Fee.
The license fee for each automatic vending machine as above defined shall
be $2 per year per machine. The fee shall be paid with the filing of the
application with the borough clerk, and the license issued by the borough
clerk shall not be transferable. The fee in each case shall be for a calendar
year, and each license issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the
year for which it was issued.
§ 4-2.5. License Refused or Revoked; Hearing.
The license hereunder may be refused or may be revoked if it is found that
the circumstances and conditions surrounding the machine in question are
detrimental to the health, welfare, morals or safety of the residents of the
borough, or if the owners of the machines are in violation of State, Federal
or local laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations, or the like. Any party who
may feel aggrieved by virtue of the borough clerk to issue a license upon
application therefor, or by virtue of the revocation thereof, shall be entitled
to a hearing before the mayor and council of the borough.
§ 4-2.6. Violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction be liable to the penalty as stated in chapter 3, section 3-1.
§ 4-3. ALARM SYSTEMS.14
a. A VENDING MACHINE – Shall mean and be defined as any device or
piece of mechanical or electrical equipment which upon the installation
of currency of the United Stated, activates any mechanism or results in
the dispensing of and making available to the person inserting the
currency the item of music, amusement or merchandise advertised
thereon.
§ 4-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.1
AO:111
§ 4-3.1. Definitions.
FIRE ALARM — Shall mean a fire alarm security system comprised of an
interconnected series of alarm devices or components, including systems
interconnected with radio frequency signals, which emit an audible, visual
or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and which provide a
warning of the presence of smoke or fire. Fire alarm does not include an
energy management system whose primary purpose is telecommunications
with energy control, the monitoring of the interior environment being an
incidental feature thereto.
LICENSE — Shall mean a license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:31A-1.1, et
seq.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL — Shall mean the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY ALARM — Shall mean any alarm which, when
activated, indicates an immediate medical emergency at the announced
location.
PANIC ALARM — Shall mean any alarm which, when activated, indicates
some immediate peril at the announced location.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person or individual, or any firm,
partnership, association, limited partnership, proprietorship, corporation or
any other business entity or any government agency or entity.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Police Department of the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs.
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean any alarm system or device
reporting to the police department a burglary, holdup, panic or medical
emergency or emergency requiring urgent attention and to which the police
department may be expected to respond. The Term "security alarm system"
shall include the terms "alarm devices," "direct alarms," "digital alarms,"
"central station alarms" and "local alarms." Fire alarm systems are not
included in this section.
§ 4-3.2. Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Police
Department.
§ 4-3.3. General Regulations.
a. Local Alarms.
1. Each local alarm shall be of a type approved by the chief of police
or his designated representative.
14.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 7427, 7521,
7903, 8004, 8513, 8604, 8713 and 8801.
§ 4-3.1 ENGLEWOOD § 4-3.3
AO:112
§ 4-3.4. Operator's Permit; Fees.
§ 4-3.5. Standards; Inspection; Disconnection.
2. Each local alarm that transmits any type of audible signal shall be
equipped with a ten-minute automatic shut off.
b. Dial Alarms.
1. Upon the effective date of this section, all dial alarms programmed
to dial into the police department communication center shall be
prohibited.
a. No person shall operate any central station alarm, digital alarm, or local
alarm installed in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs after the effective
date of this section15 without first obtaining a permit to operate the
same from the police department.
b. A permit shall be obtained from the police department within 60 days
after the effective date of this section for each central station alarm,
digital alarm, or local alarm in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, which
was installed on or before the effective date of this section.
c. All such permits shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued and
shall be renewed annually on a calendar-year basis before February 1 of
such year. Fees shall be payable to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
upon issuance of said permits.
d. In the event a permit is obtained subsequent to February 1 of any
calendar year, a permit shall be obtained from the Police Department
within 60 days after installation.
e. A permit application shall be completed and submitted with the
prescribed fee. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
person responsible for the alarm system and at least two emergency
listings shall be provided on the permit application.
f. The fee for the initial registration and operation permit of a security
alarm system shall be $25. The annual renewal fee shall be $25.
g. Failure to obtain or renew a permit within the prescribed period shall
subject the alarm system owner to a minimum fine of $50 and not more
than $250.
a. The chief of police or his designated representative may inspect and
test any newly installed alarm system within seven days of the initial
installation. This provision shall not be construed to impose a duty on
the borough to make inspections or to relieve the alarm owner from
inspecting, testing and maintaining his own alarm system.
15.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2007-08, codified herein as section 4-3, was adopted May 16,
2007.
§ 4-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.5
AO:113
§ 4-3.6. Emergency Listings.
§ 4-3.7. Response to Alarms.
b. Each alarm system that transmits any type of audible signal shall be
equipped with a ten-minute automatic shut off.
c. Any unauthorized installation may be disconnected by the chief of
police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
section.
d. No alarm system shall be installed and configured so as to transmit a
signal that does not convey the proper emergency, thus altering the
response by emergency services.
e. The chief of police or his designated representative may order
immediate, temporary disconnection of any alarm, with an audible
signal, which has failed to shut off automatically after a ten-minute time
period if said alarm is, in the opinion of the police department, causing
a disturbance. In such cases, the police department shall enter the
premises, by force if necessary, to disable the alarm. The Borough of
Englewood Cliffs, its various departments, agencies and officials shall
be held harmless for and on account of any and all damages arising out
of such entry.
a. The owner of any security alarm device within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs shall be responsible to provide the police department
with his name, address and day/night telephone number or the name,
address and day/night telephone number of the person responsible for
the operation of the alarm system, as well as the name, address and
telephone number of at least two other persons having access, control
and a working knowledge of the alarm system who may be contacted in
the event of an activation or emergency.
b. Emergency listings shall be updated as follows:
1. Upon initial registration of the alarm system.
2. On an annual basis upon renewal of the alarm permit.
3. On the next business day following any change in any of the
emergency information provided to the police department.
a. In response to any alarm signal indicating panic or medical emergency,
as so authorized by the alarm system owner in the permit application,
the police department in accordance with this section, will be
considered a real emergency, and entry will be made to the premises,
by force if necessary, to respond to such signal, and the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs, its various departments, agencies and officials shall
be held harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising
out of such entry.
§ 4-3.5 ENGLEWOOD § 4-3.8
AO:114
§ 4-3.8. False Alarms.
§ 4-3.9. Rule-Making Authority.
The chief of police may promulgate written rules and regulations
supplementing this section in order to provide for accurate record keeping
and efficient management.
§ 4-4. TAXICABS.
a. In the event that an alarm system is activated under conditions
heretofore defined as a false alarm, the chief of police shall cause an
investigation to be made and a record to be kept on file of said instance.
b. Violations and penalties. Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty
after trial in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for
a violation of a false alarm shall be fined as follows:
1. For the first and second false alarms in any given calendar year, a
written warning shall be issued by the police department.
2. For the third false alarm in any given calendar year, a mandatory
fine of $25 per false alarm shall be imposed.
3. For the fourth false alarm in any given calendar year, a mandatory
fine of $50 per false alarm shall be imposed.
4. For the fifth false alarm in any given calendar year, a mandatory
fine of $75 per false alarm shall be imposed.
5. For each subsequent false alarm in any given calendar, a
mandatory fine of $100 per false alarm shall be imposed.
6. After five false alarms in any given calendar year, the police
department shall have the right to deny the person further use of
the alarm system incorporated within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs Police Department.
c. Each violation of a false alarm shall be a separate offense.
d. No corporation or person may install, maintain or repair a burglar
alarm or fire alarm unless they have obtained a license pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:31A 1.1 and N.J.S.A. 45:5-23.
1. Any person who fails to comply with any provisions of this section
shall be subject, upon pleading guilty or being found guilty after
trial in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, to a
mandatory minimum fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000.
§ 4-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.1
AO:115
§ 4-4.1. License Required.
No person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation shall operate a
taxicab within the borough without first having obtained a license to
operate the taxicab from the mayor and council.
§ 4-4.2. Applications.
All applications for licenses shall be in writing on forms furnished by
the borough, signed by the applicant or the agent of the applicant and
presented to the borough clerk. The application shall state the name of the
applicant, the correct name under which the business is being operated, the
residence of the applicant, and such other pertinent information as may be
considered necessary to properly consider the application.
§ 4-4.3. Grant or Refuse Application.
All applications received by the borough clerk shall be presented by him to
the mayor and council at its next regular meeting and the mayor and council
shall consider the same or may adjourn action thereon to a later meeting
and at the meeting at which the same is considered the mayor and council
may grant or refuse the application.
§ 4-4.4. Clerk Issue License.
If the said application is approved, the council shall order the borough clerk
to issue the license upon payment to him of the license fee as hereinafter
provided.
§ 4-4.5. License Expiration.
All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall expire on January 1 of each
year.
§ 4-4.6. License Fees.
The annual fee for each taxicab owner's license issued or for any renewal
thereof shall be $100 for each year or portion of a year for which the
license is issued or renewed. The annual fee for a taxi driver's license issued
pursuant to this section shall be $10.
The annual fee for each taxicab vehicle license issued or for any renewal
thereof shall be $35 for each year or portion of a year for which the license
is issued or renewed, and all such licenses shall be under the charge and
control of the person applying therefor and he shall be responsible for the
operation and maintenance of all vehicles so licensed to him. All vehicles so
licensed shall at all times be kept clean and in good repair and condition.
§ 4-4.1 ENGLEWOOD § 4-4.7
AO:116
§ 4-4.7. License Displayed.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be exhibited in a prominent place inside
the vehicle.
§ 4-4.8. Fares; Charges.
The maximum fare which may be charged for conveying passengers within
or without the borough is hereby established as follows:
§ 4-4.9. Information Card Posted.
Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall have posted on the inside thereof,
where the same may be easily read by passengers, a printed card in a frame
showing the rates of fare, the name of the owner, the name of the driver, his
badge number, and a photograph of the driver. The photograph shall be a
print two inches by three inches with a head size of not less than one inch
taken against a light background.
§ 4-4.10. Operator to Wear Badge.
The operator of each taxicab shall wear a numbered badge.
§ 4-4.11. Taximeter.
Every taxicab operating in the borough shall have installed therein a
taximeter or the equivalent, thereof of standard make, by which the fare or
charge for hire of the taxicab is mechanically and accurate calculated and
registered. The taximeter is to be so placed in the taxicab that the charge
thereof may be plainly seen by the passengers. The owner of each taxicab
licensed under this section shall file with the borough clerk on February
1 and July 1 of each year a current certification from the manufacturer of
each meter (or from a qualified expert approved of by the borough) that the
meter has been inspected and that it is in proper working order.
§ 4-4.12. Soliciting Regulations.
The soliciting of taxi business shall be carried on only by licensed operators
and for taxicabs which are immediately available.
a. $1 for the first four-fifths of a mile or part thereof.
b. $0.20 for each additional one-fifth of a mile or part thereof, provided
however, that one year from the effective date of this section, the rate
for each additional one-fifth of a mile or part thereof shall be $0.25.
c. $8 per hour for waiting time. The charge for carrying passengers shall
not exceed the rates herein provided. Any fares charged in excess
thereof shall constitute a violation of this section by both owner or
operator, or both.
§ 4-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.13
AO:117
§ 4-4.13. Available Vehicle Time.
All licensed vehicles shall be available for at least eight hours a day and six
days a week.
§ 4-4.14. Passengers Regulated.
No person other than passengers for hire shall be permitted to ride in any
licensed taxicab while it is in service.
§ 4-4.15. Severability.
The provisions of this section shall be severable and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional the decision of the court
respecting such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any
other provisions which can give effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
§ 4-4.16. Violation; Penalty.
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be subject to
a fine of not exceeding $100 and in default of the payment thereof, may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
30 days. Every day on which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 4-4.17. Investigation and Fingerprinting Required.
All owners and operators of taxicabs which shall operate within or from
a station in the borough shall be properly fingerprinted and investigated
by the police department of the borough before the issuance of the above
described licenses. The police department shall make a report to the mayor
and council of any findings from this investigation. In the event that the
applicant is a corporation; the owners of the majority of the stock in that
corporation shall be fingerprinted and investigated in the manner described
above.
§ 4-5. LICENSING PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, SHOWS, CIRCUSES,
MOVING PICTURES, AND DANCE HALLS.
§ 4-5.1. License Required.
It shall not be lawful to conduct, maintain or operate a public place of
amusement within the borough, such as moving picture shows, circuses,
parks, dance halls or other places wherein amusements are provided, and to
which an entrance fee is charged, either at the entrance thereto or at or in
individual amusement places located therein, open air bathing pools, roller
coasters, scenic railways, merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels or other devices
or methods of amusement for which an admission or other fee is charged,
without first having had and obtained for that purpose a license therefor
§ 4-4.13 ENGLEWOOD § 4-5.1
AO:118
to be issued by and in the name of the borough, provided however, that
this section shall not affect such shows, entertainments or places of public
amusements except circuses and traveling shows which are not continued
more than three days consecutively.
§ 4-5.2. Application.
Application for a license as provided for in subsection 4-5.1 shall be made
in writing by the owner, manager or operator of any show or place of
public amusement, to the borough clerk, which application shall set forth
the nature of the amusement, the location of the place in which it is to
be maintained and conducted, and the names of the owners thereof, and
the name of the manager or operator in charge of such amusement, and
that the fees as hereinafter provided, shall accompany such application. The
application shall be immediately reported to the borough council for their
action thereon and if the same is granted, the clerk shall issue a license in
writing in the name of the borough, for the period of one year, or until the
license is cancelled and revoked for cause.
§ 4-5.3. Record of Licenses.
The clerk shall keep a proper record of all licenses issued by him under the
direction of the borough council including the names of the parties to whom
it was issued, the date of issue and the purpose for which the same was
issued, and the license when issued shall set forth the name of the persons
to whom it was issued and the place for where it is issued, the amusement
designated and the length of time the license is to run, and the license
shall be good only for the place designated therein, for the amusement
designated and to the parties set forth in the license and such license shall
not in any way be transferred except by consent of the borough council.
§ 4-5.4. License Fees.
The fees for such licenses shall be as follows: For places of amusement
continuing in operation one week or longer, for moving or motion picture
shows, and for theaters with a seating capacity of less than 250 persons,
$5 a year; with a seating capacity greater than 250 persons, $10 a year;
for traveling shows and circuses, $5 a day; for public parks, dance halls or
places of outdoor amusement to which a general entrance fee is charged,
or wherein subsidiary shows or entertainments are operated to which
additional entrance fees are charged, for parks of five acres or less in
extent, $1,000 a year; for parks over five and under 15 acres in extent,
$1,250 a year; and for parks of more than 15 acres in extent, $1,500 a year.
§ 4-5.5. Compliance with Existing Laws.
All licenses shall be issued subject to all existing ordinances of the borough,
and to such other ordinances, rules or regulations concerning the conduct
of shows or places of amusement which may be passed or adopted by the
borough.
§ 4-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.6
AO:119
§ 4-5.6. Revocation of License.
Any license issued may be revoked upon written notice and after hearing
the parties to whom such license was issued, on the conviction for any crime
involving the conduct of the place of amusement, or for the violation of
any of the rules and regulations of the borough, and when the license is so
revoked and the parties interested therein shall be prohibited from further
conducting the same.
§ 4-6. COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
§ 4-6.1. License Required.
No person (including, but not limited to business establishments and/or
corporations) shall place or maintain or permit to be placed, operated, used
or maintained in any public or quasi-public place or in any building, store or
other place wherein the public is invited or may enter, any coin-controlled
amusement device without first having obtained a license for each such
device from the borough clerk.
§ 4-6.2. Application.
Application for licenses shall be made in writing on forms to be supplied
by the borough clerk. In order to enable the chief of police to determine
the suitability of the premises and their location and the fitness of the
applicant to maintain or use the license applied for, the form shall contain
the following information:
a. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation, or otherwise;
b. The name, style and designation of the business maintaining the device/
devices;
c. The address of and all telephone numbers at the location where the
device or devices will be utilized.
d. The name and residence address of the manager and/or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business premises;
e. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual and concerning each stockholder holding 10% or more of the
stock of the corporation each officer and each director, if the applicant
is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager
or other person principally in charge of the business premises:
1. Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
2. The two previous addresses immediated prior to the present
address of the applicant or officer submitting the application.
§ 4-5.6 ENGLEWOOD § 4-6.2
AO:120
§ 4-6.3. License Fee; Expiration; Non-Transferable.
The annual license fee for each amusement game or machine shall be $150.
The license shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which
issued. Said license shall apply only to the person to whom it is granted
and for the premises stated in the application. Said license shall not be
transferred without written approval of the borough clerk.
§ 4-6.4. Compliance With Requirements.
No license shall be issued unless the application and license requirements
have been satisfied. No establishment, building, entity or location shall have
more than three devices as defined in subsection 4-6.7 hereof.
3. Written proof of age.
4. Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and sex.
5. Whether or not applicant has been previously licensed by any
public or governmental authority to maintain coin-controlled
amusement devices for use by the public or has previously applied
for such license, and whether or not such license has been denied,
revoked or suspended and the reason therefor.
6. All criminal convictions, fully disclosing the offense for which
convicted and the circumstances thereof.
7. Authorization for the borough, its agents or employees, to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application.
8. The names and addresses of three adult residents of the County of
Bergen who will serve as character references.
9. Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that
the foregoing information contained in the application is true and
correct, said declaration being duly made before an individual
authorized to administer oaths within the State of New Jersey,
which individual shall affix his sign or seal thereto.
10. Number of licenses desired.
11. Category of device.
12. Address where device is to be located.
13. Description of device or devices including name of manufacturer
and serial number.
§ 4-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.5
AO:121
§ 4-6.5. Display of License.
No amusement device shall be placed, operated, maintained or used unless
and until the license, when issued, shall be affixed in a conspicuous place to
the machine for which it was issued.
§ 4-6.6. Number of Devices Permitted.
No more than three amusement machines shall be allowed in any one
building or establishment.
§ 4-6.7. Prohibition.
Any person who shall use or permit to be used, any machine or device
hereunder, as a game of chance or as a means of gambling shall be guilty of
a violation of this section.
§ 4-6.8. Definitions.
As used in this section, coin-controlled amusement device shall mean:
§ 4-6.9. Revocation; Hearing.
The license hereunder may be revoked if it is found upon proper hearing
before the mayor and council of the borough, that the circumstances and
conditions surrounding the machine in question are detrimental to the
health, welfare, morals or safety of the residents of the borough, or if the
owner of the machines are in violation of State, Federal or local laws,
statutes, ordinances, regulations, or the like. Any party who may feel
aggrieved by virtue of the failure of the borough clerk to issue a license
upon application therefore shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor
and council of the borough.
a. Any machine, device or contrivance which is permitted to function or
operate by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, or other
consideration which is operated for amusement.
b. Any machine, device or contrivance which upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, or other consideration may be operated for use as a game or
contest or any description and which may or may not contain any form
of payoff device for the return of slug, money, coin checks, tokens,
merchandise or other form of prize or merchandise and shall include
pinball machines, electronic and/or computerized amusement devices
and other coin-controlled devices in which marbles, balls or pellets are
projected or propelled by spring or plunger or any other means
whereby such marbles, balls or pellets fall into slots, tracks, grooves or
any other position, or whereby such marbles, balls or pellets strike pins
or objects.
c. Any machine, device or contrivance which upon the insertion of a coin,
slug or other consideration displays any form of picture or moving
images.
§ 4-6.5 ENGLEWOOD § 4-6.10
AO:122
§ 4-6.10. Violation and Penalty.
Any licensee or other person violating any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
In addition, upon conviction of a violation hereof, the licensee shall
immediately forfeit all licenses on all devices which have been issued
pursuant to the terms of this section.
§ 4-6.11. Applicability.
All licenses under this section shall be issued subject to State law, this
section, other applicable ordinances and police regulations of the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 4-6.12. Inconsistency.
Insofar as the provisions of Ordinance No. 157R entitled "An Ordinance
Providing For The Licensing And Regulation Of Coin Operated Vending
Machines Used For Dispensing Any Goods, Wares And Merchandise Within
The Confines Of The Borough Of Englewood" adopted March 12, 1964, and
codified as section 4-2 of this Code, concerning coin operated amusement
devices, and in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions hereof, and
to that extent only, those provisions of Ordinance No. 157 R are hereby
repealed and replaced by this ordinance. All other ordinances or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are
likewise repealed.
§ 4-7. LICENSING OF LANDSCAPERS.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, or unless there is something in the
subject or context repugnant to such construction, or unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of this section, the words and phrases used in this
section shall have the following meanings:
a. LANDSCAPER – Shall mean any individual person, partnership, firm,
association, business or legal entity which undertakes any of the
following services as a commercial undertaking, for consideration:
mowing of grass or lawns: trimming or cutting of trees, bushes or
shrubbery; restoration or installation of lawns, grass, foliage, leaves or
trees from a given property; any and all services relating to the placing,
installation, care or cultivation of lawns, shrubbery, trees, foliage or
other plant life.
b. DEBRIS – Shall mean any organic or inorganic substance including
grass, grass clippings, branches, twigs, mulch, soil or other natural
§ 4-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.1
AO:123
§ 4-7.2. Licensing.
No individual person, partnership, firm, association, business or legal entity
shall conduct a landscaping business within the borough without first
having obtained a license from the borough council.
All applications for landscaping licenses shall be in writing on forms
furnished by the borough, signed by the applicant or the authorized agent
of the applicant, and presented to the borough clerk. The application shall
state the name of the landscaper, the correct name under which the
business is being operated, the residence of the applicant, the names and
addresses of residents of the borough for whom landscaping services are
being provided, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary
for an investigation of the application.
All applications for licenses received by the clerk shall after appropriate
investigation, be presented by him to the mayor and council, which shall
either grant or refuse the application. Thereafter, if the application is
approved, the council shall order the borough clerk to issue the license
upon payment of the license fee as hereinafter provided. All licenses issued
shall expire on December 31 of each year.
§ 4-7.3. License Fees.
The annual fee for each landscaping license issued, or for any renewal
thereof, shall be $50 for each year or portion of a year for which the license
is issued or renewed.
§ 4-7.4. Landscaper's Responsibilities.
parts of foliage, including stumps or trees, products of the earth,
including any residue from any of the foregoing. Leaves shall not be
considered debris for purposes of this section.
a. No landscaper shall operate within the confines of the borough without
possession of a valid license.
b. The removal of debris resulting from landscaping services shall be the
responsibility of the landscaper, and no such debris shall be placed at
the curbside for collection, swept or deposited into any public street, or
left on a given property such that same may be caused to be blown into
a public street.
c. No landscaper shall perform any landscaping services within the
confines of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs on Sunday.
d. No landscaper shall dump or allow the dumping of leaves which do not
originate within the boundaries of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
e. No landscaper shall bag leaves, unless such landscaper utilizes
biodegradable bags.
§ 4-7.1 ENGLEWOOD § 4-7.4
AO:124
§ 4-7.5. Penalties and Fines.
Should any landscaper violate the provisions of this section, it shall be fined,
for the first offense, the sum of $500, and in addition, shall forfeit its license
to operate within the borough.
In the event that a landscaper shall, after forfeiture of its license, attempt
to operate within the borough, it shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to a
fine of not less than $1,000. In addition the court may impose imprisonment
for a period of not more than 30 days.
In the event that a license is forfeited, the landscaper may reapply to the
borough clerk, and upon the posting of a bond in the amount of $3,000,
which shall secure the borough against further infractions, the landscaper
shall be issued a replacement license, valid only until the end of that
calendar year.
§ 4-7.6. Enforcing Agents.
The police department and the construction code official, and/or his
authorized designees, shall be charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this section. Additionally, the mayor and council may later
appoint other departments and/or borough officials as enforcing agents.
§ 4-7.7. Immediate Implementation.
All landscapers currently working within the confines of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs shall obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of this
section, no later than September 15, 1988. The failure of any landscaper to
obtain such a license prior to that date shall render such landscaper subject
to the penalties imposed herein.
§ 4-8. COMMERCIAL AND MOVIE FILMING.
§ 4-8.1. Definitions.
f. No person shall allow the piling of leaves so as to block accessibility to
storm sewage drains. Leaves shall be piled at least one foot from the
curbline so as to allow storm water to channel freely along the curbline
and flow, unimpeded, into the storm drain.
a. FILMING – Shall mean the taking or recording of still or motion
pictures either on film, video tape or any other recording medium
intended for commercial use for viewing on television, in movie
theaters or for advertising purposes.
b. NEWS STORIES – Shall mean the reporting or summarizing of
information concerning an event that has either recently taken place or
of a current event of general interest, including, but not limited to,
features commonly known as newscasts, news bulletins, and news
anthology programs.
§ 4-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.2
AO:125
§ 4-8.2. Permit Required; Issuance.
§ 4-8.3. Conditions for Issuance of a Permit.
No permit shall be issued for filming with the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
unless the applicant for such permit:
a. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs without first obtaining a permit, which permit shall set forth the
location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall take
place.
b. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the borough clerk and the
application for a permit shall be in a form approved by the borough
clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth herein, or as may
hereafter be established by ordinance.
c. A permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor or indoor filming for
one day within a period of not more than 10 days beginning on the date
of issuance of the permit. If the filming does not take place on the dates
specified in this permit due to inclement weather, or for other good
causes, the borough clerk may issue a new permit at no additional fee.
d. No more than 10 such permits may be issued for any location within any
calendar year unless a waiver is obtained pursuant to subsection 4-8.7
hereof.
a. Provides liability insurance coverage for bodily injury of not less than
$100,000 per person, property damage of not less than $50,000 per
person and aggregate coverage for both bodily injury and property
damage, per occurrence, of not less than $500,000;
b. Specifies in writing that the Borough of Englewood Cliffs will be
indemnified and held harmless from any liability or damages resulting
from the filming:
c. Obtains the written permission of the owners where the filming takes
place on private property;
d. Agrees to comply with all lawful directives issued by the Englewood
Cliffs Police Department. Fire Department and other departments
where deemed necessary, and to reimburse the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs for any police, fire or other borough personnel;
e. Delivers to the borough an escrow deposit in an amount equal to twice
the permit fee. Such escrow shall be held by the borough pending
completion of the filming or the expiration of the permit. The escrow
may be used by the borough to reimburse the borough for any costs
required to be paid by the applicant hereunder;
f. Provides, prior to 20 full days before the filming permit is granted,
written notice to the property owners of properties located and
residents residing within 200 feet of the property lines of the premises
§ 4-8.2 ENGLEWOOD § 4-8.3
AO:126
§ 4-8.4. Regulations.
for which the permit is requested. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall advise each property owner or resident of the date or dates upon
which filming is to take place and the location of the premises where
the filming is to take place. Such notice shall be served by certified
mail/return receipt requested upon the property owners or residents
entitled to receive notice at least 20 days prior to the issuance of the
permit, so as to allow residents to file any objections to same. Upon
the written request of the applicant, the borough shall, within 72 hours
make and certify a list from the current tax duplicates of the addresses
of properties located within the borough within 200 feet of the property
lines of the premises for which the permit is requested, together with
the names and addresses of the record owners thereof.
Notice to owners and residents of properties in adjoining municipalities
shall be given by certified mail to the clerk of such adjoining
municipality. Failure to give such notice to a resident or property owner
of the premises not shown on the list shall not invalidate the permit.
Prior to granting of the permit, the applicant shall file an affidavit of
proof of service with the borough clerk;
g. Obtain the written approval, after an appropriate investigation, of the
police department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
a. In residential zones, filming shall be permitted only Monday through
Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown,
whichever is earlier.
b. Filming shall, at all times, be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property
owners. The permittee shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
c. The holder of permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon completion of filming or the expiration of the
permit, whichever comes first. Should the holder of the permit fail to
remove all equipment, debris and other rubbish within the time period
specified, the borough may remove same at the expense of the
applicant and the applicant shall reimburse the borough for the cost
thereof.
d. The applicant shall notify the borough clerk at least 72 hours before
filming in order to give the clerk sufficient opportunity to notify the
affected departments so that they may have an authorized
representative inspect the site and take such other measures as may be
necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare.
§ 4-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.4
AO:127
§ 4-8.5. Denial and Revocation of Permits.
The borough clerk shall refuse to issue a permit whenever he determines on
the basis of objective facts and after a review of the application and a report
thereon by the police department and by other agencies involved with the
proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/or time set forth in
the application would violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably
interfere with the public's use of public land, unreasonably interfere with
the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the
free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the
public's health, safety or welfare. The borough clerk shall revoke a permit
whenever he determines, on the basis of objective facts, that the applicant
has violated any of the regulations as contained in subsection 4-8.4 hereof,
or ascertain that any of the requirements or conditions contained in
subsection 4-8.3 were untrue or have become violated since the issuance of
the permit.
§ 4-8.6. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the borough clerk granting, denying
or reviling a permit may appeal to the borough council. The council shall
e. The holder of the permit shall comply with all lawful directives issued
by any municipal agency, and comply with all other applicable laws.
When, in the discretion of the chief of police, or his designee, the
presence of police, fire or code enforcement personnel are required in
connection with the filming, the applicant shall reimburse the borough
for the cost of such personnel.
f. The holder of the permit shall not conduct filming in such a manner as
to preclude access to adjoining properties from the public street
without the express written consent of any property owner affected
thereby.
g. Vehicles used in connection with the filming, including vehicles of
personnel associated with such filming shall be parked off the public
right of way to the maximum extent possible. Vehicles should not be
parked so as to encroach upon private property without the express
written consent from the owner or occupant thereof. Vehicles parked in
the public right of way shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic regulations. Vehicles parked or located in violation hereof may be
towed by the borough and the cost thereof shall be reimbursed to the
borough by the applicant.
h. The holder of the permit shall not suffer or permit any lights used in
connection with filming to shine directly into any windows upon any
other property, nor suffer or permit any noise in excess of the limitation
specified in the borough's noise ordinance. In the event of a violation
hereof, the borough may abate such violation, and charge the cost
thereof to the applicant, who shall reimburse the borough for such cost.
§ 4-8.4 ENGLEWOOD § 4-8.6
AO:128
hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the
borough council.
§ 4-8.7. Waivers.
The borough clerk may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements or
limitations of this section if he determines that strict compliance with such
limitations will impose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant, and that
such a permit may be issued without endangering the public's health, safety
and welfare; provided however, the borough clerk must first report any such
waivers to the borough council at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
giving the reasons for any such waiver.
§ 4-8.8. Fees.
The fee schedule for permits authorized under this section shall be as
follows:
Filming on private property $100
Additional fee for filming on public land, streets, rightsof-
way or public buildings
$250
§ 4-8.9. Exemptions.
The provisions of this section relating to the requirements for and the
issuance of permits shall not apply to the filming of news stories, provided,
however, that such filming shall comply with the following regulations:
a. In residential zones, such filming shall, to the extent possible, occur
only Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. or sundown, whichever is earlier;
b. Such filming shall be conducted in such a manner to minimize the
inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining activities or normal public
activities upon public lands;
c. Such filming shall be conducted so as to minimize the creation and
spread of debris and rubbish during filming, and, upon the completion
of the filming, those conducting the filming shall remove all equipment,
debris and other rubbish from the filming location;
d. To the extent practical, advance notification shall be furnished to the
borough clerk of such filming;
e. Such filming shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the
Englewood Cliffs Police Department;
f. Such filming shall be conducted in such a manner as not to preclude
access to adjoining properties from the public streets or to encroach
upon adjoining property without the express written permission from
the owner and occupant thereof;
§ 4-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.9
AO:129
§ 4-8.10. Penalty.
Any person violating any part of this section shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 4-9. NEWSPAPER BOXES.16
§ 4-9.1. General Prohibition.
No person shall install or place upon any public sidewalk or right of way
any newspaper box except in accordance with the rules and regulations
contained herein and without having first obtained a permit therefor.
§ 4-9.2. Issuance of Permits.
g. Vehicles used in connection with the filming, including vehicles of
personnel associated with such filming, shall be parked off the public
right of way to the maximum extent possible. Vehicles should not be
parked so as to encroach upon private property without the express
written consent from the owner or occupant thereof. Vehicles parked in
the public right of way shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic regulations. Vehicles parked or located in violation hereof may be
towed by the borough and the cost thereof shall be reimbursed to the
borough by the owner thereof.
h. Lights used in connection with the filming shall not shine directly into
any window upon other property nor shall any noise from the filming
extend across property lines in excess of the limitations specified in the
borough's noise ordinance.
a. The chief of police, or his designee, is hereby authorized to direct the
borough clerk to issue permits for the installation or placement of
newspaper boxes within public rights of way.
b. An application for permit shall contain a diagram drawn to scale
showing the proposed location of the newspaper box in relationship to
surrounding curbs, streets, sidewalks, fire hydrants, bus stops, taxi
stands, loading zones, public or private driveways, adjacent buildings,
pedestrian crosswalks, handicapped curb cuts, painted parking stalls,
bus shelters and existing newspaper boxes within a radius of 20 feet.
c. The application shall be submitted to the borough clerk within a
nonrefundable application fee of $25 to cover the administrative costs
in connection therewith.
d. Permits issued hereunder shall be valid for a term of one year from the
date of issuance.
16.Editor's Note: Section III of Ordinance No. 9102 provides that in cases of inconsistencies
between code section 4-6 and section 4-9, the provisions of section 4-9 shall prevail.
§ 4-8.9 ENGLEWOOD § 4-9.2
AO:130
§ 4-9.3. Rules and Regulations.
e. Within 10 business days following receipt of a completed application
and payment of the application fee, the chief of police, in conjunction
with the borough clerk, shall issue a permit for a newspaper box upon
the public right of way unless the chief of police finds that the issuance
of the permit would not be in compliance with the rules and regulations
set forth below. Failure to issue the permit within the time limit
provided shall be appealable as set forth below.
f. Except as otherwise modified herein, the issuance, denial or revocation
of a permit for newspaper boxes, and appeals therefrom, shall be made
in writing to the mayor and council within 20 days of the decision of the
chief of police. A hearing shall be heard within 30 days of the filing of
such appeal.
a. No newspaper box shall be installed in such a manner as to:
1. Endanger the safety of persons or property; or
2. Unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle;
or
3. Unreasonably interfere with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
4. Unreasonably interfere with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
b. No newspaper box shall be installed in any of the following locations:
1. Within any public street, shoulder of any public street, public
parking lot or other public area designed for either the parking or
passage of motor vehicles.
2. Within three feet of a pedestrian crosswalk.
3. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
4. Within five feet of a public or private driveway, fire call box, police
call box or other emergency facility.
5. Within three feet of a painted line of a parking stall.
6. Within three feet of another newspaper box.
7. Within 10 feet of the sideline of an intersecting street.
8. Within three feet of a barrier free curb cut.
9. Within six feet of the portion of the curbline or street or right of
way designated as either a bus stop, taxi stand or loading area, or
§ 4-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.3
AO:131
otherwise designated as a "no parking" or "no stopping and
standing" traffic zone.
10. Within six feet of the curbline of any county or state highway
without express written permission from the appropriate county or
state authority and only if the thoroughfare to which the machine is
adjacent allows stopping or standing within 20 feet of the proposed
machine location.
11. On any privately owned property without the consent of the
property owner.
12. In such location as to result in an unobstructed sidewalk area of
less than four feet in width.
c. Subject to the limitations contained in paragraphs a and b above,
newspaper boxes shall only be installed within the public right of way in
the following locations:
1. Along streets having curbs, immediately adjacent to the edges of
the curb furthest from the street.
2. Along streets having no curbs, immediately adjacent to that portion
of the sidewalk nearest the street.
3. Along public streets having neither curbs nor sidewalks,
immediately adjacent to the public right of way.
d. Permittees shall maintain their newspaper boxes in proper working
order and free of graffiti.
e. A permittee shall collect and remove all litter which may have
accumulated under, in or about its newspaper box whenever it places
additional newspapers in its newspaper box.
f. No newspaper box shall be attached by chain, bolts, or otherwise to any
telephone pole, bus shelter, tree, traffic sign, street sign, sidewalk or
pavement or any other structure within any public street, shoulder of
any public street, public parking lot or other public area.
g. Newspaper boxes permitted hereunder shall comply with following
additional standards:
1. No newsrack shall exceed 60 inches in height, 24 inches in width or
20 inches in thickness.
2. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase
of the newspaper sold therein.
3. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund
in the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The
coin return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
§ 4-9.3 ENGLEWOOD § 4-9.3
AO:132
4. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as
to be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the
name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a
working telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to
secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin return
mechanism, or to give the notices provided for in this section.
5. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition
and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and
maintained so that
(a) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof:
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion. In the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon:
(c) The clear plastic or glass parts hereof, if any, through which
the publications therein are viewed, are unbroken and
reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations:
(d) The paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading:
(e) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly
misshaped.
h. Any newspaper box placed or installed without a permit, if required
hereunder, or in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed a public nuisance and the owner thereof shall forthwith remove
said newspaper box upon notice thereof from either the police
department or the borough clerk. Except in the case of emergencies
posing an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare,
such notice shall be provided in writing to the address of the known.
Such notice may be appealed as provided in subsection 4-9.2(f). In the
event of the failure or refusal of the owner to so remove said newspaper
box following such appeal, if any, the Borough of Englewood Cliffs may
cause such newspaper box to be removed and disposed of in
accordance with law, and at permittee's expense.
i. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph b10, a newspaper box
may be installed or placed immediately along the side of a bus shelter
or bench subject to the following additional limitations:
1. Appropriate written approval is obtained from state or county
agency having appropriate jurisdiction.
2. Only one newspaper box may be installed or placed on either side
of the bus shelter or bench.
3. Newspaper boxes shall not be placed in such a manner as to
interfere with passage from the bus shelter or bench to the curb.
§ 4-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.3
AO:133
§ 4-9.4. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine
not in excess of $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 5
ANIMALS
§ 5-1. LICENSING OF DOGS.
§ 5-1.1. License Required; Fee.
Pursuant to R.S. 4:19-15.12, the sum of $10 is hereby fixed as the sum to be
paid annually for a dog license beginning August 1, 1984, and each renewal
thereof, within the confines of the borough. Any person renewing a dog
license subsequent to March 1, shall pay an additional surcharge of $5 as a
late fee. In the event that a dog is determined to be potentially dangerous
after a determination pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 307, Laws of
New Jersey 1989, the yearly licensing fee shall be $700.
§ 5-1.2. Definition.
As used in this section.
DOG — Shall mean any dog, male or female, over the age of seven months.
§ 5-1.3. Ownership Established.
Every person who harbors or possesses any dog for 10 days or more shall
for the purpose of this chapter be the owner of the dog or dogs so harbored
or possessed.
§ 5-1.4. Unlicensed Dogs; Dog from Out of State.
Any person who brings into the borough any dog licensed in another State
and bearing a registration tag and keeps the same for more than 90 days,
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag. Any person who
shall bring or cause to be brought into the borough any unlicensed dog, and
shall keep the same for more than 10 days, shall immediately apply for a
license and registration tag.
§ 5-1.5. Issuance of License.
The owner of every dog shall pay the fees to the borough clerk, or his
designated agent, on or before January 31 annually. The borough clerk upon
4. Newspaper delivery vehicles shall not stop, stand or park within
the designated bus stop area.
§ 4-9.3 ENGLEWOOD § 5-1.5
AO:134
payment of the fees, shall issue a license for the keeping of such dog and
registration tag which shall be serially numbered and shall bear the year of
its issuance and the words "Englewood Cliffs, N.J." The license shall expire
on January 31 following its issuance.
§ 5-2. KENNEL, PET SHOP AND POUND.
§ 5-2.1. License Required.
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the borough clerk for a license
entitling him to keep or operate such an establishment.
§ 5-2.2. Application.
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located, the purpose or purposes for which it is
to be maintained and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the
chief of police and the agent of the board of health of the borough delegated
for that purpose, showing compliance with the State and borough rules and
regulations, governing location of and sanitation at such establishments.
§ 5-2.3. Expiration of License.
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained and all such licenses
shall expire on January 31 annually, and be subject to the revocation by the
borough on recommendations of the State Department of Health or the local
board of health for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the
State Department or the borough governing the same, after the owner has
been afforded a hearing.
§ 5-2.4. Individual Dog Licenses Not Required.
Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such establishments;
such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises.
§ 5-2.5. Leash Required Off Premises.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 5-2.6. License Fee.
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or less
dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual license fee
for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
§ 5-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3
AO:135
§ 5-3. DOG WARDENS.
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the council may appoint at such
times and for such terms as may seem expedient, one or more persons,
firms or corporations as dog wardens, whose duty it shall be to seize and
impound all dogs found being kept or harbored or running at large and
liable to seizure under the provisions of this chapter or pursuant to law and
to put to death or cause to be put to death as humanely as possible and be
removed from town or buried, all such dogs not redeemed in accordance
with the provisions hereof and the laws of New Jersey. The compensation
of such dog warden shall be fixed by resolution of the borough council.
The regulations pertaining to the further duties of the dog warden shall be
provided by resolution of the borough council.
§ 5-4. IMPOUNDING DOGS.
Any dog not licensed and registered as required by law and this chapter
shall be taken into custody and impounded by any police officer, dog warden
appointed hereunder or other duly authorized agent and thereafter
destroyed and disposed of in the manner provided by law.
§ 5-5. ANNUAL DOG CANVASS.
The chief of police of the borough shall annually after February 1, cause
a canvass to be made of all dogs owned and harbored within the borough
and shall report the result including the names of all persons owning or
harboring such animals in the manner provided for by law.
§ 5-6. RUNNING AT LARGE.
No person shall suffer an unlicensed dog to run at large in the borough
or suffer any dog whether licensed or not to run at large without the
registration tag herein provided for or cause or permit any unlicensed dog
to wear such tag. All dogs when upon the public highway shall be leashed.
No person shall suffer any dog, licensed or unlicensed to run at large upon
any of the streets or public places or the borough.
No dog shall be deemed to be at large within the provisions of this chapter
while upon the property of a neighbor who shall consent thereto.
§ 5-7. INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIALS.
No person shall hinder, interfere with or molest any persons appointed
as dog wardens and any assistant employed by him or any officer of the
borough or other duly authorized agent in the performance of any duty
enjoined by this chapter.
§ 5-8. (REPEALED)17
17.Editor's Note: Section 5-8 Vicious Dogs previously contained herein was repealed by
Ordinance #9013. Prior ordinance history: Ordinance #66.
§ 5-3 ENGLEWOOD § 5-9
AO:136
§ 5-9. EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dogs on a leash passing
through the borough when accompanied by their nonresident owners,
possessors or harborers.
§ 5-10. VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates or who fails or refused to comply with any of the
provisions hereof shall upon conviction be liable to the penalty as stated in
chapter 3, section 3-1.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found by a preponderance
of the evidence to have violated this act, or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, or to have failed to comply with a panel's order (and
all regulations promulgated pursuant to Chapter 307. Laws of New Jersey
1989), shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of the
violation. Each and every day that a violation continues to exist, shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.
In addition to any and all other fines and/or remedies allowable pursuant
to law, the animal control officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the provisions
of Chapter 307, Laws of New Jersey 1989, or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, or a panels' order.
In addition to all other remedies or fines here and before stated, the
municipal court may order that the dog so seized and impounded be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner, after the expiration of a
ten-day waiting period following conviction.
§ 5-11. INCORPORATION OF CHAPTER 307, LAWS OF NEW JERSEY
1989.
The provisions of Chapter 307, Laws of New Jersey 1989, be and the same
are hereby incorporated into this chapter, and shall supersede any and all
inconsistent parts or provisions of Chapter 5.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE.
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs in accordance with the
provisions of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An
Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws
of 1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.R.S. 33:
1-1 et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-2
AO:137
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in R.S. 33: 1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable.
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority.
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the mayor and
council, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required.
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the borough
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees. [New; Ord. No. 7003; Ord. No. 2015-03; Ord.
No. 2016-06]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of the alcoholic
beverages in the borough shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual License
Plenary Retail Consumption License $2,500
Club License $150
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
§ 6-3.5. License Term.
All licenses shall run from July 1 to June 30 following, except those issued
during the fiscal year which shall run from the effective date thereof to June
30 following. License fees shall be prorated on a per diem basis, from the
effective date of the license to June 30 following.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-2 ENGLEWOOD § 6-4.1
AO:138
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or consumed
in any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and New Year's Day each year as
hereinafter provided.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays.
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays, no
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.3. Saturdays.
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Saturdays. On Saturdays
no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.4. New Year's Day.
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises at all hours, unless January 1 is a Sunday, in which case
alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in
the licensed premises between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.5. Sales to Certain Persons.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or minor, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
licensed premises by any of the above named classes or persons, or permit
any such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.6. Closing Provisions.
During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no person shall be
admitted or permitted to remain therein except the licensee or bona fide
employees of the licensee: except that this closing of premises requirement
shall not apply to hotels, restaurants, or to other establishments where the
principal business is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.7. Ownership Limited to One License.
No more than one license shall be granted to any person, corporation,
partnership or limited partnership in the borough and the license shall
cover only the licensed premises.
§ 6-5. MINORS.
§ 6-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-5.1
AO:139
§ 6-5.1. Prohibition for Minors.
No licensee shall sell or serve any alcoholic beverages to any person under
the age of 18 years of age.
§ 6-5.2. Presence.
No minor shall be allowed in any premises where alcoholic beverages are
sold or served for consumption on the premises unless accompanied by his
parent or guardian.
§ 6-5.3. Violations and Penalties for Persons Under Legal Age to
Purchase, Possess or Consume Alcoholic Beverages.
a. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possess or consumes any alcoholic beverage in or on any
school property, public conveyance, public place or place of public
assembly or on private property shall be in violation of this section and
shall be subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for a
subsequent offense.
b. This section shall provide that the court may, in addition to the fine
authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone for six months the
driving privilege of the defendant. Upon the conviction of any person
and the suspension or postponement of that person's driver's license,
the court shall forward a report to the Motor Vehicle Commission
stating the first and last day of the suspension or postponement period
imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of
the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of
license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day
the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after
the person reaches the age of 17 years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Commission along with the report. If
for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in
the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex
of the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall be a defense to a subsequent charge of a violation
of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
§ 6-5.1 ENGLEWOOD § 6-5.3
AO:140
§ 6-6. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
§ 6-6.1. Room Shall Have Public Freely Admitted.
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold for consumption on the premises in any
room to which the public is not freely admitted; except that the provisions
of this paragraph shall not restrict the sale of alcoholic beverages to any
person in a room not open to the public at large where such person is in
attendance at a private party, affair, wedding reception or similar gathering
catered, served or attended by the licensee and/or his employees so long as
all other provisions of this chapter are compiled with.
If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Commission the required report. The court shall not
collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section. Upon
receipt of a report by the court, the Commission shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
1. This section shall not prohibit an under-aged person from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with
a religious observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the
legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
2. As used in paragraph b1:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian
of the under-aged person pursuant to testamentary or court
appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the under-aged person's grandparent,
aunt or uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or
affinity.
c. This section shall not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment
by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school or post-secondary educations institution. However, this section
shall be construed to not preclude the imposition of a penalty under this
section N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against a person
who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.2
AO:141
§ 6-6.2. Prostitutes, Female Impersonators, and Criminals on
Premises.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises,
any prostitute, female impersonator, pickpocket, swindler, confidence man,
or any notorious criminal, gangster, racketeer or other person of ill repute.
§ 6-6.3. Lewdness, Obscene Language, Disturbances.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any lewdness, immoral activity or foul, filthy or obscene language or
conduct, or any brawl, act of violence, disturbance, or unnecessary noise or
shall any licensee allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to
be conducted in such manner as to become a nuisance.
§ 6-6.4. Gambling, Bookmaking and Pin Ball Games.
No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any poolselling,
bookmaking or any playing for money at faro, roulette, rouge et noir or
any unlawful game or gambling of any kind, or any device or apparatus
designed for any such purpose, or any machine or device commonly known
as bagatelle or pin ball machine, in or upon the licensed premises.
§ 6-6.5. Slot Machines.
No licensee shall possess, or allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed
premises, any slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine which
may be used for the purpose of playing for money or other valuable thing.
§ 6-6.6. Lighting Requirements.
Any and all premises licensed under the terms of this chapter to sell
alcoholic beverages shall provide a light, either fluorescent or incandescent,
which light shall be kept burning over the bar located within such premises.
This light shall be kept illuminated from the time of closing as set forth
under this chapter until there is sufficient natural light after sunrise.
Further, there shall be kept clear of any shade, blind, drape, curtain or other
covering, a window, whereby it will be possible for the law enforcement
officers in the borough to make inspection by viewing through such window
into the premises for the purposes of protecting the premises itself and
in general, the public health, safety, welfare and morals; moreover, such
window shall be located in such a manner that an inspecting officer, viewing
from the outside, may be able on a direct line of vision to see the illuminated
bar and the area behind it, as provided above.
§ 6-6.7. Location of Business; Transfers Prohibited.
No plenary retail consumption license shall be transferred from any
premises to any other premises which are located within a residential zone
as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the borough; provided however,
§ 6-6.2 ENGLEWOOD § 6-6.7
AO:142
that this paragraph shall in no way affect presently existing premises with
licenses located therein.
§ 6-7. REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of R.S. 33: 1-31 by a service of a five day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for a
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. WORDS AND PHRASES.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein.
§ 7-2. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as may be in
current use in the Borough.
§ 7-3. PARKING.18
§ 7-3.1. Regulations Not Exclusive.
a. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in R.S. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
b. Enforcement of all parking ordinances may be suspended by written
order of the chief of police or his designee in the event of circumstances
18.Editor's Note: For provisions regarding resident and visitor parking permits, see Chapter
3, § 3-12, "Resident and Visitor Parking on Certain Designated Public Streets."
§ 6-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-3.1
AO:143
§ 7-3.2. Parking Prohibited during State of Emergency.
§ 7-3.2A. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal.
requiring same for the good and welfare of the Borough. Separate signs
may be posted if necessary.
c. All vehicles parked on any street in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs are
restricted to not more than 48 hours without being moved, including
State Highway U.S. 9W/Sylvan Avenue.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The chief of police or, in his absence, the
ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fire or public celebrations, dictate or require the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free
flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are
being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any
vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper
regulations of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway for two inches or more, an emergency shall exist
and no vehicles shall be parked on any street or highways or portions
thereof indicated. The owner or operator of any vehicle parked on the
street prior to the time that the street became covered with snow shall
remove it from the street within two hours after the street became
covered with snow of two inches or more.
The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased, until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-3.1 ENGLEWOOD § 7-3.2A
AO:144
§ 7-3.3. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.4. Parking Prohibited during Certain Hours on Certain
Streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule II of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.5. Parking, Stopping or Standing Prohibited during Certain
Hours on Certain Streets.
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified
in Schedule III of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.6. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed in Schedule IV of any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IV of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.7. Parking on Fire Department Property.
No person, other than specifically authorized by the fire department or
police department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle at any time in front of the fire department building or in the
parking spaces designated for fire department members in the rear of the
fire department building, which is located at Sylvan Avenue.
The Police Department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall enforce
the provisions of this subsection by issuing a summons to the operators of
vehicles violating the provisions hereof.
§ 7-3.8. Overnight Commercial Parking Prohibited.
No person shall park any commercial vehicle on a public street in the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
c. Violations and penalties. Any person convicted of a violation of this
subsection shall be liable to a penalty of $50 for each day parking
thereof that said violation exists.
d. Signs. Signs advising the public of this subsection shall be located at
each and every entrance to the Borough from all adjoining borders of
the Palisade Interstate Parkway.
§ 7-3.2A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4
AO:145
§ 7-4. LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO CERTAIN CLASS OF
VEHICLES.
§ 7-4.1. Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded from Certain Streets.
Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule V except for the pick up and delivery
of materials on such streets. Schedule V being of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-4.2. Unattended Trailers.
No person shall leave a trailer unattended on any street in the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs unless same is being actively utilized for the purpose
of serving the property directly adjoining the property where the trailer is
parked.
§ 7-5. ONE-WAY STREETS.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 7-6. THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS AND YIELD
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 7-6.1. Through Streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S.39: 4-140, the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule VII of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as Through
Streets. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the Through Street except where YIELD signs are provided for
in the designations.
§ 7-6.2. Stop Intersection. [Ord. #7010, A5, § 5-2; Ord. #9121, § I;
Ord. #9805, §§ 1,2; Ord. No. 2015-02]
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 39:4-140, the intersections described in
Schedule VIII of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
STOP signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 7-6.3. Yield Intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 39:4-140, the intersections described in
Schedule IX of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as Yield Intersections.
YIELD signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 7-7. LOADING ZONES.
The locations described in Schedule X of Chapter 7A are hereby designated
as Loading Zones.
§ 7-4 ENGLEWOOD § 7-8
AO:146
§ 7-8. TAXI STANDS.
The locations described in Schedule XI of Chapter 7A are hereby designated
as Taxi Stands.
§ 7-9. BUS STOPS.
The locations described in Schedule XII of Chapter 7A are hereby
designated as Bus Stops.
§ 7-10. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-10.1. Left Turn Prohibition.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XIII of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.2. U-Turn Prohibition.
No person shall make a U-Turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XIV of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.3. No Turns.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XV of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.4. Left Hand Turn Only.
§ 7-11. STREET CLOSING.
§ 7-11.1. Streets Closed on School Days.
The Mayor of this Borough is authorized to promulgate regulations
providing for the closing during specified hours on specified days of such
streets as are necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health and
welfare.
§ 7-11.2. Warning Signs Posted.
Such regulations shall in addition provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing in any street or portion thereof during the time the
same is closed in pursuance thereof and shall further provide penalties
for the violation of this section or any regulation promulgated hereunder,
such penalties being in accordance with the penalties provided by the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated for traffic violations and in particular New Jersey
Statutes Annotated R.S. 39:4-203.
a. Lane Use Reservations. The lane locations in Schedule XVI of Chapter
7A are designated as Lane-Use Reservations and traffic shall move as
indicated.
§ 7-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:147
§ 7-12. PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of $29 for the first offense,
and not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days,
or both, for any and all subsequent offenses.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs covered
in this traffic chapter are hereby repealed except that this repeal shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act
done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to
the taking effect of this ordinance.
Whenever a supplemental notice is issued by the municipal court of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs for a violation of this chapter, there will be
imposed an additional cost of $5.
§ 7-13. ESTABLISHMENT OF RESTRICTED PARKING SPACES FOR
HANDICAPPED PERSONS. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
§ 7-13.1. Authorization to Establish Restricted Spaces.
The Borough is hereby authorized to establish restricted parking spaces
in front of residences, schools, hospitals and other public buildings and in
shopping and business districts for use by persons who have been issued
special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, which is made apart hereof without inclusion
herein and by the Borough Clerk.
§ 7-13.2. Parking by Unauthorized Persons.
§ 7-13.3. Enforce Provisions Hereof.
The Police Department of the Borough shall enforce the provisions of this
section by issuing a summons to the operators of vehicles violating the
provisions hereof. An eligible handicapped person may request a law
enforcement officer to arrange for the removal and storage of a motor
vehicle which is parking unlawfully in a parking space or zone which is
restricted for use by a handicapped person. It shall be the obligation of the
a. No person shall park or otherwise cause his vehicle to stand in a
parking space marked restricted for handicapped parking unless the
person displays in the vehicle a valid identification card issued by the
Division of Motor Vehicles and/or the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
b. No person having the right to park in a space designated handicapped
parking and having acquired the requisite permit therefor shall
transfer, let or otherwise allow another not having the right to utilize
the parking permit or identification and in order to park in a restricted
parking space.
§ 7-12 ENGLEWOOD § 7-13.3
AO:148
owner and the motor vehicle to pay the reasonable costs for the removal
and for any storage which may result from the removal.
§ 7-13.4. Signs.
The Police Department is hereby authorized and directed to post signs
designating "handicapped parking only" in the form prescribed by the State
of New Jersey, which shall also state the penalties for violations.
§ 7-13.5. Violations: Penalty.
§ 7-14. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEM.
§ 7-14.1. Findings.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs finds and
determines:
§ 7-14.2. Installation.
a. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined the sum
of $250 for initial violations thereof and court costs in the amount of
$33 and additional imposition of a $10 fee whenever a supplemental
notice is issued by the municipal court.
b. The assessment of removal and storage costs against a person whose
motor vehicle was towed and stored in accordance with the provisions
of this section shall be in addition to any other penalties assessed
against the person for a violation of this section.
a. P.L. 2007, Chapter 348 (the "Act"), codified at N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.12 et seq.,
of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey has determined that the
installation of a traffic control signal monitoring system by
municipalities complementing local law enforcement could serve as an
effective tool in encouraging drivers to observe and obey traffic control
devices at intersections, thereby increasing traffic flow, reducing
vehicle accidents and enhancing pedestrian safety; and
b. The Act authorizes a municipality, by ordinance, to determine to install
and utilize a traffic control signal monitoring system to facilitate the
lawful observation of and compliance with traffic control signals
governing the flow of traffic at intersections under its jurisdiction
approved by the Commissioner of Transportation; and
c. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs is desirous of installing traffic control
signal monitoring systems at various intersections within the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs; and
d. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs has determined that adoption of this
subsection is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the
Borough and its residents.
§ 7-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14.2
AO:149
§ 7-14.3. Issuance of a Summons.
The police department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall review the
recorded images produced by the system to determine whether sufficient
evidence exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has
occurred and shall issue a summons when appropriate in accordance with
the rules of the court.
§ 7-14.4. Use of Recorded Images.
a. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs herby determines to install and utilize
a traffic control signal monitoring system ("system") at various
intersections within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as approved by
the Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to the Act.
b. The system to be installed shall be approved by the governing body by
resolution.
c. The Borough shall have the authority to enter into a contract, following
a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the system. Any
contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the Act shall not be
deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to the Act.
d. The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be in
accordance with specifications approved by the municipal engineer,
and shall be placed on each street converging into the affected
intersection as required by N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.14.d.
e. The municipal engineer shall inspect and certify the system at least
once every six months from the date of its installation pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.14.e.
a. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the system shall be available for the exclusive use of the
police department for the purpose of discharging its duties under P.L.
2007, Ch. 384.
b. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.15.a., any recorded image or information
produced in connection with the system shall not be deemed a public
record under N.J.S.A. 47:1A, et seq., or common law. The recorded
images shall not be:
1. Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter; or
2. Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not
directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
c. Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a traffic
control signal violation shall not be retained after 60 days following the
collection of any fine or penalty.
§ 7-14.2 ENGLEWOOD § 7-14.4
AO:150
§ 7-14.5. Owner's Liability. [Ord. No. 2011-03]
The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic control
signal violation summons pursuant to the system shall be joint subject to
provisions of the Act.
Chapter 7A
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
§ 7A-1. SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.3, no person shall park
a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets.
Name of Street Sides Location
Charlotte Place South Hudson Terrace to Route 9W
Clendinen Place North Entire street
Hollywood Avenue Both From Sylvan Avenue to a point 150
feet westerly thereof
Irving Avenue South From 9W west to a distance of 161
feet
Irving Avenue North From 9W west to a distance of 204
feet
Kahn Terrace North Entire length
Middlesex Avenue South Sylvan Avenue to Center Street
Middlesex Avenue North Sylvan Avenue to Arthur Street
New Street South Sylvan Avenue to Hudson Terrace
Sherwood Avenue South Sylvan Avenue to Hudson Terrace
Summit Street West Between Irving Avenue & Van
Nostrand Avenue
Third Street East From the north end to Henry Street
Van Nostrand Avenue South Sylvan Avenue to east driveway of
120 Van Nostrand Avenue
d. If a summons is not issued within 90 business days following the traffic
control signal violation, all recorded images and any information
collected with respect to the traffic control signal violation shall be
removed by the police department within three business days.
e. The Borough shall certify compliance with this section by filing reports
with the Commissioner of Transportation in accordance with the Act.
§ 7-14.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-1
AO:151
Name of Street Sides Location
West Bayview Avenue Both From the Senior Citizens Building
to Sylvan Avenue only
§ 7A-2. SCHEDULE II: PARKING PROHIBITED CERTAIN HOURS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.4, no person shall park
a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets.
Name of
Street
Sides Hours Location
Bayview Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. School days
Sylvan Avenue to Hudson
Terrace
Bolz Road East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Charlotte Place to Jenkins
Drive
Irving Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. School days
Sylvan Avenue to
Hammett
Sherwood
Avenue
North 1 hour parking Sylvan Avenue to Hudson
Terrace
Summit Street East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. School days
Between Irving Avenue
and Van Nostrand Avenue
§ 7A-3. SCHEDULE III: NO PARKING, STOPPING OR STANDING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.5, no person shall
park, stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the
following described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Charlotte Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Rose Street to Castle
Drive
Charlotte Place South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Sylvan Avenue to Rose
Street
Clifton Terrace Both 1 hour, except
residents
Entire length
Floyd Street East 1 hour, except
residents
Palisade Avenue to
Demarest Avenue
Floyd Street West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. School days
Palisade Avenue to Van
Wagoner Drive
John Street Both 1 hour parking,
except residents
All days
From 9W to Castle
Drive
§ 7A-1 ENGLEWOOD § 7A-3
AO:152
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Marjorie Terrace Both 1 hour, except
residents
Palisade Avenue to
Loretta Court
McDermott Way West At any time All
days
Entire street
New Street Both 1 hour, except
residents All days
From 9W west to
Castle Drive
Palisade Avenue Both All Route 9W easterly to
westernmost property
line of the Palisade
Interstate Parkway
Sage Road Both At any time. All
days
Sylvan Avenue to
Johnson Avenue
Sherwood
Avenue
Both 1 hour, except
residents All days
From 9W west to
Castle Drive
Summit Street Both 1 hour, except
residents All days
Palisade Avenue to
Loretta Court
§ 7A-4. SCHEDULE IV: TIME LIMIT PARKING.
Name of Street Sides Time Location
Clendinen Place South 1 hour Entire street
Kahn Terrace South 3 hours From 9W to Municipal
Building driveway
New Street North 1 hour From 9W (Sylvan Avenue) to
Hudson Terrace
Sherwood
Avenue
North 1 hour From 9W (Sylvan Avenue) to
Hudson Terrace
Summit Street Both 1 hour From Palisade Avenue to
Loretta Court
§ 7A-5. SCHEDULE V: TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-4.1, trucks over four tons
gross weight are excluded from the following described streets or parts of
streets, except for the pick up and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Location
Charlotte Place Route 9W to Castle Drive
Dillingham Place Route 9W to Summit Street
John Street Route 9W to Summit Street
Summit Street Palisade Avenue to John Street
§ 7A-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-5
AO:153
Name of Street Location
Summit Street Palisade Avenue to Lyncrest Road
Floyd Street Palisade Avenue to Van Wagoner Drive
Sage Road Route 9W to Johnson Avenue
Johnson Avenue Jane Drive to the corporate border line of the city
of Englewood
Roberts Road Jane Drive to Johnson Avenue
Jane Drive Johnson Avenue to Roberts Road
§ 7A-6. SCHEDULE VI: ONE-WAY STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-5, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the
direction indicated.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-7. SCHEDULE VII: THROUGH STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.1, the following
described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as Through
Streets. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the Through Street except where YIELD signs are provided for
in the designation.
Bayview Avenue, between U.S. Route 9W and Hudson Terrace
Irving Avenue, between U.S. Route 9W and Summit Street
John Street, between U.S. Route 9W and Summit Street
Summit Street, between Palisade Avenue and Lyncrest Road
Fairview Avenue, between Summit Street and Booth Avenue
Lyncrest Road, from Englewood City Line to Summit Street
Roberts Road, between Johnson Avenue and Jane Drive
Jane Drive, between Johnson Avenue and Roberts Road
Johnson Avenue, between Jane Drive and the Englewood Line
Floyd Street, between Palisade Avenue and Allison Drive
Castle Drive, from John Street to Middlesex Avenue
§ 7A-8. SCHEDULE VIII: STOP INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.2, the following
intersections are hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
Hammett Avenue and Mercer Avenue:
STOP signs to be erected on Mercer Avenue
§ 7A-5 ENGLEWOOD § 7A-8
AO:154
Middlesex Avenue and Castle Drive:
STOP sign to be erected on the southbound side of Castle Drive by
Middlesex Avenue [Ord. No. 2015-02]
Summit Street and John Street:
STOP signs to be erected upon John Street
Summit Street and Dillingham Place:
STOP signs to be erected upon Dillingham Place
§ 7A-9. SCHEDULE IX: YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.3, the following
intersections are designated as Yield Intersections.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-10. SCHEDULE X: LOADING ZONES.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-7, the following described
locations are hereby designated as Loading Zones.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-11. SCHEDULE XI: TAXI STANDS.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-8, the following described
locations are hereby designated as Taxi Stands.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-12. SCHEDULE XII: BUS STOPS.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-9, the following described
locations are hereby designated as Bus Stops.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-13. SCHEDULE XIII: NO LEFT TURN.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.1, no person shall
make a left turn at any of the following locations.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-14. SCHEDULE XIV: NO U-TURN.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.2, no person shall
make a U-Turn at any of the following locations.
§ 7A-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-14
AO:155
Name of Street Location
Floyd Street Between Hollywood Avenue and Van Wagoner
Drive
§ 7A-15. SCHEDULE XV: NO TURNS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.3, no person shall
make a turn at any of the following locations.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-16. SCHEDULE XVI: LANE USE RESERVATIONS.
In accordance with subsection 7-10.4 the lane locations described below
designed as Lane-Use Reservations and traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Palisade Avenue and the Palisades
Interstate Parkway Ramps (Exit
#1 Southbound)
a. Eastbound left lane of Palisades
Avenue reserved for left turns
only
Chapter 8
PARKING LOTS
§ 8-1. PREAMBLE.
The mayor and council of the borough, deem it in the best interest of
the borough to provide regulation of the parking of vehicles upon the lots
adjacent to the borough hall-police facility and ambulance corps building,
such parking lots being located between Kahn Terrace and Clendenin Place
as well as the intersection of Kahn Terrace and Hudson Terrace in the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs; and such regulation is authorized pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39: 4-197(q);
§ 8-2. PARKING RESTRICTED.
Parking in the municipally-owned parking lots located between Kahn
Terrace and Clendenin Place adjacent to the borough hall-police facility of
the borough as well as that municipally owned parking lot adjacent to the
Englewood Cliffs Ambulance Corps Building located at the intersection of
Kahn Terrace and Hudson Terrace, shall be prohibited except for vehicles
of municipal officers or employees and for vehicles of persons engaged in
business or activities with the borough.
§ 8-3. VIOLATIONS.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, for each violation,
be subject to the penalty as stated in chapter 3, section 3-1. Vehicles in
§ 7A-14 ENGLEWOOD § 8-3
AO:156
violation of this chapter may also be towed away at the expense of the
owner.
Whenever a supplemental notice is issued by the municipal court of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs for a violation of this chapter, there will be
imposed an additional cost of $5.
§ 8-4. SIGNS POSTED.
The chief of police of the borough is authorized pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:4 et seq. to post such signs as are required to notify the public
of the regulation effectuated by this section.
§ 8-5. (RESERVED)19
Chapter 9
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 9-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE.
§ 9-1.1. Enforcing Agency Established.
§ 9-1.2. Construction Board of Appeals.
a. There is hereby established in the borough a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "building
department," consisting of a construction official, building subcode
official, plumbing subcode official, electrical subcode official, fire
protection subcode official, and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The construction official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. Each official position created in subsection a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217 as
amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
19.Editor's Note: Section 8-5, "Municipal Parking Lot on Block 514, Lot 3", previously
contained herein, has been repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 8908.
§ 8-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.2
AO:157
§ 9-1.3. Fees. [Ord. No. 2017-07]
a. There is hereby established a construction board of appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. Such board shall
consist of five members. At least one board member shall be a
registered architect or licensed professional engineer of building
construction experience, and at least one board member shall be as
qualified as a plumbing subcode official, and one as qualified as an
electrical subcode official. No more than two board members shall be
selected from the same business or profession. Each board member
shall have had at least three years experience in construction, design or
supervision as a licensed engineer or registered architect; or, in the
alternative, five years experience in construction, design or supervision
as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree in architecture or
engineering, respectively, from an accredited institution of higher
education: or as a further alternative, 10 years experience in
construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a construction
trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or inspector.
b. The borough council shall appoint the board members and any
alternate members. For the members first appointed, the borough
council shall designate the appointees' terms so that one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a
term of three years, and two for a term of four years. At the expiration
of such terms and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of
four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
The borough council shall appoint such number of alternates, as may
be appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years; or may in the
alternative, appoint alternates on a case by case basis. No regular or
alternative board member may be a member of the enforcing agency,
the decisions of which are subject to the review of the board.
c. There will be no compensation for regular or alternate members unless
established by the borough council by amendment hereto.
a. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in 1 through 29 hereof and shall be paid before the permit is
issued.
1. The building subcode fee schedule shall be:
(a) $0.027 Per cubic foot volume new residential construction
including commercial and additions.
$0.0016 Per cubic foot — N.J. Training Fee
$0.80 Per $1,000 — N.J. Training Fee for alterations excluding
demolition and tank removal.
(b) For renovations, alterations and repairs, the permit fee shall be
based upon the estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in
§ 9-1.2 ENGLEWOOD § 9-1.3
AO:158
the amount of $34 per $1,000 up to $50,000. From $50,001
to and including $100,000, the additional fee shall be in the
amount of $26 per $1,000 of estimated cost exceeding
$50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee shall be in the
amount of $22 per $1,000 of estimated cost exceeding
$100,000.
For the purpose of determining the estimated cost of the
renovation, alteration or repair, the applicant shall submit in
the department the cost data if available, produced by the
architect or engineer of record, recognized estimating firm or
contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be
submitted.
The building department shall have full and final discretion in
determining the estimated cost of the renovation, alteration or
repair. The minimum fee shall be $100.
(c) For combinations of renovations and additions, the fee shall be
the sum of the fees computed as renovations and additions.
2. The plumbing fee shall be in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code. (Minimum fee - $50)
3. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the construction permit
with a minimum fee of $75. These amounts, which shall be
nonrefundable, shall be credited toward the fee for construction
permit. The plan review fee shall be paid prior to the review of the
plans by the subcode official.
4. The fee for a sewer connection shall be $125.
5. The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure, or
part thereof, shall be $500. The fee for the demolition of a
commercial building or structure, or part thereof, shall be $1,000.
The fee for the demolition of a garage shall be $100 (according to
size).
6. The removal of a building or structure from one lot to another or to
a new location on the same lot shall be $5 per $1,000 of the sum of
the estimated cost of moving and placement in a new foundation,
provided the minimum fee shall be $50.
7. The fee for a permit for construction of a wood or chain link fence
shall be $50. The fee for the construction of masonry walls shall be
$150. The fee for permit for installation of railroad tie walls shall be
$100.
8. The fee for a permit for construction of a deck or other elevated
porch area shall be $150.
9. The fee for a permit for reroofing of any residential or commercial
building shall be based upon the estimated cost of the work. The
§ 9-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.3
AO:159
fee shall be in the amount of $24 per $1,000 up to $50,000. Above
$50,001 the additional fee shall be in the amount of $18 per $1,000
of estimated costs.
10. The fee for a permit for installation of aluminum siding shall be
$200.
11. The fee for the installation of a prefabricated shed shall be $50; and
the fee for installation of all other sheds shall be $100.
12. If the borough elects to have a third party agency, the elevator
subcode fee shall be the departmental fees as set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20 C-6 and 7 and N.J.A.C. 5:23-12, plus an administrative fee
of 7%.
13. The fee for a permit for construction of an in-ground swimming
pool shall be $250; an aboveground pool shall be $200. The fee for
a permit for the installation of pavers around a pool shall be $150.
In addition thereto, the applicant shall be responsible for any
electric, plumbing and fence fees.
14. The fees for certificates of occupancy shall be as follows:
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for a residential dwelling
shall be 5% of the construction permit fee, with a minimum fee
of $65. The fee for a certificate of continued residential
occupancy shall be $50.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for a commercial building
shall be 5% of the construction permit fee with a minimum fee
of $85.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy, for tenants of a
commercial building shall be $25.
(d) The fee for a commercial continued certificate of occupancy for
title change, shall be $100.
(e) The fee for a multiple certificate of occupancy shall be $100.
15. The developer of a new commercial property shall forward all plans
concerning commercial structures directly to the State approved
certified review agency for its review. Upon State approval, the
construction official shall determine the total fee, which shall be
based upon $0.009 per cubic foot to be paid by the applicant
directly to the agency. The applicant shall receive a credit for any
fees paid to the agency. Renovations, alterations, and/or repairs of
commercial structures shall be based upon the same fee schedule
as for residential properties.
16. The provisions of the foregoing fee schedule do not apply to State,
county or municipal agencies.
§ 9-1.3 ENGLEWOOD § 9-1.3
AO:160
17. (Reserved)
18. (Reserved)
19. The fee for a permit to construct an identification sign shall be
$200. The fee for a permit to construct an illuminated sign shall be
$500.
20. The fee for placement of a brokerage sign shall be $50.
21. Electrical fee should be in accordance to Uniform Construction
Code. Minimum fee - $50.
22. The fee for installation of stucco shall be $300.
23. The fee for installation of a hot water heater shall be $50.
24. The fee for installation of a prefab fireplace shall be $50. The fee
for a masonry fireplace shall be $100.
25. (Reserved)
26. (Reserved)
27. The fee for fire protection shall be based on the number of sprinkler
heads, standpipes, smoke and heat detectors established by the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code. The minimum fee shall be
$65.
28. The fee for tank installation, residential, shall be $50. The fee for
tank installation, commercial, shall be $75.
29. The fee for tank abandonment shall be $50. The fee for tank
removal shall be $100.
b. The construction official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the borough biannually, a report based on the
operating expenses of the agency, and other expenses of the
municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act.
c. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
Regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0016 per cubic foot of volume of
new construction. The fee shall be $0.80 per $1,000 for alterations.
Said surcharge fees shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing
Inspection. Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for
the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, and June 30, and
not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the Regulations first become
effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the third and
fourth quarters only.
§ 9-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.3
AO:161
§ 9-1.4. Fire Limits.
The following fire limits established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 shall be
incorporated herein by July 1, 1997.
The construction official shall prepare and submit to the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs annually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the construction
official, the building subcode official, and the fire subcode official regarding
those areas which should be designated as within the fire limits, with the
reasons therefor.
§ 9-1.5. Construction Code Official.
§ 9-1.6. Title; Code Adopted by Reference.
The code established and adopted and which governs the provisions of this
section is described and commonly known, for the purpose of identification,
as the Building Officials and Code Administrator's Basic Property
Maintenance Code of 1978, the provisions of which are incorporated and
made a part hereof, without inclusion herein as if set forth herein in their
entirety. The Code shall govern construction within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs except where modified by, or in conflict with, the
supplemented provisions of this section in which case the provisions of this
section shall govern.
§ 9-2. EXTERIOR DESIGN OF RESIDENCES.
§ 9-2.1. Purpose.
In accordance with the general purposes and powers granted to
municipalities through the provisions of R.S. 40:55-30, et seq. and to
The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau, not later than July 31, the total amount of the
surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the fiscal year in which the
regulations first become effective, said report shall be for the third and
fourth quarters only.
a. Preamble. The provisions of Chapter 291, Public Law 1975 provide that
the borough may by ordinance designate a person other than the
borough clerk as the administrative officer as defined in Chapter 291,
Public Law 1975; and the mayor and borough council deem it advisable
that the construction code official of the borough be designated as the
administrative officer for the purposes specified in Chapter 291, Public
Law 1975;
b. The construction code official of the borough is designated as the
administrative official for all purposes specified in Chapter 291, Public
Law 1975 in place and instead of the borough clerk as designated
therein.
§ 9-1.3 ENGLEWOOD § 9-2.1
AO:162
accomplish these said purposes, namely, regulating and restricting
residential building throughout the municipality according to the
construction thereof, for the purposes of preventing the over-crowding
of lands or buildings, avoiding undue concentration of population and
specifically with a view of conserving the value of the surrounding property
and thereby encouraging the most appropriate use of land within the
borough, this section is hereby adopted. It is further a purpose to the
enactment of this section to generally promote the health and general
welfare of the community and to maintain the property values, which in
turn will be reflected in the tax revenue returnable to the borough at large
and thereby further create a proper balance between the taxable value of
real property in said areas and the cost of any and all municipal services
to be provided therefor. Moreover, it is the intention of the borough council
in conjunction with the advice of the planning and zoning commission to
provide for a comprehensive scheme and plan for the future development of
the borough.
§ 9-2.2. Distance Required Between Similar Exterior Design.
Except as provided in this section, the building subcode official shall not
issue a building permit for the construction of any dwelling in a housing
development where there is located within 150 feet of the property line
upon which the proposed structure is to be built a dwelling now in existence
or for which a building permit has already been issued having the same
exterior design and appearance as that for which the building permit has
been sought. Distance measured shall be the distance between street
property lines of the respective building plots. Control of the issuance of the
permits shall be in the hands of the building subcode official, who is to be
guided in all instances by the building code, zoning ordinance, this chapter
or any other ordinances now or hereafter to come into existence.
§ 9-2.3. Characteristics Determining Similarity.
Houses within such specified distance from each other shall be considered
uniform and similar in exterior design and appearance, if they have more
than one of the following characteristics:
a. The same basic dimensions and floor plans without differentiation of
one or more exterior elevations.
b. The same basic dimensions are used without change in orientation of
the houses on the lots.
c. The height and design of the roofs are without change in design and
appearance.
d. The size and type of windows and doors in the front elevation are
without differentiation.
e. The same use is made of brick and/or stone whether used for facing or
as a basic building material where the end result of such similar use will
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.3
AO:163
§ 9-2.4. House Designs Required.
In addition to the requirements specified in subsection 9-2.3, there shall
be not less than two separate basic house designs in every housing
development consisting of eight or more houses, and not less than three
separate house designs where there are 15 or more houses.
§ 9-2.5. Violations.
The building subcode official shall have the right to refuse building permits
and/or certificates of occupancy where there have been apparent violations
of this section. In the event that violation occurs, the building subcode
official, upon noting the violation, shall notify the owner of the particular
development in writing, giving him five days within which to abate the
violation or to make application to the building subcode official for an
extension of the five day term. Thereafter, the building subcode official, as
enforcing officer of the chapter, may cause to be signed a complaint in the
municipal court for a violation of said section. In each and every instance,
the building subcode official is to be guided by the terms of this chapter,
the zoning ordinance and any other ordinances now existing or hereafter to
come into existence.
§ 9-2.6. Grievance.
Should any owner of property coming upon the terms of this chapter seek
to acquire relief from the provisions hereof, he shall first notify the building
subcode official, mayor and council and board of adjustment of such
intention in writing and thereafter he shall apply to the board of adjustment,
seeking a recommendation from the board to the mayor and council for
relief grounding his application in the statutory criteria as set forth under
R.S. 40:55-39(d), as repeated in the zoning chapter, section 16-24. Any relief
which shall be granted shall be upon the same grounds set forth therein and
all owners of property within 200 feet of the subject development shall be
given notice in accordance with the statutory provision.
§ 9-2.7. Penalty.
Any owner, or lessee, or other person or persons, who permits, takes part or
assists in any violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
for each and every violation thereof and for each and every day that such
violation thereof continues, be subject to the penalty as stated in chapter 3,
section 3-1.
be to create the same aesthetically architectural effect thus creating an
overall scheme or plan resulting likeness of exterior appearance.
The provisions, requirements and standards heretofore set forth shall not be
considered met where there is an attempt to make minor changes or deviations
from building plans and location surveys, which changes show an obvious
intent to circumvent the purposes of this section.
§ 9-2.3 ENGLEWOOD § 9-3
AO:164
§ 9-3. REGULATIONS CONCERNING EXCAVATIONS.
§ 9-3.1. Excavation.
§ 9-3.2. Time Limit on Excavations.
No excavation of soil, rock or any other material resulting in a depression
from existing ground level more than one foot deep shall be permitted
to remain in such condition for a period in excess of 45 days without
either backfilling such excavation and the elimination of all mounds of dirt,
rock and/or debris created thereby or substantial construction taking place
therein pursuant to the existing State law and/or borough ordinances.
§ 9-3.3. Written Notice.
In the event that property is permitted to remain in the above described
condition for a period in excess of 45 days, upon written notice to the
property owner made by the building subcode official and/or any member of
the police department of the borough, such written notice to be sent to the
last known address of the person, firm or corporation listed as the taxpayer
in the office of the borough tax collector, the borough may, at its election
at any time within 10 days after written notice, undertake to remedy the
aforesaid condition and to charge the property with the cost thereof, such
charge to be collected as additional tax on the property in question.
§ 9-3.4. Violations.
Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore to the contrary, the municipal court
shall have the right to impose a fine upon any person causing or permitting
a violation of the provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine of
not more then $100 per day.
§ 9-3.5. Blasting and Chipping.
a. Excavation of soil and/or rock on private property within the borough
provides a condition both unsightly and dangerous; and such
excavations, if permitted to remain unfilled or without substantial
construction taking place thereon, provide an unsightly and hazardous
condition for an inordinately long period of time.
b. All excavations must be enclosed by fencing conforming to the
"International Building Code 2,000 N.J. Edition" regulations. All gates
must be securely locked at the end of the working day. Partially
complete structures must be fenced in until the entry floor or first floor
is covered by either permanent or temporary flooring.
c. A stop work order may be issued by serving a written notice to the
property owner if this ordinance is not complied with.
a. Blasting. (N.J.A.C. 12:190-7.3 Notification)
§ 9-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.5
AO:165
1. Any person intending to conduct a blasting operation shall notify
the New Jersey Department of Labor, Division of Workplace
Standards, Mine Safety Section in Trenton of such intention prior
to conducting the blasting operation via phone followed by fax
transmittal or in writing. Such notification must be received by the
Division of Workplace Standards no later than 3:00 p.m. of the
previous business day prior to conducting the blasting operation on
forms specified by the Department of Labor. Illegible or incomplete
notifications shall not be acceptable. Notifications shall include:
(a) The contractor name and address;
(b) The specific location of the blasting;
(c) The intended time of the blast; and
(d) The specific start and scheduled completion dates of the
blasting operation.
2. All blasting operations that are continuous projects shall be
required to submit a single notice of intention to blast. A
continuous project means blasting consecutively every day.
3. Any person intending to initiate blasting operations shall notify the
fire official having jurisdiction over the municipality in which the
blasting operation is taking place, prior to conducting any blasting
operations. Notification shall be made on an application for permit
and include the following:
(a) The specific location of the blasting;
(b) The intended time of the blasting;
(c) Certificate of liability insurance; and
(d) Copy of the permit to use explosives license.
4. Documentation at the blasting site. (N.J.A.C. 12:190-7.4). Any
person conducting blasting operations shall have at the blasting
site a current permit to use explosives and evidence of insurance
required by N.J.A.C. 12:190-7.5, and a fire safety permit.
5. Time of blasting operations. (N.J.A.C. 12:190-7.6)
(a) Blasting, except during normal unusual conditions and when
approved by the Commissioner of Labor, shall be conducted
only during daylight hours, but shall not be conducted before
8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on the day of blasting. Prior to
conducting any blasting operations, notification shall be made
to the Police Department. Notifications shall include the
specific location and intended time of blasting.
(b) Blasting shall not be conducted on Sundays except as approved
by the Commissioner of Labor. Blasting on State legal holidays
§ 9-3.5 ENGLEWOOD § 9-3.5
AO:166
§ 9-4. OFFICIAL MAP.
§ 9-4.1. Definitions.
shall not exceed 100 pounds of explosives in any single blast,
except as approved by the Commissioner of Labor.
(c) Loading of explosives into blast holes shall not be performed in
other than daylight hours on the day of blasting, except as
approved by the Commissioner of Labor.
(d) Where loading of blast holes has occurred and blasting cannot
be safely accomplished within the limits prescribed by (a) and
(c) above, the blast holes shall be attended until the explosives
have been disposed of, and the person conducting the blasting
operations shall notify the appropriate officials of the Division
of Workplace Standards.
6. Penalties. (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12(b)7)
(a) Failure to obtain a required permit prior to commencing the
operation, process or activity for which a permit was required -
a maximum fine of double the amount of the applicable permit
fee.
(b) Failure to obtain a required permit after being ordered to do so
while continuing the operation, process or activity - a
maximum fine of $5,000 per day during which the operation,
process, or activity continues.
b. Chipping.
1. Chipping permits, obtained through the building department, and
will be limited to 10 business days. Permit fee - $50. The
construction official has the authority to limit the number of
permits issued to a specific site.
2. Chipping shall be prohibited except during the following days and
times:
Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
3. The construction official or his designee shall be authorized to
enforce this subsection.
4. Penalties. The maximum penalty for any act or omission in violation
of this paragraph b of the subsection shall be not more than $500
per violation per day.
a. PLAT – Shall mean the map of a subdivision.
b. STREET – Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane,
parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing State, county
§ 9-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.1
AO:167
§ 9-4.2. Purposes of Establishing Official Map.
§ 9-4.3. Amending the Official Map; Procedure.
Prior to amending the official map or any part thereof, the borough council
shall send such proposed amendments to the planning and zoning
commission of the borough for its recommendation, and the borough
council shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until 45 days
after such reference without such recommendation of the planning zoning
commission, or after 45 days without such recommendation, the borough
council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendments to the
official map, and at least 10 days prior to such hearing, notice of the hearing
or municipal roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore
approved pursuant to law or approved by official action pursuant to
the Municipal Planning Act, or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to
the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of
the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking area and other areas within the
street lines.
c. DRAINAGE RIGHTS-OF-WAY – Shall mean the lands required for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches required along a
natural stream or water course for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against
flood damage in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 58:1, etc.
a. The official map is hereby established for the express purpose of
conserving and promoting the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
b. The official map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location
and width of streets and drainage rights-of-way, and the location and
extent of public parks and playgrounds shown thereon, whether such
streets, drainage rights-of-way, parks or playgrounds are improved or
unimproved. Upon the application for approval of a plat, the borough
may reserve for future public use the location and extent of public parks
and playgrounds shown on the official map, or any part thereof and
within the area of said plat for a period of one year after the approval of
the final plat, or within such further time as agreed to by the applying
party. Unless within such one-year period or extension thereof, the
borough shall have entered into a contract to purchase, or instituted
condemnation proceedings for the park or playground according to law,
such applying party shall not be bound to observe the reservation of
such public parks or playgrounds. During such period of one year or any
extension thereof, the applicant may use the area so reserved for any
purpose other than the location of buildings or improvements thereon,
except as provided in subsection 9-4.4.
§ 9-4.1 ENGLEWOOD § 9-4.3
AO:168
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough.
A map showing the proposed amendments shall be hung in a conspicuous
place in the borough hall for such period and the notice shall to state.
§ 9-4.4. Permit for Building in the Bed of a Mapped Street or
Drainage Right-of-Way.
In order to preserve the integrity of the official map of the borough, the
building subcode official shall not issue a building permit for any building
which is proposed to be built in the bed of any street or drainage rightof-
way which is shown on the official map or a plat filed pursuant to the
borough planning ordinance except as provided herein. If it should appear
that one or more parcels of land upon which is located the bed of such a
mapped street or drainage right-of-way or any park or playground location
reserved pursuant to subsection 9-4.2b cannot yield a reasonable return
to the owner unless a building permit is issued, the board of adjustment
of the borough may in a specific case by a majority vote of its members
grant a permit for a building in the bed of such a mapped street or drainage
right-of-way or within such reserved location of a public park or playground,
which will as little as practicable increase the cost of opening such a street
or tend to cause a minimum change of the official map. The board of
adjustment shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition of granting
the building permit using as its standard the promotion of public health,
morals, safety and general welfare. Action upon any such application for a
building permit under the provisions of this section shall only be taken after
a public hearing has been held at which hearing the parties in interest and
others shall have an opportunity to be heard. The applicant shall notify all
owners of property within 200 feet of the property to be affected by the
grant or denial of the building permit, service to be in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the board of adjustment. At least 10 days prior to
the public hearing, there shall be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the borough, notice of the time and place of the hearing. The
notice shall be inserted in the newspaper by the secretary of the board of
adjustment and any costs incidental thereto shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 9-4.5. Building Permit Requirements as to Lot Abutting Street;
Improvements.
a. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless the
building lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed structure
which has been duly placed on the official map or street shown upon a
plat approved by the borough council and planning board as provided in
the planning ordinance of the borough. Before any such building permit
shall be issued, such street shall have been certified to be suitably
improved to the satisfaction of the borough council acting on the advice
of the borough engineer, or such suitable improvement shall have been
assured by means of a performance guarantee in accordance with
standards and specifications approved by the borough council in
relation to the borough planning ordinance and as adequate with
§ 9-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.5
AO:169
§ 9-4.6. Change in Map.
Those lands presently designated as "Reserved for Recreation Purposes"
which were formerly described as Lots 10 and 11 in Block 21 on the
Assessment Map of the borough and which will be known in the future as
Lots 1, 13, and Lots 20 through 29 in Block 21H will after May 26, 1960
no longer be so designated and the official map shall hereby be amended to
the extent that it no longer shall bear the words "Reserved for Recreation
Purposes" in the above described places.
§ 9-5. UNFIT STRUCTURES.
§ 9-5.1. Definitions.
As used in this section.
respect to the public health, safety and general welfare for the special
circumstances of the particular street.
b. Where the enforcement of subsections 9-4.4 and 9-4.5a would entail
particular difficulty or unnecessary hardship or where the
circumstances of the case do not require the structure to be related to a
street, the applicant for the permit may appeal from the decision of the
building subcode official to the board of adjustment and this appeal
shall be governed by the same provisions as those provided in cases of
appeals in respect to zoning regulations. The board of adjustment, may
in determining any such appeal make reasonable exceptions and issue a
permit subject to conditions that will assure adequate access for fire
fighting equipment, ambulances, and other emergency vehicles
necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. The board
may also impose conditions which will protect any future street layout
shown on the official map or on the master plan of the planning board.
The board of adjustment shall refer any application made under this
section to the planning and zoning commission of the borough for
report and recommendation before taking final action. The planning
and zoning commission shall consider the application at its next regular
meeting and make its report and recommendation within two weeks
from that regular meeting. Failure to act within this time shall
constitute a favorable recommendation from the planning and zoning
commission and thereafter the board of adjustment may proceed to
take final action.
a. PUBLIC OFFICER – Shall mean the officer who is authorized by this
section to exercise the powers prescribed by this ordinance.
b. PUBLIC AUTHORITY – Shall mean any officer who is in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the borough relating to
health, fire, building regulations, or to other activities concerning
buildings in the borough.
c. OWNER – Shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple.
§ 9-4.5 ENGLEWOOD § 9-5.1
AO:170
§ 9-5.2. Public Officer.
d. PARTIES IN INTEREST – Shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who are
in actual possession thereof.
e. BUILDING – Shall mean any building, or structure, or part thereof,
whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outhouses, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
a. The construction official of the borough shall be the public officer
designated to exercise the powers outlined by this section.
b. Upon the filing of a petition with the public officer by a public authority
or at least five residents of the borough, charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears
to the public officer after investigation on his own motion, that any
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the public
officer shall after proper basis for charges has been shown issue and
cause to be served on the owner and the parties in interest in such
building a complaint stating the specific charges and containing a
notice that a public hearing will be held before the public officer at a
place in the borough, not less than 10 days or more than 30 days after
the serving of the complaint. The owners or parties in interest shall
have the right to file an answer to the complaint and appear in person
or otherwise, give testimony at the hearing. The rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts may be used as a guide in such hearings but
shall not be controlling.
c. If after the hearing, the public officer having heard all testimony, shall
determine that the particular building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he shall reduce his determination to findings of fact
in writing with his final determination and cause these findings of fact
and conclusion to be served on the owner and parties in interest by
certified mail or by personal service. The determination made may
order the following:
1. That the particular building under consideration be repaired,
altered or improved by the owner or party in interest within a
reasonable time, shall be stated in the determination, or that the
owner or party in interest shall vacate or have the building vacated
and closed within the said reasonable time.
2. If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons in, on or near the premises, and the
owner fails within the reasonable time set forth to make such
repairs, alterations or improvements, the public officer may require
the owner or party in interest to remove or demolish the said
building within an additional reasonable time to be specified in the
original determination served upon the parties.
§ 9-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.2
AO:171
§ 9-5.3. Standards.
The standards by which the public officer shall be guided in making his
determination are those as set forth in R.S. 40:48-2.6 and more specifically
that such public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if conditions exist which are dangerous
or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of the borough.
3. Should the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with any such
determination, the public officer shall have the right to cause such
building to be repaired, altered or improved, or in the alternative,
to be vacated and closed, by posting upon the premises a placard
with substantially the following words "This building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupancy of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
d. Failure of any owner or party in interest to comply with an order from
the public officer to remove or demolish a building shall give to the
public officer the authority to cause such a building to be removed or
demolished and to this extent he may contract for the removal or
demolition thereof after advertising for and receiving bids.
e. The public officer is hereby authorized to conduct a sale of any
materials which remain after the demolition of such building. Such sale
shall be conducted as a public auction after five days' notice having
been placed in three conspicuous public places in the borough and a
publication once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
circulating in the municipality, and finally by filing a copy of the order
for sale with the office of the county clerk. Should this sale amount to
less than the cost of the demolition or removal of said building, then
that amount remaining shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. The public officer shall file
a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs, amounts resulting from
sale, and the amounts so due, with the municipal tax assessors, and a
copy of such report shall be forwarded to the owner of the property by
registered mail. Should a balance remain which exceeds the costs
incurred in the demolition and removal of the buildings, such excess
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer to be
secured in such manner as may be directed by the court order or
judgment. There shall be included in the costs of removal and
demolition the cost of filing all legal papers, expert witnesses fees,
search fees and advertising charges. Any owner or party in interest may
within 60 days from the date of filing of the lien certificate apply an a
summary manner to the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness
of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the certificate.
§ 9-5.2 ENGLEWOOD § 9-5.4
AO:172
§ 9-5.4. Service of Complaints and Orders Generally.
All complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this section
shall be served either personally or by registered mail. If the whereabouts
of the owner or parties in interest is unknown and cannot be ascertained,
the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and may thereupon
publish the complaint or order once each week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper circulating in the municipality, and post a copy of the
complaint or order on the premises affected thereby and file such complaint
or order with the office of the county clerk.
§ 9-5.5. Grievance.
Any person who shall deem himself to be aggrieved by any complaint or
order may proceed in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 40:48-218.
§ 9-5.6. Additional Powers of Public Officer.
The public officer shall have the power to:
§ 9-5.7. Administration: Costs.
The borough council shall provide for the administration of this section in its
annual budget and further provide any equipment and supplies necessary,
and provide for the expense of examinations or other investigation
consistent with the provisions of this section, and may apply grants or
donations to assist in carrying out this section.
§ 9-5.8. Violations: Refusing Inspections.
Any owner or party in interest who shall refuse to permit the public officer
or his authorized representative to enter upon the premises and make
reasonable inspections thereon and who fails to comply with the orders
issued by the public officer, shall upon conviction, after due trial in the
municipal court, be liable to the penalty as stated in chapter 3, section 3-1.
§ 9-6. OCCUPATION OF DWELLINGS.
§ 9-6.1. Preamble.
It is deemed by the mayor and council to be in the best interests of the
citizens of the borough to restrict occupancy of any single family dwelling
a. Investigate building conditions in the municipality to determine the
fitness of buildings for habitation, occupancy and use:
b. Administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. Enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations
providing that such entries shall cause the least possible
inconveniences to persons in possession.
§ 9-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-6.1
AO:173
or dwelling unit within a multiple family dwelling to such persons as are
hereinafter designated.
§ 9-6.2. Occupancy of Dwelling Limited to One Family.
Within the borough no single family house or any dwelling unit within a
house occupied as multiple dwelling units as prescribed by the appropriate
ordinances of the borough shall be occupied or inhabited by more than one
family.
§ 9-6.3. Definition.
As used in this section.
FAMILY — Shall mean one or more persons living together as a stable
and permanent living unit, being a traditional family unit with a functional
equivalency thereof.
§ 9-6.4. Clarification.
In no case, unless specifically permitted by appropriate borough ordinance,
shall a lodging house, boarding house, fraternity house, sorority house or
multiple dwelling be classified or construed as one family.
§ 9-6.5. Violations.
Any persons violating any provision of this section including the owner,
general agent of a building structure or premises where such violation has
been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of a building or
structure or premises in which part such violation has been committed or
shall exist or any other person who knowingly commits, takes part or assists
in any such violation or who maintains any building, structure or premise in
which any such violation shall exist shall be a disorderly person and shall be
liable to the penalty as stated in chapter 3, section 3-1.
§ 9-7. SANITATION STANDARDS IN LEASED HOUSING.
§ 9-7.1. Preamble.
There exists within the borough certain dwellings which are substandard in
sanitation facilities; and occupancy of such dwellings by excessive numbers
will adversely effect public health and safety and lead to the creation of
blight. Adequate protection of public health and safety and welfare requires
the establishment and enforcement of certain minimum standards therefor.
§ 9-7.2. Minimum Equipment Required.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling, rooming house,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit within the borough unless such dwelling,
rooming house, dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall contain at least the
§ 9-6.1 ENGLEWOOD § 9-7.2
AO:174
following minimum basic equipment and facilities for each four or a fraction
thereof adult occupants of such premises:
§ 9-7.3. Basement Facilities not Included.
Basement facilities shall not be considered in the computation as set forth
in the foregoing section.
§ 9-7.4. Owner to Advise of Maximum Occupancy.
Every owner or operator of premises let as provided herein shall advise the
occupant in writing either by insertion in the lease between the parties or
otherwise of the maximum number of occupants permitted in the occupied
premises under this section.
§ 9-7.5. Violation and Penalty.
Any person, owner, or occupant permitting or causing occupation of any
premises within the borough in violation of this section shall be subject to a
penalty as stated in section 3-1 for each day of such unlawful occupation.
§ 9-8. MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY OF PLACES OF ASSEMBLY.
§ 9-8.1. Construction Official to Determine Maximum Occupancy.
As soon as practicable the construction official of the borough shall
ascertain and determine in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 8 of the "Code for Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and
Structures" as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association (No.
101-1967), for all places of assembly within the borough as therein defined,
specifying the maximum occupancy for each separate area of each of such
places of assembly.
§ 9-8.2. Notification to Owner of Maximum Occupancy.
Following such ascertainment and determination, the construction official
shall within two weeks thereof, notify the owner of each such place of
assembly in writing by a notice addressed to such place of assembly of such
maximum occupancy as determined by him.
a. Lavatory facility. A room separate from the habitable rooms, which
affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush water closet.
b. Basin. A lavatory basin located in the same room as the required flush
water closet.
c. Bathtub or shower. A room separate from the habitable rooms which
affords privacy to a person in the room and which is equipped with a
bathtub or shower.
§ 9-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-8.3
AO:175
§ 9-8.3. Notice of Occupancy Posted.
Within one week following such notice, it shall be the duty of the owner of
each such place of assembly to post in a prominent place in each separate
area thereof, a notice clearly indicating the maximum occupancy of each
such separate area as determined by the construction official, such notice to
be clearly visible to the occupants of such area. Failure to post such notice
and to keep such notice posted in any such area shall be deemed a violation
of this section.
§ 9-8.4. Penalty.
Any establishment failing to maintain the notice provided for herein or
permitting occupancy of any area as provided herein in excess of the
maximum occupancy as determined and posted shall be fined up to $1,000
for each violation hereof.
§ 9-9. AGENCIES FOR ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS DESIGNATED.
§ 9-9.1. Preamble.
Under the terms and provisions of Public Law 1971 Chapter 24, the Board
of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey is now vested
with the authority to approve electrical inspection agencies authorized to
conduct inspections of electrical construction work.
The Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey has
issued its interim order Docket No. 717-449 dated July 8, 1972, authorizing
the following agencies for the inspection of electrical construction work:
§ 9-9.2. Agencies Designated.
The following authorized agencies be and they hereby are authorized as
acceptable agencies for the inspection of the electrical construction work
within the borough: Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters
and Keystone Electrical Inspection Service, Inc.
§ 9-10. REFRIGERATION AND AIR CONDITIONING.
§ 9-10.1. Definitions.
As used in this section.
a. Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters.
b. Keystone Electrical Inspection Service, Inc.
a. AIR CONDITIONING – Shall mean and applies to that equipment used
primarily for human comfort cooling and shall be considered on the
basis that one compressor motor horse-power is equal to one ton of
refrigeration.
§ 9-8.3 ENGLEWOOD § 9-10.1
AO:176
§ 9-10.2. New Installation; Permit Required; Fee.
No new installation of refrigerating, air conditioning or refrigerating and
air conditioning equipment requiring the use of water shall be made on any
premises until a permit authorizing such installation has been issued by
the board of health of the borough. The fee for the inspection of such new
installation and the permit issued therefor shall be $5.
§ 9-10.3. Annual Fee.
Any firm who installs any refrigerating or air conditioning or refrigerating
and air conditioning equipment and any owner, agent, lessee or occupant
who causes or permits the installation or operation of any such equipment
wherein the water from the aforementioned equipment is emptied or
directed into the sanitary sewer system of the borough shall pay an annual
fee of $15 per compressor motor horsepower unit as defined above. This fee
shall be payable annually on or before July 1 as set forth herein, and, upon
the payment of such annual fee, a permit for the registration period shall
issue from the board of health; it also being understood that equipment as
described above in this section which is presently installed in any premises
in the borough shall also be liable to regulation under the provisions of this
section.
§ 9-10.4. Exemption from Annual Fee; Disposal of Water.
Shall any person or any owner, agent, lessee or occupant install the
equipment described above but not empty or direct the water from the
equipment into the sanitary sewer of the borough then the annual fee of
$15 per compressor motor horsepower unit shall not be due, nor shall any
annual permit be required; it being understood, however, that the permit
issuing at the time of the installation is mandatory in any case. The disposal
of any such water from the aforementioned equipment may be made in any
way practicable, either through sprinkling systems or directly into a storm
drain where convenient, provided, however, that this disposal shall in no
way cause floods or pooling of water whereby private and/or public property
is or shall be damaged in any way whatsoever or the public health, safety or
welfare are in any way endangered. Any disposal which creates any of the
above situations shall be termed a violation of this section and of the other
pertinent ordinances of the borough.
§ 9-10.5. Applications for Permits.
Applications for permits at the time of installation and applications for
annual permits where required by this ordinance shall be made to the
board of health, which board shall furnish forms for applicants, which
forms shall require among other things, the name and address of the
b. EQUIPMENT USED FOR A PURPOSE OTHER THAN AIR
CONDITIONING – Shall mean and be considered on the basis that one
compressor motor horsepower is equal to six ton of refrigeration.
§ 9-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.5
AO:177
applicant, the location of the premises where the installation is proposed,
name and address of the owners and tenants of the premises, and any
other information deemed necessary by the board of health and its health
inspector.
Any person who installs any refrigerating or air conditioning, or
refrigerating and air conditioning equipment, and any owner, agent, lessee
or occupant, who causes or permits the installation or operation of any such
equipment in violation of any provision of this section shall upon conviction
thereof be subject to a penalty as stated in chapter 3, section 3-1.
§ 9-10.6. Registration Period.
Registration period, which shall mark the effective date of this section shall
be July 1, 1957.
§ 9-11. LIGHTING IN PARKING AREAS.
§ 9-11.1. Purposes.
It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of
lighting in commercial zones of the borough so it will aid in the protection of
the property in question, but will not be so glaring, improper or misdirected
as to affect the health, well being or comfort of the surrounding residential
areas.
§ 9-11.2. Regulations.
a. All lamps, spot lights, lighting devices, signs, display pieces, flood lights
or the like located on or about commercial property within the confines
of the borough shall be so erected, shielded, operated or maintained in
such a manner and to such an extent so as to avoid lights shining,
glaring or reflecting into the residentially zoned areas of the borough.
Such lighting shall be provided, however, as will permit owners of
motor vehicles parking in the commercial area to have sufficient light
so as to provide them with reasonable lighting in all portions of the
commercial parking area during the hours of darkness when the
commercial enterprise is open for business, and further provide
adequate security lighting when the commercial enterprise is not open
for business.
b. Lights maintained for security purposes in parking areas should be so
shaded that objectionable spill light and glare on adjacent property is
minimized. In addition, all security lights shall be so arranged, designed
and shaded that the light emanating therefrom reflects away from any
residential zone.
c. All windows facing residential areas shall be so covered by blinds,
shades, drapes, curtains or other suitable coverings after 8:30 p.m. of
the then prevailing time so as to prevent "objectionable glare," as
§ 9-10.5 ENGLEWOOD § 9-11.2
AO:178
§ 9-11.3. Enforcement.
§ 9-11.4. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a penalty as stated in chapter 3, section
3-1.
§ 9-11.5. Right to Prosecute Hereunder.
Notwithstanding the fact that the building subcode official of the borough is
the prime enforcement officer under the terms of this section, any taxpayer
shall be authorized to file a complaint for the violation of the provisions of
this section provided however, that he shall first have notified the building
subcode official in writing of the alleged violation and if the building
subcode official within two weeks thereafter has failed to move under the
terms of this section, and further provided that the person gives to the
alleged violator the notice provided for hereinabove in like manner as if he
were the prime enforcement officer hereunder.
§ 9-12. RETAINING WALLS.
hereinafter defined, emanating therefrom observable from any
residential zone in the borough.
OBJECTIONABLE GLARE — As hereinabove used is defined as an
average brightness emanating from the curtained window in question
(excluding their luminaire itself) in excess of twelve-foot lamperts.
a. This ordinance shall be enforced by the building subcode official of the
borough.
b. In the event of a violation of any of the terms of this section either with
respect to the lighting of an area in nonresidential zones in this borough
or with respect to light emanating from nonresidential zones shining
into or reflecting into residential zones, the building subcode official
shall serve in writing a notice upon the individual causing the light in
question to emanate, be he the owner, lessee, maintainer or operator of
the said lighting device, to cease and desist the violation or to take the
same out of the operation. The notice shall provide that if the violation
is not corrected within a period of five business days, the building
subcode official will file a complaint for violation of this section.
c. In the event that the building subcode official issues a notice of violation
as aforesaid a copy thereof shall forthwith be filed with the borough
clerk of this borough for delivery to the chairman of the lighting
committee.
d. Any person, firm, corporation or the like which fails to correct a
situation after written notice is served as provided hereinafter within
the time period allowed shall be in violation of the terms of this section.
§ 9-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.1
AO:179
§ 9-12.1. Preamble.
Conditions within the borough render construction of retaining walls
outside of building premises or otherwise an extremely hazardous and
demanding form of construction; and it has been demonstrated that
conditions in Englewood Cliffs render the form of retaining wall
construction known as "railroad tie wall construction" to be an insecure
and ineffective method of constructing such retaining walls in light of such
conditions.
§ 9-12.2. Certain Material Used in Construction of Retaining Walls
Prohibited.
Henceforth no wall higher than one foot in height shall be constructed on
any land or premises within the borough, such wall utilizing as its principal
building material railroad ties or similar materials such as, but not limited
to, logs, trees, planks, lumber, etc.
§ 9-12.3. Notice to Remove Wall.
Upon receiving notice of the construction hereafter of any wall as described
in the preceding paragraph, the building subcode official or any official of
the borough designated by him, shall notify the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which such wall has been constructed, in writing, of the
requirement that such wall be removed within 10 days from the date of such
notice.
§ 9-12.4. Failure to Remove; Penalty.
Any person failing to remove or cause the removal of the type of wall
heretofore described within 10 days provided in such notice, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $50 per day for each day that such wall is
permitted to remain, each such day being regarded as a separate violation
of this section.
§ 9-13. DIVERTING STREAMS.
§ 9-13.1. Preamble.
There have been within the confines of the borough serious drainage
problems which problems are and would be aggravated by the unregulated
structure, diversion, alteration or change of any kind of any stream and the
New Jersey State Water Policy Commission has adopted as administrative
policy the determination that it cannot assume jurisdiction over streams of
purely local character not appearing on the State atlas; and there are within
the confines of the borough streams which fall within such category.
§ 9-13.2. Notice to Planning Board; Compliance with Conditions.
No structure, diversion, alteration or change of any kind within the natural
or ordinary high watermark of any stream all or part of which is located
§ 9-12.1 ENGLEWOOD § 9-13.2
AO:180
within the confines of the borough, shall be made by any public authority or
private person or corporation without notice to the planning board and in
no case, without complying with such conditions as the planning board may
prescribe for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public as well as surrounding property owners
against danger from the waters impounded or affected by such structure,
diversion, alteration or change of any kind and this prohibition shall apply
to any renewal of existing structures.
§ 9-13.3. Property Rights Not to be Invaded.
No such approval by the planning board shall impair or affect any property
rights, otherwise existing which might be invaded by the construction or
maintenance of any such structure.
§ 9-13.4. Hearing; Planning Board May Order Structures Removed.
The planning board may, whenever in its judgment public safety so requires,
and after a hearing either on its own notion or upon complaint, make
and serve an order directing any person, corporation, officer or board
constructing, maintaining or using any such structure in any of the waters
of this State to remove or repair it within such reasonable time and in such
manner as shall be specified in the order, and every such person shall obey,
observe and comply with the order and the conditions prescribed by the
planning board for preserving the channels of streams and for safeguarding
the public against danger from waters impounded by structures
hereinbefore referred to.
§ 9-13.5. Violations; Penalty.
Every person failing, omitting or neglecting so to do, or who constructs
or reconstructs any such structure in any of the waters aforesaid without
submitting to the planning board plans therefor and obtaining its approval
thereof, or who fails to remove, construct or reconstruct the same in
accordance with the plans so approved shall forfeit to the State not less
than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each and every offense. Every violation
of any such order, direction or requirement shall be a separate and distinct
offense, and, in case of a continuing violation, every day's continuance
thereof shall be and be deemed to be separate and distinct offense. If such
a continuing violation shall have continued for more than seven consecutive
days, an additional penalty not exceeding $1,000 per day may be imposed
for the eighth and each succeeding day; and if it shall have continued for
more than 14 consecutive days, a further additional penalty not exceeding
$1,000 per day may be imposed for the 15th and each succeeding day.
Nothing in this section shall preclude or prevent the borough or any of
its agencies from seeking appropriate redress for any violation of the
provisions of this section.
§ 9-14. PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY.
§ 9-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-14.1
AO:181
§ 9-14.1. Preamble.
It is the considered opinion of the mayor and council that senior citizens
of low income in the community are entitled to safe and sanitary housing
accommodations at rentals such persons can afford, and such low-rental
housing accommodations are in extremely short supply in Bergen County
and overcrowded and congested housing will eventuate from such a
shortage and thereby impair public safety and economic values, and the
shortage of such safe and sanitary housing for low-income senior citizens
in Bergen County cannot be totally relieved through private enterprise
and that, therefore, new and rehabilitated construction of housing projects
and facilities would not be competitive with private enterprise, and it is
a governmental function to seek public monies to acquire property and
construction and/or rehabilitate or lease housing facilities for low-income
senior citizens.
The borough is desirous of having its territorial area included in the area of
operation of "The Housing Authority of Bergen County."
§ 9-14.2. Participation by Borough.
The borough desires to participate in the area of operations of the Housing
Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary and the
jurisdiction of its mayor and council for the purpose of alleviating the
shortage of safe and sanitary housing for low-income senior citizens.
§ 9-14.3. Consent of Borough.
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs does hereby consent to its inclusion in the
area of operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 9-14.4. Copies Filed.
The clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified copy of this
section with the Commissioner of the State Department of Conservation and
Economic Development and with the Secretary of the Housing Authority of
Bergen County.
§ 9-15. (RESERVED)20
§ 9-16. ILLEGAL CONVERSIONS.
§ 9-16.1. Preamble.
The governing body of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs is aware of the
continuing need to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents and property owners of the borough and the governing body
has become aware that certain owners of properties in the borough have
20.Editor's Note: Former section 9-15, Satellite Antennas, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 8305 and 9605 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 9715. For regulations on antennas see section 30-20.
§ 9-14.1 ENGLEWOOD § 9-16.1
AO:182
converted their properties to contain more residential rental units than
are permitted for those particular properties under the zoning or building
ordinances of the borough, or under other laws or regulations.
Such conversions frustrate the purposes of zoning and proper planning;
such conversions adversely affect the population density in neighborhoods
of the borough, thereby affecting parking, traffic and environment; and
such population density tends to cause a greater demand for and drain
on municipal services for which the owners of such properties do not
compensate the borough in taxes; and the existence of such properties
results in a greater inequity with respect to the burden of real estate
taxation as the owners of such properties are not assessed for their fair
share of taxation as between such owners and the owners of one family
dwellings.
Tenants of such impermissible rental units, upon being required to vacate
said units, are forced to expend substantial sums of money in finding other
accommodations and in relocating, and by reason of the substantial profit
or gain which may be realized in owning or maintaining properties with
such impermissible units, the only effective deterrent to such practices is
the imposition of strict and severe sanctions and penalties.
§ 9-16.2. Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
§ 9-16.3. Obligations.
a. RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT – Shall mean a building, or portion
thereof, rented (for either direct or indirect compensation) or offered
for rent for dwelling purposes to one or more tenants or family units.
b. IMPERMISSIBLE UNIT – Shall mean a residential rental unit which is:
1. A residential rental unit for which no certificate of occupancy has
been issued; or
2. A residential rental unit which is in excess of the number of such
units for a particular building or zone according to the zoning code,
property maintenance code or other ordinance, regulation or
statute; or
3. A residential rental unit which was created without the required
plumbing, electrical or building permits.
a. No person shall rent or suffer to be occupied an impermissible unit in a
building which such person owns or otherwise controls.
b. Upon a tenant being required to vacate an impermissible rental unit,
the landlord of said tenant shall pay to said tenant:
§ 9-16.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-16.3
AO:183
§ 9-16.4. Violations.
§ 9-16.5. Effect on Existing Ordinances.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to invalidate any other
municipal ordinance. However, whenever the provisions of this section
(including penalties for violations) conflict with other municipal ordinances,
the provisions of this section shall be deemed to supersede any such
ordinances or parts thereof.
§ 9-17. CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY.
§ 9-17.1. Transfer of Ownership Requires Certificate.
Each time there is a transfer of ownership of property within the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs, a purchaser of such property must obtain from the
construction official of the borough a certificate of continued occupancy
certifying that the property may be continued to be used as it is currently
being used and certifying that the use of the property is a permitted use in
the zone in which the property is located, by virtue of either of the fact that
the use is a permitted use in the zone or by virtue of the fact that the use is a
nonconforming use in the zone which was established prior to the adoption
of an ordinance which prohibits said use in the zone.
§ 9-17.2. Fees.
The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $50, payable to the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
1. All reasonable moving and relocation expenses incurred by said
tenant, including a real estate broker's commission incurred in the
procuring of a new rental unit;
2. Any security deposit; and
3. Any pro rata rent which may be due to the tenant because of the
tenant being required to vacate the unit prior to the expiration of
the tenancy.
a. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 or a confinement to not more than 90
days in jail, or both.
b. For purposes of determining violations of subsection 9-16.3a, each and
every day of continued rental or occupancy shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct violation.
c. For purposes of determining violations of subsection 9-16.3a, each and
every day of refusal to pay to the tenant the monies required
thereunder shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation.
§ 9-16.3 ENGLEWOOD § 9-17.3
AO:184
§ 9-17.3. Inspection.
Before a certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued the construction
official shall make an inspection of the premises to determine whether the
certificate may or may not be issued.
§ 9-17.4. Application, Requirements. [Ord. #8603, § 4; Ord. #12-14;
Ord. #13-12; Ord. No. 2014-14]
a. Rental/Lease Units. No person shall rent, lease, sub-lease or sub-let any
dwelling unit to any person intending to use the dwelling unit for
residential purposes, or allow any person to inhabit any one and two
family dwelling unit, unless a certificate of continued occupancy has
been obtained from the code official or the construction official. Any
application pursuant to this section must be made at least 10 days prior
to any intent of occupancy.
1. Inspection. Before a certificate of continued occupancy shall be
issued the construction official shall make an inspection of the
premises to determine whether the certificate may or may not be
issued.
2. Violations. In the event a purchaser of property in the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs fails to obtain a certificate of continued
occupancy, the construction official shall notify said property owner
of the said violation by posting a notice of violation at the subject
premises. In the event that the property owner fails to thereafter
obtain a certificate of continued occupancy, the property owner
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 for each summons
issued. Each day a violation continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance in the notice provided for herein, shall constitute a
separate offense.
b. Standards for Issuance.
1. The code official or the construction official if, after a general
inspection of the visible parts of the structure, determines that the
dwelling unit is fit for human habitation and complies with the
Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs,
and all other Ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, health, safety, fire and
minimum building standards, and that no violations of State law or
of the State Uniform Construction Code exist, which would prevent
the issuance of a certificate of continued occupancy pursuant to
that code, or the regulations pursuant to that code shall issue the
certificate. If a certificate of continued occupancy cannot be issued
because of any violations, the code official or construction official
will provide a notice of violations and if a certificate of continued
occupancy cannot be issued it shall be enforced pursuant to this
section.
§ 9-17.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-17.4
AO:185
(a) Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,250, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or
by community service as determined in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and
the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation
of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
(b) The violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
2. If the Inspector as a result of a general inspection of the visible
parts of the structure, finds any violation as set forth in paragraph
1, he shall notify the owner of the violation and allow the owner 14
days to correct the violation, by mailing a written notice by certified
mail, return receipt and regular mail, or by delivering the notice to
the owner or his agent. The notice shall identify the premises and
specify the violations and any remedial action. The notice shall
state that the failure to correct the violations within the time
specified shall constitute a violation of this section and may be
punishable in accord with Chapter 9, subsection 9-17.4 pursuant to
paragraph a2 penalty clause.
3. Any violation of the ordinances, Codes and New Jersey Statutes
shall be grounds for the denial of a certificate of continued
occupancy.
c. Rental Units. No building or portion thereof shall be rented for
residential purposes or offered for rent to a family as defined in
subsections 9-6.3 and 9-6.4 for the period of less than six months. It is
the intent of this ordinance to prohibit short-term rentals which are not
occupied for at least six months by the tenant.
d. Applications for Certificate.
1. Any owner intending to rent, lease, sub-lease or sub-let any
dwelling unit or allowing any person to inhabit a dwelling unit,
shall apply to the code official or his agent for a certificate of
continued occupancy. Said application shall include the name and
address of the person to be renting the property, the telephone
number where said person can be reached, the telephone number
of the owner where he can be reached and a copy of the agreement
in regard to the rental, lease, sub-lease or sub-let. Within seven
days of the receipt of the payment of the required fee and the
application form, the owner shall afford the Inspectors the
opportunity to inspect the structure and shall consent to the
inspection. Within 14 days of the inspection, the code official or his
§ 9-17.4 ENGLEWOOD § 9-17.4
AO:186
agent will issue a certificate of continued occupancy or deny the
same, setting forth the reasons as set forth above. The fee for said
inspection shall be $85. The fee for a second and any additional
reinspection shall be $50.
(a) In the event the property is under lease and the lease expires,
the property owner shall immediately advise the Construction
Official, or his representative, of the termination of the lease or
the renewal of same, depending upon the circumstances, and
shall again furnish a copy of the new rental, lease, sub-lease, or
sub-let agreement. In the event that the same tenant becomes
a non-lease tenant, this information shall be furnished to the
Construction Official or his representative, setting forth the
terms of the new agreement. The owner shall comply with all
other terms of this section, specifically in regard to the
extension of any lease or agreement, and shall give the
Construction Official, or his representative, seven days' notice,
if there is a continuation of occupancy by the same tenant, a
new Certificate of Continued Occupancy shall not be required.
2. All applications for such certificates shall be made in writing and
shall state the name and address of the owner of the structure, the
name and address of the owner-occupant or tenant-occupant or any
other occupant structure, the name and address, if a sale or
transfer of title, of the seller, transferrer, buyer and the new
proposed occupancy, and the name and address of the renting
agent. It shall also describe the premises to be occupied, including
the street address thereof, and a designation of the portion or
portions of the premises or structures for which the specific
application is being made and shall set forth the number of persons
who shall occupy any and all portions of the premises.
3. All owners or renting agents of real estate or person or persons
applying for a Certificate as provided herein shall advise the Code
Official or his agent of a reasonable time or times that the
inspections may be made and have someone present to assist and
provide entry for the inspection purposes.
4. Required Fees:
(a) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy for a transfer
of ownership of property within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs shall be $50, payable to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
(b) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy for a rental
unit shall be $85, payable to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
(c) Requests for a CCO received fewer than four business days
prior to the closing or change of occupant add additional $150
to required fee.
§ 9-17.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-17.4
AO:187
§ 9-17.5. Violations.
In the event a purchaser of property in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
fails to obtain a certificate of continued occupancy, the construction official
shall notify said property owner of the said violation by posting a notice
of violation at the subject premises. In the event that the property owner
fails to thereafter obtain a certificate of continued occupancy, the property
owner shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 for each summons
issued. Each day a violation continues beyond the date fixed for compliance
in the notice provided for herein, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 9-18. ELEVATOR INSPECTOR.
§ 9-18.1. Established.
There is hereby established the position of elevator inspector within the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
(d) The fee for a second and any additional reinspection shall be
$50 per inspection.
e. Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide Detector Required in all
Residential Buildings. No certificate of continued occupancy may be
issued to a residential building or any portion thereof unless approved
smoke detector and carbon monoxide detectors have been installed as
required by applicable State statute and local ordinance.
f. Failure to Comply. If, after inspection by the enforcement officer, a
certificate of continuing occupancy may not be issued to the residential
building or portion thereof because of the existence of a violation of any
code or failure to comply with the standards set forth herein, notice
shall be given by the enforcement officer to the owner detailing the
violations of applicable laws, regulations or ordinance. The
enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue any summons or
complaint for any violation of any ordinance, statute or regulation
against the owner and/or occupant of the residential building or portion
thereof wherein the violation exists.
g. Expiration. If a dwelling unit is not occupied within six months of the
issuance of a certificate of continued occupancy, the certificate will
expire, and a new certificate must be obtained before occupancy.
h. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to hotels, rooming houses or
motels that are generally occupied by tenants or guests for less than 30
successive days, dwelling units not intended for human habitation or
new construction, for which inspection and a certificate of occupancy is
required by the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 9-17.4 ENGLEWOOD § 9-18.2
AO:188
§ 9-18.2. Appointment.
The elevator inspector shall be appointed by the mayor, upon the advice
and consent of the council, for a term of one year. The inspector shall have
specific training and/or experience in elevator safety and shall hold any and
all legally required certifications and/or licenses.
§ 9-18.3. Findings of Elevator Inspector.
The elevator inspector shall work in conjunction with the construction code
official, and shall report its findings directly to the construction code official
not more than 30 days following the completion of the inspection or testing.
Thereafter, the office of the construction official shall issue any and all
permits, denials or certificates of approval.
§ 9-18.4. Fees.
The elevator inspector shall enter into an agreement with the borough
wherein its fees for various services shall be specified. Such fees shall be
reasonable and not in contravention of any State or local governmental
mandates setting forth fees.
All fees charged by the elevator inspector shall be paid by the owner of the
premises, and a failure to pay for such services shall result in a lien against
the premises.
In addition to the fee paid to the elevator inspector, the owner of the
property shall pay the sum of $35 to the office of the construction code
official for each inspection, as an administration fee.
§ 9-18.5. Elevator Inspection Required.
All elevators within the confines of the Borough of Englewood shall be
inspected and certified for safe operation and conformance with the BOCA
Basic Building Code and Uniform Construction Code.
All elevators, manlifts and escalators shall be inspected and certified as
conforming with applicable law not less than once every six months, and all
dumbwaiters shall be inspected for compliance not less than once every 12
months.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to apply for, and
obtain the prescribed periodic inspection and testing. Failure of any owner
of property to obtain such inspection shall constitute a violation of the
Uniform Construction Code regulations and the construction code official
shall issue a summons for such violation. In addition, the construction code
official shall have the right upon proper notice, to declare that any elevator
or escalator not properly certified as being in conformity with applicable
law, shall not be utilized unless and until such certification is obtained.
Elevator inspections shall be performed within the following time periods
and at the following rates:
§ 9-18.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-18.5
AO:189
6 Month Inspection
Elevator - 4 stories or less in height: $110
Elevator - 5 stories and over $110
3 Year Hydraulic Test
All hydraulic elevators $125
5 Year Test
Elevator - 2 stories but not over 26 stories $225
Reinspection Fee Per Failed Unit
Elevator $70
Dumbwaiters $40
Escalators/moving stairways $75
Manlifts $60
Chair lifts $40
Automotive lifts $75
New Construction Approval
Elevator - 2 stories but not over 26 stories $350
Dumbwaiter $100
Escalators/moving stairways $200
Manlifts $200
Moving walks $200
Chair lifts $150
Automotive lifts $300
The fees hereinabove stated shall be in addition to the administrative fee
payable to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 9-19. LIGHTING RESTRICTIONS.
§ 9-19.1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following shall have the meanings indicated:
FOOTCANDLE — Shall mean the amount of light from one candle at one
foot from the source of the light.
GLARE — Shall mean any artificial light which shines with a strong, steady
or dazzling light.
LAND — Shall mean comprehending not only buildings but the ground, soil,
or earth as commonly understood.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a dwelling, pole or elevated object, or a building
or other structured improvement on any premises, of such physical size
as to be capable of having artificial lighting emanating from the interior
§ 9-18.5 ENGLEWOOD § 9-19.1
AO:190
thereof, through either glass or other transparent material, or capable of
having attached thereto or incorporated thereon on the exterior, artificial
lighting by means of electrical, gas or other luminescent fixtures.
§ 9-19.2. Restrictions on Light Sources Facing Neighboring
Property.
§ 9-19.3. Legislative Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority given any municipality of
this State to enact ordinances which the governing body deems necessary
and proper for the good government, order or protection of persons and
property and for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and its inhabitants.
§ 9-19.4. Enforcing Agencies.
The construction code official, the building department and the police
department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall be the enforcing
agencies with regard to the restrictions specified herein.
§ 9-19.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person or persons responsible for such nuisance or annoying lighting
as described hereinbefore, whether owner, lessee or lessees or others using
a. No artificial lighting, from either within a structure or from the exterior
of any structure or sign, shall shine directly upon any neighboring
property or public roadway or be so established that it shall shine
directly upon any neighboring property or public roadway or shall shine
directly on or into any room or rooms, porches or patios of any
neighboring property, nor shall any artificial lighting be maintained or
operated from any structure or land in such a manner as to be a
nuisance or any annoyance to neighboring properties or as to interfere
with the physical comfort of the occupants of neighboring properties.
b. Lights directly facing a neighboring or adjacent property or a public
roadway shall be shielded. This prohibition includes any lighting which
emanates from the interior of any structure and shines through glass or
other transparent material.
c. No sources of light shall be maintained or operated in connection with
any building or land in any manner, or by any process or method which
transmits an objectionable glare on neighboring property or public
roadway.
d. In no instance will any glare be permitted if such glare originates from a
light source facing any dwelling unit.
e. The light intensity from illumination of any kind at any given location
along the property line from which the light originates shall not exceed
five footcandles.
§ 9-19.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-19.5
AO:191
any premises with or without the permission of the owner, violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $500 or to imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not to exceed 30 days, or to both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion
of the court. Each day a particular violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 9-20. DEMOLITION PERMITS.
§ 9-20.1. Demolition Permit: Security Requirements.
a. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the demolition of any structure
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17 or other applicable regulation, the
person, firm or entity making such application shall post with the
construction official security in the form of cash, certified check,
irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond issued by a surety company
authorized to do business in New Jersey. Such security shall be in the
amount of $500 for one-family homes and accessory buildings, and
$2,500 for all other buildings. Any interior renovation within a onefamily
home which encompasses removal of walls, ceilings, flooring or
appliances shall be exempt from the provisions hereof. The purpose of
the security or condition of the bond shall be to insure that demolition
shall have been performed in a good workmanlike manner as well as to
guarantee compliance with subsections 9-20.2 and 9-20.3 of this
section, in addition to all other regulations governing demolition. In the
event a bond is posted, the beneficiary of the security or obligee shall
be the owner or owners of the land and any persons having an interest
in the realty involved on which the demolition is taking place, and the
term of any security, be it cash, certified check, irrevocable letter of
credit or surety bond, shall terminate no earlier than the completion of
the demolition or the expiration of the demolition permit, whichever is
later, plus an additional 30 days.
The site must be inspected by and approval granted from the
superintendent of public works or his designee before a building permit
can be issued or further work can be conducted.
b. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, or within three business days
after demolition is completed in accordance with a borough demolition
permit, all existing storm drainage lines, including sump pump
discharge lines, sanitary sewer laterals and/or potable water lines must
be physically plugged, capped and/or removed to prevent any discharge
from said lines.
c. In addition to the aforesaid requirements set forth in subsection 9-20.1a
and b, the applicant must first apply to the chairman of the shade tree
commission and/or his/her designee, and the environmental
commission chairman and/or his/her designee and comply with the
provisions of Chapter 30, Zoning, section 30-22 entitled "Tree
Preservation and Removal For Residential Lots" ordinance and the
§ 9-19.5 ENGLEWOOD § 9-20.1
AO:192
§ 9-20.2. Recycling Tonnage Application Form.
Concurrent with the obtainment of a demolition permit, the applicant shall
cause to be filed with the recycling official of the borough a municipal
recycling tonnage application form and accompanying documentation. Such
form shall be available from, and shall be filed with, the recycling
coordinator of the borough. In the event that any person, owner, contractor,
or builder, during the course of a demolition activity shall discover the
existence of recyclable items, same shall be reported and duly documented
in accordance with this subsection.
§ 9-20.3. Mandatory Source Separation and Disposal.
It shall be mandatory and a condition precedent to the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy for the applicant to recycle at an authorized
recycling facility all construction and/or demolition debris and to provide
written proof to the recycling coordinator in accordance with the following.
Written documentation of tonnage of material recycled shall be made by
accurate weight slips and/or such form as required by the recycling
coordinator as will satisfy State requirements for borough eligibility for
State tonnage grants. Prior to the issuance of a construction permit or
certificate of occupancy, the recycling coordinator shall notify the
construction official. In writing, that demolition was completed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 9-20.4. Definitions.
DEMOLITION and/or CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS – Shall be defined as the
residue of any structure, residential or commercial, and including, but
not limited to, brick cement, asphalt roofing, window glass, wood, scrap
metals or roofing. In addition, any and all debris from trees including wood,
stumps, branches and/or shrubbery which is demolished or removed during
construction, shall also be recycled in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
requirement of Chapter ST1, entitled "Regulations For Planting,
Control, Protection and Improvement of Trees and Shrubbery," which
regulates shade trees within the borough and obtain such permission
and/or approvals as necessary. Said application shall be made to the
office of the construction department, who shall advise the applicant
what person they should directly contact for said approvals and the said
commissions. In the event that there is no approval granted or denial
made within 10 business days of the application being made, pursuant
to this subsection the construction official may waive the provisions of
this ordinance.
§ 9-20.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-20.5
AO:193
§ 9-20.5. Penalties.
In the event of any violation of any provision of this section, the municipal
court shall impose a fine of not less than $500 for the first offense and not
less than $750 for the second and succeeding offenses.
§ 9-20.6. Disposition of Security.
In the event within 30 days after demolition of the building or structure,
the recycling official has not received the required documentation pursuant
to subsection 9-20.2 of this section, and the recycling coordinator has been
notified in writing of the commencement of litigation and the court in
which such litigation has commenced, and that the said litigation alleges
a violation of the purpose or condition of the security or bond posted
herewith, the recycling coordinator shall forthwith transmit such security
or bond to the clerk of the court involved for disposition of the matter.
§ 9-21. (RESERVED)21
§ 9-22. SOIL DISTURBANCE.
§ 9-22.1. Legislative Intent.
The mayor and council hereby declares its intent to regulate the
disturbance of fill upon residential properties within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs and to promulgate rules and regulations in regard to same
including grading changes.
It is the intent of this section to prevent waters from running onto adjacent
property owners property as a result of the disturbance of land and/or the
grading of same and to maintain a zero-run off in regard to same and it is
further the intent to prevent any build-up of water on adjacent properties as
a result of the activities of the disturbance and/or existing grading.
§ 9-22.2. Permit Required.
Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or
improvement to any existing structure, proposed structure or to any lands
situated within the borough, a site improvement permit shall be obtained
from the construction official in regard to the prevention or any disturbance
of land which would cause adversity upon neighboring properties
concerning water and/or drainage.
§ 9-22.3. Permit Waiver.
The construction official is hereby empowered to waive the requirements
outlined under this section, if, in his opinion, the construction, modification
or improvement being proposed is de minimus and the reasons set forth for
21.Editor's Note: Former section 9-21, Affordable Housing Development Fee, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 9511 was repealed by Ordinance
No. 9707. See section 30-19 for Affordable Housing Development Fee.
§ 9-20.5 ENGLEWOOD § 9-22.3
AO:194
the waiver are submitted in writing and a copy forwarded to the municipal
clerk for distribution to the mayor and council with the next monthly report.
§ 9-22.4. Structures.
Structures shall be defined but not limited to any construction including
additions for which a building permit or other permit is required. This shall
include but not be limited to accessory structures, swimming pools, walls
and fences.
§ 9-22.5. Construction Official Authorized to Promulgate Rules.
[Ord. No. 9604 § 2]
The construction official is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to implement the legislative intent of this section.
§ 9-22.6. Issuance of Certificate of Approval. [Ord. No. 9604 § 2]
A certificate of approval will not be issued by the building department until
an approved site inspection form is received by the building department
from the construction official and approved.
§ 9-22.7. Application Procedure. [Ord. No. 9604 § 2]
§ 9-22.8. Consideration of Application. [Ord. No. 9604 § 2]
In considering the application the construction official shall be guided by
the following factors:
a. Application for a site improvement permit must be made with the
construction official. Upon review of a completed application, the
construction official will, within 20 days either deny or approve said
permit. If said permit is approved, work may then, and only then,
commence. If said permit is denied, the borough engineer will supply
supporting information and list all deficiencies.
b. The construction official shall refer such matters as the construction
official deems necessary in regard to the approval procedure to the
borough engineer for advice and consultation. The engineer at a
minimum shall conduct a review of the site plans and make a final
inspection.
c. The construction official or his/her designee may require the applicant
to provide such data including topographical maps certified by a
licensed engineer to assist the construction code official in determining
whether or not there will be any detrimental effect to adjacent
properties as a result of the activities of the applicant.
a. Soil erosion by water and wind.
b. Drainage.
§ 9-22.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-22.8
AO:195
§ 9-22.9. Fees. [Ord. No. 9604 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-04]
c. Soil fertility.
d. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
e. Land values and uses.
f. The effect of the construction or grading or soil disturbance upon
adjacent properties.
g. Zero run-off.
Any other criteria based on environmental and engineering considerations not
inconsistent with the above factors and affecting the public interest as may
from time to time be promulgated by regulation of the borough construction
official.
If, after considering the above, the construction official determines that the
proposed disturbance of soil will not be detrimental to the health, safety
or welfare of the borough or its inhabitants, he shall issue a permit. The
construction official may deny the application or condition the issuance of
the permit on such terms and conditions as he/she may deem appropriate
in light of the environmental concerns which may be involved, including the
filing of certified topographic or as-built surveys upon completion of the soil
disturbance and so notify the applicant.
a. The basic fee for a Soil Disturbance Permit application shall be $250.
b. The basic fee for engineering review of an application shall be $500.
c. The applicant shall post $1,000 in engineering escrow for engineering
inspections of site improvements associated with the project, including
drainage, grading and soil erosion.
d. The applicant will be required to post a $125 fee per revision for review
of revisions made to the engineering plan of the site for drainage,
grading and soil erosion.
e. In addition, the applicant shall deposit in cash or bond, a Performance
Guarantee in the amount of $5,000 to prevent erosion or flooding onto
lands or streets adjacent to the lot and to eliminate any soil disturbance
condition which is likely to be dangerous to health and safety. This
amount shall be returned to the applicant upon final inspection and
approval by the Borough Engineer.
f. The applicant is required as part of the project to provide an as-built
drawing showing all site conditions including final drainage, grading
and site features for the property, prior to receiving certificate of
occupancy for the property. This document shall be reviewed and
approved by the Borough Engineer prior to the release of the
performance guarantee.
§ 9-22.8 ENGLEWOOD § 9-22.10
AO:196
§ 9-22.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 9604 § 2]
§ 9-22.11. Right to Enter Upon Lands. [Ord. No. 9604 § 2]
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this section, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the borough shall have the right to
enter into and upon any lands for which an application has been filed and
may examine and inspect such lands.
§ 9-22.12. Enforcement Officer. [Ord. No. 9604 § 2]
The construction official is hereby designated as the enforcement officer.
§ 9-23. FENCES.
§ 9-23.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 9713 § 1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — Shall mean any fence, wall, barrier or structure enclosing, setting
off or fixing the limits for a particular use or uses of all or part of any
land, whether residential or commercial, whether of solid-type construction,
stockade, openwork construction or chain link, whether the same is
conducted wholly or partly of wood, brick, stone, masonry blocks, metal,
fiberglass or other composition.
§ 9-23.2. Regulations. [Ord. No. 9713 § 1]
Any fence constructed or installed in any zone in the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs which is designed or constructed so as to have a front side and
rear side, shall be erected so that the front side faces abutting streets or
abutting premises, and the rear side faces the premises on which the fence
is erected. Therefore, if the fence has beams, an unfinished or rough side,
these sides shall face inward toward the premises on which the fence is
erected. It Is the intent of this section to ensure that the most aesthetically
pleasing side of the fence be on the outside and the least pleasing to be on
the inside.
§ 9-23.3. Violations.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not exceeding $1,000 or to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or to community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
b. Failure to obtain the proper permit, make satisfactory improvements, as
determined by the construction official, or pay the proper permit fee
shall be considered a violation and shall be punishable under this
section.
§ 9-22.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.3
AO:197
§ 9-24. BUSINESS ZONING APPLICATION.
§ 9-24.1. Business Zoning Application Required.
Each time there is a new business located within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs, the owner of such property and/or business must fill out and file with
the construction official a business zoning application.
§ 9-24.2. Fees.
The fee for a business zoning application shall be $200, payable to the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 9-24.3. Investigation of Application. [Ord. No. 2010-07]
Upon receipt of the business zoning application, the construction official
shall conduct his or her investigation to determine if such use is acceptable.
Each applicant is aware by filing such an application that they must conform
to all building, electric, plumbing, fire and board of health codes. Depending
on the circumstances surrounding the application, the construction official
may require the applicant to appear before the Borough Planning Board.
Chapter 10
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 10-1. TITLE, POLICY AND PURPOSES.
§ 10-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "The Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs" and may be referred to in the chapter in the
short form as "The Property Maintenance Code" or as "this code".
§ 10-1.2. Findings and Declaration of Policy.
It is hereby found and declared that there exists in the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs structures used for residential and nonresidential
a. The construction code official shall have all rights granted to that office
pursuant to law with regard to the enforcement of the provisions of this
section, including but not limited to, ordering removal of the fence,
imposing fines, filing of summonses in municipal court or seeking relief
in the Superior Court.
b. The municipal court shall impose a fine against any person, firm,
corporation or entity found guilty of violating any provisions of this
section of not less than $100, and shall have the right to impose such
fine for each day that the fence existed in violation of the provisions
hereof.
§ 9-23.3 ENGLEWOOD § 10-1.2
AO:198
purposes which are, or may become in the future, substandard with respect
to structure, equipment or maintenance, and further that such conditions
including, but not limited to, structural deterioration, inadequate
maintenance, infestation, inadequate provisions for light and air, and
unsanitary conditions constitute a menace to the health, safety and welfare
of the residents and inhabitants of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs. It is
further found and declared that the existence of such conditions has the
further effect of creating blights and substandard neighborhoods, and that
by the enactment of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained,
the development of blight may be prevented and neighborhood and property
values maintained and the public health, safety and welfare protected and
fostered.
§ 10-1.3. Purposes.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential
premises: to establish minimum standards governing facilities and other
physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid
facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use: to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners, operators and occupants: and to
fix penalties for the violation of this code. This code is hereby declared to
be remedial and essential for the public interest and it is intended that this
code be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein.
§ 10-2. DEFINITIONS.
§ 10-2.1. Meaning of Certain Words.
The following terms wherever herein or referred to in this code shall have
the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a building or use that is: (a) on the
same lot: or (b) subordinate to: and (c) under the same ownership of control
as: and (d) used for the purpose customarily incident to the use of the main
building.
DEBRIS — Shall mean any grass, leaves, parts of trees, stumps, or any other
similar material, paper, cigarettes, cans, bottles, construction waste or any
manner or type of refuse.
DETERIORATION — Shall mean the condition or appearance of a building
or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a building
which are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises
outside of any building erected thereon.
§ 10-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.1
AO:199
FOLIAGE — Shall mean any grass, leaves, parts of trees, stumps or any
other similar material.
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. (See also
Refuse, Rubbish)
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard.
JUNK — Shall mean any portions, parts or wholes of any usable item,
including glass, metal or similar material.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person living, sleeping, or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof: or shall have charge, care or
control of any dwellings or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or
as fiduciary, including but not limited to: executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee
in possession regardless of how much possession was obtained. Any person
who is a lessee subletting, or reassigning any part or all of any dwelling
unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said
lessee.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings
or structure thereon.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
including, but not limited to: garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
(See also Garbage, Rubbish)
Any public nuisance known as common law or in equity jurisprudence,
or as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey, or in the
ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
a.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building,
or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to:
abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or
structures, lumber, trash or debris.
b.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of
persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
c.
Unsanitary conditions or conditions which render air, food or drink
detrimental to the health of human beings.
d.
§ 10-2.1 ENGLEWOOD § 10-2.1
AO:200
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials. (See also Garbage, Refuse)
STRUCTURE — Shall mean anything that is built or constructed and
permanently affixed on or under the ground or upon another structure or
building.
§ 10-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING LITTERING;
ABANDONED VEHICLES; AND BRUSH, HEDGES AND OTHER
PLANT LIFE NEAR INTERSECTIONS OF PUBLIC ROADWAYS.
§ 10-3.1. Dumping Garbage and Trash.
No person shall within the limits of the borough throw, dump, cast or
deposit or permit to be maintained paper, paper products, bottles, tin cans,
containers, automobile parts, junk, unusable machines or parts of machines,
metal, trash, garbage, natural parts of foliage including stumps, and trees,
debris or other waste materials upon open fields, woods, or private property
vacant or not vacant or upon or along any public street, highway or other
public place, provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit
the placing of such materials as are removed from the borough by the
individual, firm, or department authorized by the borough to remove the
same when placed in suitable containers for that purpose.
§ 10-3.2. Abandoned Motor Vehicles.
No person shall keep, store, abandon or leave upon any parcel of land,
street, or parkway in the borough, any motor vehicle not currently used for
transportation and not being licensed for the current year or which cannot
be readily operated under its own power; provided however that nothing
herein contained shall be determined to prohibit the placing, keeping,
storing, or abandonment or any such motor vehicle in a garage or other
building in the borough.
§ 10-3.3. Littering or Dumping Debris, Trash or Foliage.
No person shall litter or dump upon any property vacant or unoccupied
located within the borough any debris, junk or foliage.
§ 10-3.4. Debris from Construction or Demolition of Building: Time
Allowed.
No person shall permit land to be covered with, or contain, refuse or debris
resulting from the construction activities or the demolishing of a building,
which refuse or debris has remained on the land for more than 30 days after
the completion of the construction activities or demolition work.
§ 10-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.5
AO:201
§ 10-3.5. Property Owner Maintenance Required.
All owners of real property within the borough shall keep all brush, brushes,
hedges, and other plant life, growing within 10 feet of the curbline of any
public roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of the curbline of two
public roadways, cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where same
shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public safety
within the borough. This determination shall be made by the enforcing
agency on the basis that the growth obstructs the vision of automobile
operators so as to cause a hazard to motorists and pedestrians.
§ 10-4. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL BUILDINGS.
§ 10-4.1. Residential and Nonresidential Buildings to Comply.
Every residential and nonresidential building and the premises on which
it is situated in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs previously or presently
used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial
occupancy, shall comply with the provisions of this code, whether or not
such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or
after the enactment of this code, and irrespective of any permits or licenses
which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building, or
for the installation or repair of equipment of facilities prior to the effective
date of this code. This code establishes minimum standards for the initial
and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings, and does not replace
or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of the building equipment or facilities contained therein,
except as provided in subsection 10-3.2.
§ 10-4.2. Higher Standard to Prevail in Cases of Conflict with Other
Laws or Ordinances.
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinance of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs,
or under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set
forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this code impose a lower
standard than other ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs or of the
laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any
such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 10-4.3. Enforcement of and Compliance with Other Ordinances.
No certification of compliance with this code shall constitute a defense
against any violation of any other ordinance of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs, applicable to any structure or premises.
§ 10-5. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER, OPERATOR AND
OCCUPANT TO BE INDEPENDENT OF EACH OTHER.
§ 10-3.5 ENGLEWOOD § 10-5.1
AO:202
§ 10-5.1. Owners and Operators.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in this code, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from
any such duties and responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 10-5.2. Occupants.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
section 10-6 of this code and the occupant shall not be relieved from any
such duties and responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against any charge
or violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or operator is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 10-5.3. Contracts Not to Alter Responsibilities.
Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this code, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand, and
the occupant on the other, shall not be altered or affected by any agreement
or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and other
parties.
§ 10-6. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND
OPERATOR.
§ 10-6.1. Maintenance of Exterior of Premises - Residential and
Nonresidential.
The exterior of the premises and all structures including retaining walls
thereon shall be kept free of any hazards to the safety of occupants,
pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsightly
or unsanitary conditions and any of the foregoing shall be promptly
removed and abated. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep
the premises free of hazards and unsightly or unsanitary conditions which
include, but are not limited to the following:
a. Refuse. Including, without limitation: junk, debris, scrap lumber, scrap
metal, inoperable machinery or parts and fragments thereof glass,
stumps and trash;
b. Loose and overhanging objects. Including, without limitation, dead and
dying trees, accumulations of ice or other similar conditions which by
reason of their location above ground level constitute a hazard to
persons in the vicinity thereof;
c. Ground surface hazards. Including, without limitation, holes,
excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions which constitute a
hazard to persons using the premises;
§ 10-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.1
AO:203
§ 10-6.2. Appearance of Exterior of Premises and Structures. [Ord.
No. 8925 § 2; Ord. No. 9209 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-02; Ord. No.
2014-04]
d. Inadequate foundation wall, piers, retaining walls and columns.
Foundation walls, piers, retaining walls, columns, or similar loadbearing
components shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects
and damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely:
e. Unsafe exterior facilities. Including, without limitation, exterior
porches, landing, balconies, stairs and fire escapes, all of which shall be
kept structurally sound and in good repair and shall be provided with
banisters or railings properly designated and maintained.
a. Residential. The exterior of the premises, the exterior of dwelling
structures and the condition of accessory structures shall be
maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings
thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the
residential standards of the neighborhood and/or such that the
appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a
blighting factor depreciating adjoining properties nor an element
leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the
neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values.
1. General maintenance. In order to preserve property values,
eliminate safety hazards and protect adjoining properties and the
neighborhood from blighting influences, the exterior of every
structure or accessory structure (including fences) shall be kept
painted or whitewashed where necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance, free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone or brick or excessive peeling paint. The grounds
shall be maintained to an extent sufficient to prevent the
appearance thereof from constituting a blighting factor
depreciating adjoining properties and impairing the residential
character of the neighborhood. All residential property, both vacant
or improved, shall be maintained free of debris, foliage, tree
stumps, litter or junk.
2. Front yard parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle, or permit or suffer the same to be done, in any front yard
area of premises occupied by a dwelling except on driveways and
parking areas constructed and installed in compliance with
applicable borough ordinances.
(a) No person shall park any vehicle in any residential or
commercial zones except on paved areas such as driveways
and parking spaces. Parking on grass or any unimproved land
shall be strictly prohibited.
§ 10-6.1 ENGLEWOOD § 10-6.2
AO:204
3. Sidewalks, driveways, etc. The sidewalks, driveways, walkways and
entrance stairways shall be maintained in a safe condition, such as
will not constitute a hazard to persons using the premises.
4. Waterways, brooks, etc. All waterways, brooks, drainage ditches
and swales, to the extent that the same are located on or
immediately adjacent to the premises, shall be maintained in good
conditions, free from debris, plantings or other obstructions.
5. Construction equipment, vehicles and/or construction materials.
No person shall keep, store or leave, either permanently or
temporarily, any construction equipment, vehicle or construction
materials on any residential lot within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs, and which premises are not then currently being improved
for development as the result of a permit issued by the construction
code official.
b. Nonresidential. The exterior of the premises and the condition of
accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance
in keeping with the standards of the zoning district in which the
property is located and/or such that the appearance of the premises and
structures shall not constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining
properties nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and
downgrading of the neighborhood and/or the zoning district in which
the property is located.
1. General maintenance. In order to preserve property values,
eliminate safety hazards and protect adjoining properties and the
neighborhood from blighting influences, the exterior of every
structure or accessory structure (including all fences) shall be
maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept
painted or whitewashed where necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance, free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone or brick or excessive peeling paint. The ground
shall be maintained to an extent sufficient to prevent the
appearance thereof from constituting a blighting factor
depreciating adjoining properties and impairing the character of
the neighborhood. All nonresidential property, vacant or improved,
shall be maintained free of any accumulation of debris, foliage, tree
stumps, litter or junk.
2. Conditions of approval. All conditions of approval incorporated in
resolutions or other acts of the Englewood Cliffs Borough Council
or of any duly constituted board or agency of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs shall be adhered to and shall be construed to be
continuing conditions of approval. Any on-site improvements of
every kind or nature, including, without limitation sidewalks,
curbs, catch basins, storm drains, and driveways installed pursuant
to the requirements of the Englewood Cliffs Borough Council or any
duly constituted board or agency of the Borough of Englewood
§ 10-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.2
AO:205
Cliffs shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition at all
times.
3. Windows. No storage of materials, stock, or inventory shall be
permitted in window display areas unless said areas are first
screened from public view by drapes, venetian blinds or other
permanent rendering of the windows opaque to the public view. All
such screening of interiors shall be maintained in a clean and
attractive manner and in a good state of repair.
4. Store fronts. All store fronts shall be maintained in good repair and
all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted when necessary for
purposes of preservation and appearance. In the event repairs to a
portion of a store front are made, such repairs shall be performed
with materials identical or compatible with the materials used in
the area not undergoing repair, to the end that the appearance of
the store front shall be uniform and attractive and shall not
constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining properties.
5. Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its
accompanying structural members which extend over any street,
sidewalk, or other portion of the premises shall be maintained in
good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard.
In the event such awning or marquees are not properly maintained
in accordance with the foregoing, they shall together with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event said
awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic, or of a similar
material, said cloth or plastic where exposed to public view shall be
maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of
excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing, or other
holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public
domain.
6. Signs. All signs, including the structural and supporting
components thereof and all light stanchions and poles shall be
maintained in good repair.
7. Parking lines. All parking areas shall be marked with clearly visible
parking lines and necessary directional arrows. Such markings
shall be consistent with any requirements as to parking areas
imposed by the Englewood Cliffs Borough Council or any other duly
constituted board or agency of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
8. Sidewalks, driveways, etc. The sidewalks, driveways, and entrance
stairways shall be maintained in a safe condition, such as will not
constitute a hazard to persons using the premises.
9. Waterways, brooks, etc. All waterways, brooks, drainage ditches
and swales, to the extent that the same are located on or
immediately adjacent to the premises, shall be maintained in good
condition, free from debris, plantings or other obstructions.
§ 10-6.2 ENGLEWOOD § 10-6.3
AO:206
§ 10-6.3. Structural Soundness and General Maintenance-Exterior.
§ 10-7. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS, OPERATORS
AND OCCUPANTS.
§ 10-7.1. Interior Maintenance - Residential and Nonresidential.
a. Residential. Every dwelling and accessory structure shall be kept
structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety or health
hazards, including: terioration or corrosion are to be restored and
protected against weathering or seepage.
b. Nonresidential. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure
(including fences and store fronts) shall be maintained in good repair
and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed where
necessary for purposes of preservation of appearance. All surfaces shall
be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or
brick, excessive peeling paint or other conditions reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that property itself
may be preserved, safety hazards eliminated and adjoining properties
and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences. All
reconstruction of walls and siding shall be of standard quality and
appearance commensurate with the character of the properties in the
zoning district in which the premises are located; such that the
materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance under
prevailing appraisals, practices and standards will depreciate the value
of the neighboring and adjoining premises as aforesaid.
a. Basement and cellars. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces are to be
maintained free of moisture, and ventilation shall be required where
necessary to prevent accumulations of moisture and dampness.
b. Freedom from infestation. All parts of the premises shall be maintained
as to prevent infestation.
c. General sanitation and safety. All parts of the premises shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition, free of nuisances and free from health,
safety and fire hazards.
d. Accumulations of garbage. No accumulation or obstruction from
garbage, refuse, rubbish, or refuse shall be permitted on common
stairways, areas, balconies, porches, hallways, basements or cellars.
e. Floors, interior walls and ceilings. Floors, interior walls and ceilings of
every structure shall be structurally sound and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition.
f. Floors generally. Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound
when capable of safely bearing imposed loads, and shall be maintained
at all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks,
breaks and other hazards.
§ 10-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.1
AO:207
§ 10-7.2. Exterior Maintenance - Residential and Nonresidential.
[Ord. No. 2017-07 § 2]
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs:
g. Bathrooms, water closet compartment and kitchen floors. Bathroom
water closet compartment, shower room and kitchen floors shall be
kept at all times in a clean and sanitary condition.
h. Walls and ceilings generally. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained in
good repair and free from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and similar
conditions. Walls shall be provided with paint, paper, sealing material or
other protective covering so that the said walls and ceilings shall be
kept clean, free or visible foreign matter, sanitary and well maintained
at all times.
i. Stairs and railings. Interior stairs of every structure shall be
structurally sound and free from defects. Stairs shall be adequately
lighted in all places with controlled switches operable from each story
to permit safe use at night for persons ascending or descending, except
where artificial lighting for hallways and common areaways is supplied
in accordance with State law from a master control switch.
j. Garbage disposal. All structures shall be provided with water-tight
receptacle with tight fitting covers sufficient in capacity to hold all
refuse, garbage and waste matter from said building or structure which
receptacles shall not be located nor maintained in such a manner as to
provide the creation of a nuisance or a health hazard.
a. Throw, dump, cast or deposit, or permit to be maintained, paper, paper
products, bottles, tin cans, containers, automobile parts, junk, natural
foliages, parts or foliage, including stumps and tree debris or other
waste materials upon open fields, woods, or private property vacant or
not vacant or upon or along any public street, highway or other public
place, provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
placing or such materials as are removed from the borough by the
individual, firm or department authorized by the said borough to
remove the same when placed in suitable containers for that purpose.
b. No person shall keep, store, abandon or leave any parcel of land, street,
road, alley way or parkway in the borough, any motor vehicle not
currently used for transportation and being licensed for the current
year or which cannot be readily operated under its own power, provided
however, that nothing herein contained shall be determined to prohibit
the placing, keeping, storing or abandonment of any such motor vehicle
in a garage or other building in the borough.
Further, no person shall keep, store or leave any construction
equipment, vehicle or construction materials on any property within the
borough, and which properties not then currently being improved by
§ 10-7.1 ENGLEWOOD § 10-7.2
AO:208
development as a result of a permit issued by the construction code
official's office.
c. No person shall litter or dump upon any property, vacant or unvacant,
located within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, any debris, junk or
foliage.
d. Permit land to be covered with or contain refuse or debris resulting
from the construction activities or the demolishing of a building which
refuse or debris has remained on the land for more than 30 days after
the completion of the said construction activities or demolition work.
e. All buildings, whether residential or commercial, shall have
prominently displayed the address of said building in order to promote
public safety in regard to fire and police and rescue. Said address shall
be clearly visible from the curbline of said building or buildings. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building unless it
complies with the provisions of the subsection.
The provisions of subsection 10-7.2e shall be enforced by the
construction office and/or police department as deemed appropriate.
f. Specific requirements for numbers.
A house or building number shall be:
1. In Arabic numerals or letters.
2. A minimum height of three inches. If a house or building is set back
more than 50 feet from the curbline, the numbers shall have a
minimum height of six inches and be clearly legible from the street.
3. Mounted in a secure fashion at the front of the building so as to be
clearly visible from the street.
4. Of a contrasting color to the background and arranged in such a
manner so as to be clearly legible from the street, both day and
night.
5. At least 36 inches above ground level and so placed that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
6. If the house or building is set back from the street in a location that
the provisions of this chapter cannot be complied with, then the
owner, occupant or lessee shall, in addition to displaying the
number of the building, provide a post, rod or other type of fixture
of a substantial and permanent nature with the number and a
directional symbol affixed thereon and so located on the premises
that the number and directional symbol shall be conspicuous and
visible from the street upon which the building property fronts.
§ 10-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.2
AO:209
§ 10-8. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
§ 10-8.1. Enforcement Officers.
All members of the police department, building department, board of
health, department of public works and authorized enforcement officers for
purposes of the enforcement of the provisions of this code.
§ 10-8.2. Procedure.
Whenever any enforcement officer determines, after appropriate
investigation, that there exists a violation of any provision of this chapter,
he or she shall give written notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
§ 10-8.3. Special Procedure in Emergency Conditions.
Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate attention to protect the public health or safety, he or
she may, without notice, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to
7. All numbers shall be easily discernible at night with the aid of an
emergency support light.
g. Violations and penalties. Any person or persons, association, firm or
corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be liable to pay a fine of not less than $250 for
the first offense, $500 for the second offense and $1,000 for the third
offense and the jurisdiction as to the enforcement of this chapter shall
be in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Municipal Court. The
continuation of the offense shall, in each case, constitute a new offense.
a. Be in writing;
b. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
c. Be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises, or the agent of
either of them; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is served upon such person,
personally, or sent by certified or registered mail to his last known
address; or posted in a conspicuous place in or about the premises
affected by the notice. Such notice shall also state that, unless within 10
days from service of the notice, the condition complained of is abated, a
municipal court summons will be issued and/or the borough will
undertake to abate the violation and charge a lien on the property as
hereinafter provided. A copy of the Notice shall also be sent to the
borough clerk.
§ 10-7.2 ENGLEWOOD § 10-8.3
AO:210
the enforcement officer, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. In
the event the order is disregarded by the property owner or person to whom
the order is directed, the enforcement officer shall have the right to notify
the borough clerk for the purpose of instituting immediate remedial action,
the cost of which shall result in a lien on the premises. After such hearing,
the enforcement officer shall continue such order in effect, or modify or
withdraw it.
§ 10-9. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or may
be promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to
exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter and each day that such violation shall
continue shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
In addition to the foregoing, and all other remedies available to the
borough, the borough treasurer, upon appropriate notification from the
mayor and council (after appropriate certification from the enforcement
officer), shall place a lien on any property determined by the enforcement
officer to be in violation of the provisions of this code, in the amount of
any and all administrative expenses, and any and all actual expenditures for
work necessary in order to maintain the property and/or abate the violation.
The lien placed upon such lands shall be added to and become and form a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced
by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
In addition to all of the foregoing, and all other remedies available to
the borough, the cost of removal of any offensive construction equipment,
vehicles or construction materials, refuse, hazards, overhanging objects,
vehicles, or any other offending physical object, shall be a lien on the
property, the cost of which shall be added to and become and form a part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 10-10. CLEAN COMMUNITIES PROGRAM.
§ 10-10.1. Littering Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard, or otherwise
place litter of any nature upon any public or private property, other than a
litter receptacle.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap,
or detachable tab of any bottle, jar, or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
§ 10-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-10.1
AO:211
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic, or paper containers or other packaging or
construction material but does not include the waste of the primary process
of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or
manufacturing.
§ 10-10.2. Illegal Dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture, on private property, except by written consent of the owner of
said property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of
solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 10-10.3. Use of Litter Receptacles.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including; sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that as a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings, and railroad and substations; parks, drive-in restaurants; all
street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service stations islands; shopping centers; parking lots;
campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations;
boat launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public
is invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses, and
festivals. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events
shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container suitable for the depositing
of litter.
§ 10-10.4. Containerization of Sweepings.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property shall
keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. All litter
sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 10-10.5. Open or Overflowing Waste Disposal Bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 10-10.1 ENGLEWOOD § 10-10.6
AO:212
§ 10-10.6. Uncovered Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped, or parked,
on any public roadway unless such vehicle is constructed, covered or loaded
to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any
materials which constitute litter have fallen or escaped, which could cause
an obstruction, damage a vehicle, or otherwise endanger travelers or public
property, shall immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of all
such materials and shall pay the cost therefor.
§ 10-10.7. Construction Sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during, or immediately following completion of any construction or
demolition project. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or contractor
in charge of a construction site to furnish containers adequate to
accommodate flyable or non-flyable debris or trash at areas convenient to
construction areas, and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a
manner and with such a frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 10-10.8. Commercial Establishments and Residences.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept from the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind, and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter.
§ 10-10.9. Distribution of Handbills.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, to cause to be placed, or to hire
another person to place any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited material
of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, building or vehicle within the
community in such a manner that it may be removed by natural causes.
§ 10-10.10. Enforcement.
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the same agencies and/
or departments specified in chapter 10, section 10-8 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 10-10.11. Penalties.
Any person, business or legal entity violating any of the provisions hereof
shall be subjected to the penalties set forth in chapter 10, section 10-9 of
the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
Chapter 11
§ 10-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-10.11
AO:213
SEWER AND WATER
§ 11-1. SEWER CONNECTION FEES.
§ 11-1.1. Charge Procedure.
In accordance with the powers granted to the borough by R.S. 40:48-1, et
seq., and 40:49-1, et seq., and to better protect the public welfare, health
safety and morals of the citizens of the borough, there shall be charged a
sewer connection fee in accordance with the following procedure.
§ 11-1.2. Permits and Applications.
Permits for sewer connections, both storm and sanitary, shall be provided
and shall be issued by the plumbing inspector. Application shall be made
therefor in writing upon forms to be supplied by the officer and these
applications shall be signed by the owner of the subject property, and/or his
duly authorized agent.
§ 11-1.3. Inspections Required.
Upon such application being made, the plumbing inspector shall notify
the borough engineer and health inspector who shall make inspections of
the installations which are sought to be connected within a period of 48
hours from the filing of such applications (weekends excepted) The borough
engineer, health inspector and plumbing inspection shall then proceed to
approve or disapprove the particular installation which is sought to be
connected, and if the installation is disapproved, the plumbing inspector,
upon receiving the report of the inspecting officers shall within 24 hours
notify the owner of the property and/or his agent.
In the case of those instances where the size of the installation requires a
series of inspections as work progresses, the plumbing inspector shall make
such inspections as are required to properly supervise each phase of the
construction or installation.
The inspecting officer shall at all times have the right to enter upon the
lands served by the sewerage system and/or the realty improvements for
said purposes.
§ 11-1.4. Conformance to Ordinances Required.
The installations shall be made and connected in accordance with the
borough building code, health code, sanitary code, planning and subdivision
ordinances, and any conditions which may appear upon any preliminary
and/or final plat filed by the owner of the property under consideration.
§ 11-1.5. Connection Fees.
If the installation sought to be connected is approved upon inspection as set
forth in subsection 11-1.2, the plumbing inspector, who is hereby granted
§ 10-10.11 ENGLEWOOD § 11-1.5
AO:214
authority to issue the permits, shall grant the same upon the payment by
the applicant of a fee in accordance with the following schedule for each
sanitary sewer connection:
§ 11-1.6. Map Required.
After the installation of the sewerage system the applicant shall submit
in duplicate a map with an overlay of the original plan, upon which
certification is based showing the location of the treatment plant, and
showing all utilities, construction units and connections in exact location
and elevation. The map shall bear the certification of the engineer designing
the system.
§ 11-1.7. Approval Required for Certificate of Occupancy.
No permit authorizing any such connection shall be granted until all
conditions are met in accordance with the requirements set forth in
subsection 11-1.4 and 11-1.5. Further, should the installation be
disapproved, the building inspector shall be immediately notified and he
shall not thereafter issue a certificate of occupancy until the installation has
been corrected to the satisfaction of the inspecting officers, who shall give
notice to him of such satisfactory installation and connection.
§ 11-1.8. Making Connection to Sewer After Disapproval.
Should any owner of property upon having made application for a permit
for a sewer connection which application was disapproved, connect to the
sewer facilities, either storm or sanitary, from the subject property, he shall
be notified upon the discovery of such installation and connection that the
connection is to be cut off within five days and should he fail to heed this
notice, then at the end of the five days he shall be subject to prosecution in
the municipal court for a breach of this section. Each day of violation shall
be considered a separate offense.
§ 11-1.9. Violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, on conviction
thereof; be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 10 days, and it shall be lawful for the officer before whom any
person may be brought, in the discretion of such officer, upon conviction,
to imprison for any term less than 10 days or to impose any fine less than
$100 and in default of the payment of any fine authorized by this section to
imprison any offender for a term not exceeding 10 days in the county jail.
a. Single-family residence - $125.
b. All other structures - $125 for the first inspection and $75 for each
subsequent inspection.
§ 11-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.10
AO:215
§ 11-1.10. Supplement to Existing Ordinances. [Ord. No. 151R § 11;
Ord. No. 2014-06]
This section shall be considered supplemental to any existing ordinances
within the borough having provisions consistent herewith.
§ 11-1.11. Additions, Renovations or New Construction:
Inspections; Fees; Violations and Penalties.
a. The owner of any property being served by the sewer system shall be
responsible for the maintenance and repair of the lateral line running
from any structure to the main sewer line of the Borough.
a. For any additions, renovations or any new construction, the owner shall
be responsible to have a TV inspection of all sewer lines whether
existing, new or being replaced and shall submit the inspection to the
department of public works superintendent or his designated
representatives to verify same to assure the integrity of the sewer
system and the connections and shall further supply a CD/DVD of such
inspection and a written report indicating the findings of said
inspection. The costs of same to be paid by the owner of the property.
b. The conditions of this subsection shall not apply wherein additional
renovation or new construction has not taken place, but merely the
installation of apparatus such as air ducts for air conditioning,
generators and similar items.
c. The owner shall further pay an impact charge for the ongoing
maintenance and inspection of the borough's sanitary sewer system and
the effects, if any, of the improvements of said additions, renovations or
new construction.
d. The imposition of said charges are for the purpose of the inspection and
repairs, maintenance and upkeep of the present sanitary sewer system.
e. If the use of said property is for residential uses, the owner shall pay a
sewer fee charge of $2,000 in regard to all new construction or
replacement construction and for any renovations or additions where
the building fee permit is based on a value in excess of $25,000. Said
fee shall be paid upon application for a building permit.
f. Commercial properties shall be charged a sewer fee charge of $10,000
in regard to all new construction or replacement construction and for
any renovations or additions where the building fee is based on a value
in excess of $25,000. Said fee shall be paid upon application for a
building permit.
g. Violations and penalties.
1. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall,
for each and every violation thereof and for each and every day that
said violation continues to be in existence, upon conviction thereof,
§ 11-1.10 ENGLEWOOD § 11-1.11
AO:216
§ 11-2. USE OF GARBAGE DISPOSAL UNITS PROHIBITED.
No garbage disposal unit shall be connected with the sewer system of the
borough, nor be permitted to discharge its effluent therein.
§ 11-3. BERGEN COUNTY SEWAGE AUTHORITY.
§ 11-3.1. Preamble.
Pursuant to Chapter 123 of the Pamphlet Laws of 1946 of the State of
New Jersey, a sewage district was established by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the County of Bergen adopted February 19, 1947;
pursuant to the Chapter 123, there was thereupon created for said sewage
district the Bergen County-Hackensack River Sanitary Sewer District
Authority (now the Bergen County Sewer Authority) and the Board of
Chosen Freeholders has duly appointed the commissioners thereof who
have duly qualified; and pursuant to the Chapter 123, an agreement with
the authority for the disposal of sewage from the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs, has been submitted to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, which
agreement is more particularly set forth in subsection 11-3.3. It appears
after due consideration that it is in the best interest of the borough to enter
in the agreement.
§ 11-3.2. Agreement Entered.
The borough shall enter into an agreement with the Bergen County Sewer
Authority for the disposal of sewage of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as
more particularly set forth in subsection 11-3.2.
§ 11-3.3. Form of Agreement.
The agreement shall be in substantially the following form, and the terms
and conditions thereof are hereby approved and specifically agreed to:
AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT made as of the ______________ day of 20______
BETWEEN
THE BERGEN COUNTY SEWER AUTHORITY (hereinafter referred to as
the "Authority") a body politic and corporate of the State of New Jersey,
be subject to a penalty not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 30 days or to community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days per violation at the discretion of the
magistrate of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
2. Failure to obtain the proper permit, make satisfactory
improvements, as determined by the superintendent of public
works or his designee, or pay the proper permit fee shall be
considered a violation and shall be punishable under this
subsection.
§ 11-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:217
AND
THE BOROUGH OF ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS, a municipal corporation of the
State of New Jersey situate in the County of Bergen, hereinafter referred
to as "Municipality."
WITNESSETH
RECITALS
1. Pursuant to the Act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled:
"An Act relating to the establishment of Sewerage districts in first and
second class counties, the creation of Sanitary Sewer District Authorities
by the establishing of such district, prescribing the powers and duties
of any such authority and of other public bodies in connection with the
construction of sewers and sewage disposal facilities in any such district,
and providing the ways and means for paying the costs of construction and
operation thereof," approved April 23, 1946, constituting Chapter 123 of
the Laws of 1946 (hereinafter, with the acts amendatory thereof, referred
to as "Act"), a sewage district (hereinafter referred to as "Sewer Districts")
was established by resolution of the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the
County of Bergen, New Jersey, adopted on February 19, 1947. The Sewer
District comprises 50 municipal corporations situate in said County of
Bergen, and the Municipality is a part thereof.
2. As provided in the Act, the Authority was created for the Sewer District
and is a body politic and corporate with perpetual succession as a
governmental instrumentality for the purpose, among others, of the
protection of public safety, health and welfare and has all the proper or
necessary powers to design, finance, construct, acquire and operate such
a system (hereinafter referred to as the "Complete Sewer System") of
trunk, intercepting and outlet sewers, pumping and ventilating stations,
treatment plants and other plants and structures as in its judgment will
provide the most effectual and advantageous plan or method for relieving
the Hackensack River and its tributaries and other streams, whether
navigable or otherwise, within the Sewer District from pollution and for
preventing pollution of the same.
§ 11-3.3 ENGLEWOOD § 11-3.3
AO:218
3. Pursuant to the Act, the Authority did with all practicable speed cause
to be prepared a project report dated July, 1947, and a project report
dated December, 1952, and a project report dated December 10, 1953,
together with maps, designs and costs and other estimates all in conformity
with the Act (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Prior Project
Report"), showing a proposed plan or method of construction of a part
(hereinafter referred to as the "Overpeck Valley System") of the Complete
Sewer System serving the portion of the Sewer District known as the
Overpeck Valley area, being an area in which the Municipality is located
either in whole or in part, and pursuant to said Prior Project Report
the Authority has constructed a portion of the Overpeck Valley System
including trunk, intercepting and outlet sewers, a treatment plant,
pumping stations and other works serving in whole or in part the Borough
of Cliffside Park, the City of Englewood, the Borough of Fairview, the
Borough of Fort Lee, the Borough of Leonia, the Borough of Palisades Park,
the Borough of Ridgefield, the Village of Ridgefield Park, the Township of
Teaneck, the Borough of Tenafly and the Borough of Cresskill.
4. Pursuant to the Act, the Authority did with all practicable speed cause
to be prepared a project report dated December 7, 1955, together with
maps, designs and costs and other estimates all in conformity with the
Act (hereinafter referred to as the "1955 Project Report") relating to the
Overpeck Valley System and showing a proposed plan or method of
construction, as a part of the Complete Sewer System, of an intercepter
sewer in the City of Englewood and Borough of Englewood Cliffs
connecting with the existing truck sewer of the Authority at a point on
the north border of New Jersey Highway Route No. 4 near Jones Road
and extending from such connection in a general northwardly direction
and generally along the course of Flat Rock Brook to a point at or near
the Englewood Cliffs-Englewood boundary line (said intercepter sewer,
together with all necessary works and facilities appurtent thereto, being
hereinafter referred to as the "Englewood Cliffs Extension").
5. Copies of the Prior Project Report and the 1955 Project Report have
been supplied and submitted to the governing body of the Municipality
and to other bodies and in other places as required by the Act, and the
Prior Project Report and the 1955 Project Report are on file in the office of
the Authority and by this reference are made a part hereof and are made
subject to the provisions of this Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the Act, and in consideration of the
premises and of the mutual covenants and undertakings herein contained,
it is hereby covenanted and agreed by and between the Municipality and
its successors, and the Authority, as follows:
ARTICLE I
THE DISTRICT SEWER SYSTEM
§ 11-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:219
The Authority, pursuant to the Act and in the exercise of its discretion,
has heretofore deferred consideration of and action regarding all parts
of the Complete Sewer System except the Overpeck Valley System, and
shall hereafter, in the exercise of such discretion, defer consideration of
and action regarding only those parts of the Complete Sewer System not
constituting the Overpeck Valley System or the Englewood Cliffs Extension.
For all purposes of this Agreement, the Englewood Cliffs Extension shall be
deemed to be and shall constitute a part of the District Sewer System of
the Authority as that term is defined and used in the Agreements dated as
of November 23, 1948 and November 13, 1953, between the Authority and
municipal corporations of the State of New Jersey situate in the County of
Bergen, and the Englewood Cliffs Extension, together with the Overpeck
Valley System, is hereinafter referred to as the "District Sewer System."
ARTICLE II
CONSTRUCTION OF DISTRICT SEWER SYSTEM
Upon the taking effect of this Agreement and subject to the conditions
and provisions of the Act, the Authority shall with all practicable speed
commence and proceed with the construction and completion of the
District Sewer System, including the Englewood Cliffs Extension in
accordance with the Prior Project Report and the 1955 Project Report,
provided, however, that (a) the Authority, notwithstanding any of the
provisions of the Prior Project Report or the 1955 Project Report, shall
have full discretion in the determination of the size, capacity, route and
location of all trunk, intercepting and outlet sewers, pumping and filtering
stations, treatment plants and works or other plans and structures, and (b)
the Authority shall have full discretion to make any change in any estimate
or calculation in the Prior Project Report or the 1955 Project Report, and
(c) the Authority may proceed with the construction and acquisition of
the District Sewer System and commence its operation in such sections
or parts of the whole or only at such time or times as the Authority may
deem proper and expedient and consistent with the plan or purpose of the
Act. This Agreement when effective shall continue and be binding upon
the Municipality notwithstanding any exercise of such discretion by the
Authority contrary to the provisions, estimates or calculations or any other
conditions of the Prior Project Report or the 1955 Project Report.
ARTICLE III
OPERATION OF DISTRICT SEWER SYSTEM
Upon completion of and acceptance of the District Sewer System the
Authority shall, as soon as practicable, cause the same to be put into
operation, and shall operate, repair and maintain the District Sewer
System so as to effectuate and carry out the plan and purposes of the Act.
ARTICLE IV
CONNECTIONS TO DISTRICT SEWER SYSTEM
§ 11-3.3 ENGLEWOOD § 11-3.3
AO:220
The Municipality shall, upon notice from the Authority, cause and at all
times permit its sewer or drainage system or the outfall thereof to be
connected with the District Sewer System at the point or points designated
in the 1955 Project Report or at such other point or points as the Authority
and the Municipality may mutually agree upon, the said connection to
be so made and constructed as to deliver and discharge into the District
Sewer System all of the sewage as defined in the Act arising within or
collected or caused by the Municipality and not delivered by it into sewers
or other facilities owned by the City of Englewood or Borough of Tenafly
discharging into the District Sewer System. The Municipality shall be
responsible for and pay the costs of the delivery and discharge of sewage
to and into such point or points of connection.
ARTICLE V
INSTALLATION OF METERS BY AUTHORITY
Upon the making of connections with the District Sewer System as
provided in Article IV, the Authority shall provide and install meters or
other approved devices or establish other procedures for the measuring
of the flow of all sewage which shall be delivered and discharged into the
District Sewer System by the Municipality.
ARTICLE VI
APPROVAL OF THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Before construction of any kind whatsoever with respect to the Englewood
Cliffs Extension is commenced under any contract or otherwise, the plans
and specifications for such construction shall be submitted by the Authority
to the State Department of Health of New Jersey for approval as a sanitary
measure, and a permit shall be obtained by the Authority from said State
Department of Health to proceed with the work.
ARTICLE VII
FISCAL YEAR
A Fiscal Year of the Authority begins on the first day of January in each
year, and, wherever used in this Agreement unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context, the term "year" or "Fiscal Year" means a
Fiscal Year of the Authority.
ARTICLE VIII
ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES BY AUTHORITY
§ 11-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:221
The Authority may prescribe and change from time to time rates to be
charged under the Act and under this Agreement, for the discharge and
disposal of sewage through the District Sewer System. Such rates shall
be prescribed and from time to time revised so that the Authority and the
District Sewer System shall be and always remain self supporting with
earnings sufficient to provide for all expenses of operation, maintenance,
depreciation and repair, including establishment and maintenance of
working capital and reserves, and the payment and security of the principal
of and interest on any bonds issued or to be issued pursuant to the Act,
so as to prevent the accrual of any deficit. Such rates shall be based
upon the total annual volume of sewage from municipalities, private sewer
companies, industries or other institutions discharged or disposed of
through the District Sewer System, and shall be uniform throughout the
Sewer District for the same type, class and amount of use or service
of the District Sewer System, provided, however, that the Authority may
include in such rates provisions, in its discretion, for surcharges giving
weight to the characteristics of the sewage and other wastes discharged
or disposed of through the District Sewer System and any other special
matter affecting the cost of treatment and disposal of such sewage and
other wastes, including but not limited to chlorine demand, biochemical
oxygen demand, concentration of solids and chemicals composition.
ARTICLE IX
CALCULATION OF ANNUAL RATES
On or before the fifteenth day of January, or in each Fiscal Year, the
Authority shall calculate the rate or rates upon which are to be based the
payment to be made to it during the current year pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this Agreement. Such rates shall be established in accordance
with Article VIII and with the Act and shall include such surcharges as the
Authority in its discretion may determine and shall be calculated to provide
such amount as the Authority reasonably estimates will be required (in
addition to any funds on hand applicable to such purposes) during such
Fiscal Year for payment and security of the principal of and interest on any
of the bonds or other obligations authorized by the Act and for the cost of
the operation, maintenance, depreciation and repair of the District Sewer
System, including establishment and maintenance of working capital and
reserves. The provisions of this Article IX and of Article VIII and Article
X and of Sections 43, 45 and 47 of the Act shall be deemed a contract
between the Authority and the holders of all bonds or other obligations
authorized by the Act, and issued by the Authority and shall be enforceable
by appropriate proceedings at law or in equity.
ARTICLE X
CALCULATION AND CERTIFICATION OF ANNUAL PAYMENTS
A
§ 11-3.3 ENGLEWOOD § 11-3.3
AO:222
On or before the seventeenth day of January in any year beginning after
the effective date of this Agreement, the Authority shall calculate and
certify to the Municipality the amount of money which it shall be required
to pay to the Authority during the year. As to the Municipality, such
amount shall be calculated by the Authority by applying said rate or rates
(including any applicable surcharges as provided for in Article VIII and
Article IX) to the volume and characteristics of the sewage delivered and
discharged in to the District Sewer System by the Municipality during
the year ending on the last day of December, next preceding as shown
by the records of the Authority or, if there is no record covering such
deliver and discharge during a full year, then (1) if the sewer or drainage
system of the Municipality or the outfall thereof has not previously been
connected with the District Sewer System as provided in Article IV, to
the volume of sewage (if any) which the Authority then estimates will be
delivered and declared by the Municipality into the District Sewer System
during the year following such last day of December, or (2) if the sewer or
drainage system of the Municipality or the outfall thereof has previously
been connected with the District Sewer System as provided in Article IV, to
the volume of sewage which the Authority them estimates will be delivered
and discharged by the Municipality into the District Sewer System during
the first full year following the making of such connection.
B
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, the amount of
money certified pursuant to the paragraph A of this Article, to the
Municipality in each year shall in no event be less than the amount
(hereinafter referred to as the "Base Charge") obtained by aggregating
(1) the principal and interest payable by the Authority in such year with
respect to bonds or other obligations issued to finance costs in connection
with the Englewood Cliffs Extension plus such part of the costs estimated
by the Authority for such year of the operation, maintenance, depreciation
and repair of the District Sewer System as is properly attributable to the
Englewood Cliffs Extension or the sewage and other wastes delivered and
discharged into the Englewood Cliffs Extension, and deducting therefrom
(2) the amount, if any, calculated by applying the rate or rates referred
to in said paragraph A to the volume of the sewage delivered during
the year ending on the last day of December next proceeding by the
Municipality into sewers or other facilities owned by the City of Englewood
or Borough of Tenafly discharging into the District Sewer System as shown
by any meters or other devices, satisfactory to the Authority, for measuring
such volume which shall have been installed by or at the expense of the
Municipality, and if with respect to any year the Base Charge shall exceed
the amount calculated in or for such year pursuant to said paragraph A,
the Municipality shall in such year pay to the Authority as provided in
this Agreement the amount of the said Base Charge and the amount of
said Base Charge shall in such year be certified to the Municipality by
the Authority as provided in said paragraph A instead of the said amount
calculated pursuant to said paragraph A.
§ 11-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:223
ARTICLE XI
PAYMENTS BY MUNICIPALITY
A
The Municipality shall in each year make provision for all payments to
become due from it to the Authority pursuant to Article X and shall pay
to the Authority for the services rendered or to be rendered to it in the
disposal of sewage, in each year in equal quarterly payments as hereinafter
stated, the amount of money certified to it in or for such year by the
Authority pursuant to said Article X. Such equal quarterly payments shall
be due on and be made on or before the first days of February, May, August
and November of each year.
B
In any part of any such installment or payment due to the Authority from
a Municipality shall remain unpaid for 30 days following its due date, the
Municipality shall be charged with and pay to the Authority interest on the
amount unpaid from its due date until paid at the rate of 8% per annum,
and the Authority in its discretion and without releasing the Municipality
from any obligation hereunder may refuse to permit the Municipality to
discharge sewage into the District Sewer System during the period of such
default and, at the expense of the Municipality, may shut off from the
District Sewer System, and upon the curing of such default reconnect, the
sewer or drainage system of the Municipality or outfall thereof.
C
The provisions of this Article XI and Section 57 of the Act shall be deemed a
contract between the Municipality and the holders of all bonds authorized
by the Act and shall be enforceable by appropriate action at law or suit in
equity.
ARTICLE XII
RECORDS OF AUTHORITY
The Authority shall make and keep permanent records of the rates
established by the Authority and the volume of sewage delivered and
discharged into the District Sewer System by the Municipality and all other
users of the District Sewer System.
ARTICLE XIII
TERM OF CONTRACT
This Agreement is perpetual in time, provided, however, that this
Agreement shall be null and void and have no further force and effect
on or after December 31, 1956, unless the Authority shall have at that
time commenced the construction and acquisition of the Englewood Cliffs
Extension or some part thereof.
ARTICLE XIV
ENLARGEMENT AND EXPANSION OF DISTRICT SEWER SYSTEM
§ 11-3.3 ENGLEWOOD § 11-3.3
AO:224
The District Sewer System may be enlarged and expanded and such
District Sewer System so enlarged and expanded shall be the District
Sewer System for all the purposes of this Agreement.
ARTICLE XV
REMEDIES BY AUTHORITY
Every obligation assumed by or imposed upon the Municipality by this
Agreement or pursuant to the Act shall be enforceable by the Authority
by proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ or other appropriate action or
proceeding instituted by the Authority.
ARTICLE XVI
CONTRACTS WITH PRIVATE SEWER COMPANIES AND INDUSTRIES
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the Authority
from entering into agreements in accordance with the Act with any private
sewer company or industry or with any other municipality for the treatment
and disposal through the District Sewer System or otherwise of sewage or
other wastes.
ARTICLE XVII
EFFECTIVE DATE
Upon the execution of this Agreement by the Municipality and by the
Authority, the same shall be in full force and effect and be legally binding
upon the Authority and upon the Municipality.
ARTICLE XVIII
PRIOR AGREEMENTS NOT AFFECTED
This Agreement shall not be construed to alter, amend, modify, or
supersede the terms of the certain agreements dated as of November
23, 1948 and November 13, 1953, between the Authority and municipal
corporations of the State of New Jersey situate in the County of Bergen,
but said agreements remain in full force and effect.
ARTICLE XIX
EXECUTION OF COUNTERPARTS
This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, all or any of
which shall be regarded for all purposes as one original and shall constitute
and be but one and the same instrument.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Municipality and the Authority have caused
their respective corporate seals to be hereunto affixed and attested and
these presents to be signed in their respective corporate names by their
respective officers thereunto duly authorized and this Agreement to be
dated as of the day and year first above written.
§ 11-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:225
BERGEN COUNTY SEWER AUTHORITY
By:
Harry E. Forsthoff. Chairman
ATTEST:
BOROUGH OF ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS
By:
Mayor
ATTEST:
Borough Clerk
§ 11-3.4. Mayor to Affix Corporate Seal.
The mayor shall be and he hereby is authorized and directed on behalf of the
borough to execute the agreement under the corporate seal of the borough,
which shall be affixed and attested by the borough clerk, and to deliver the
same.
§ 11-4. USER CHARGE SYSTEM AND INDUSTRIAL COST
RECOVERY SYSTEM.
§ 11-4.1. Preamble.
The Federal government has enacted and amended the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, now known as the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
1150 et seq.); and
The Bergen County Utilities Authority has enacted rules and regulations,
as required by the Federal Clean Water Act incorporating an industrial cost
recovery system, a user charge system, and regulations pertaining to the
use of sanitary sewers: and
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs is within the district serviced by the
Bergen County Utilities Authority and has contracted with the Bergen
County Utilities Authority for the removal and treatment of the wastewater
contained within the sanitary sewers of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs:
and
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs desires to assure that the sanitary sewers
operated and maintained by it will conform to the best sanitary engineering
practices and comply with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act.
§ 11-3.3 ENGLEWOOD § 11-4.2
AO:226
§ 11-4.2. Compliance with Bergen County Utilities Authority.
The use of all sanitary sewers of the borough shall be in compliance with
the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
§ 11-4.3. Systems Adopted.
The borough hereby adopts and enacts the user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system contained in the rules and regulations of
the Bergen County Utilities Authority, and authorize their immediate
implementation by the appropriate municipal official, to be designated by
resolution of the governing body.
§ 11-4.4. Copies on File.
Not fewer than three copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the office of the clerk of
the borough and are available for public inspection during normal business
hours.
§ 11-4.5. Copies Available for Cost.
Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority
can be obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of
publication.
§ 11-5. SUMP PUMPS OR OTHER DISCHARGE OF WATER INTO
SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
§ 11-5.1. Legislative Intent.
The mayor and council hereby declares its intent to regulate and control
the flow of any ground or surface waters except sanitary sewer waters into
its sanitary sewer system. It is the intent of this section to prevent ground
waters, surface waters, and any other waters from entering the Englewood
Cliffs Sanitary Sewer System by means of sump pumps, storm drains or any
other devices and to provide penalties for the violation of same.
§ 11-5.2. Duties of Construction Official.
Whenever it is necessary for a property owner to obtain a certificate of
occupancy or a continued certificate of occupancy and/or there is a transfer
of any ownership of any residence or commercial building, the construction
official shall be required to perform the following duties and acts:
Upon application for a certificate of occupancy or continued certificate of
occupancy, the fire subcode official shall inspect, within 10 days, excluding
weekends and holidays, the subject premises in order to determine whether
any sump pumps or drains or other mechanical devices are discharging any
waters into the sanitary sewer system. In the event that he determines that
there is such discharge, no certificate of occupancy or continued certificate
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5.2
AO:227
of occupancy shall be issued to the possessor of said property until said
condition is removed. Upon the inspection of such dwelling, the fire subcode
official shall file an appropriate affidavit indicating that said inspection has
been made and shall file same with the borough clerk.
§ 11-5.3. Connections Prohibited.
a. No person shall connect a sump pump, drain or any other mechanical or
nonmechanical device which shall discharge unsanitary sewage waters
into the sanitary sewer system of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
b. No commercial building shall be constructed unless all roof leaders are
connected directly to a storm drain system or a dry well and in no event
shall they be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
c. In the event any owner of property applies for a building permit to
enlarge an existing building or to construct an additional building on
his property, then in that event, prior to a certificate of occupancy being
issued, all roof drains on the property that are presently connected to
the sanitary sewer system must be disconnected and connected to
either a dry well and/or the storm drain system of the municipality.
d. Any permit for re-roofing or a new roof issued in regard to a roof which
is 7,500 square feet in area or greater shall require all roof leaders to
be connected to either a storm drain or dry well. If any roof leaders then
in existence are connected to any sanitary sewer system, they shall be
disconnected from any sewer that they are connected to and
reconnected to either a storm drain or dry well. In no event shall any
roof leader continue to be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
e. Prior to re-roofing or installing a new roof which is 7,500 square feet in
area or greater, the owner or his representative shall make application
to the borough for a roof permit in regard to same.
f. The fee for said permit shall be $200.
g. The construction official or his designee shall review the application
and make an inspection to ascertain whether or not any roof drains are
presently connected to the sanitary sewer system of Englewood Cliffs or
will be connected as a result of said construction.
h. No roof permit shall be issued unless the construction official, or his
designee, is satisfied that no drains will be connected to said system
and furthermore any drains presently connected shall be disconnected.
i. The construction official shall issue a permit for said repair or
reconstruction upon the applicant satisfying the provisions of this
section.
§ 11-5.2 ENGLEWOOD § 11-5.3
AO:228
§ 11-5.4. Violations.
In the event that the owner of real property in the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs violates any subsection of this section, the construction official shall
be empowered to give notice to the property owner of the violation of same
and the same shall be corrected within 30 days thereof. In the event that the
property owner fails to comply with the order of the construction official,
they shall be determined to be in violation of this section.
§ 11-5.5. Right to Enter Upon Lands.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this section, the borough
construction official, or his designee, shall have the right to enter into and
upon any lands for which an application has been filed and may examine
and inspect such lands.
§ 11-5.6. Enforcement Officer.
The construction official or his designee is hereby designated as the
enforcement officer.
§ 11-5.7. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not exceeding $1,000 and/or
to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days and/or to community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days for each and every day that said
violation continues to exist.
§ 11-6. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE
STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
§ 11-6.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 11-6.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
j. Upon completion of the work the construction official, or his designee,
shall re-inspect the work in order to determine whether or not the
conditions of this section have been fulfilled.
§ 11-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.2
AO:229
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES
permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General permit
(NJPDES Permit Number NJ 141852). Nonphysical connections may
include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basin, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement to the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14a.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may, however, contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waster product. Process wastewater includes, but
is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
§ 11-6.2 ENGLEWOOD § 11-6.2
AO:230
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 11-6.3. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs, any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
§ 11-6.4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police department or
the superintendent of the department of public works or his designee of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 11-6.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not exceeding $1,000
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or to community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 11-7. IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
§ 11-7.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm water
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 11-7.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
§ 11-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7.2
AO:231
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 11-7.3. Prohibited Conduct.
§ 11-7.4. Exceptions to Prohibition.
a. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of
materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is
also prohibited.
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
c. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
h. Flows from firefighting activities.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
1. Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
2. Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
§ 11-7.2 ENGLEWOOD § 11-7.4
AO:232
§ 11-7.5. Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the police department and the
superintendent of the department of public works of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ 11-7.6. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 11-8. USER CHARGES FOR NON-TAX-EXEMPT PROPERTIES.
§ 11-8.1. Preamble.
The Federal Government has enacted and amended the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, now known as the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
1150 et seq);
The Bergen County Utilities Authority has enacted rules and regulations, as
required by the Federal Clean Water Act in incorporating an industrial cost
recovery system, a user charge system, and regulations pertaining to the
use of sanitary sewers; and
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs is within the district serviced by the
Bergen County Utilities Authority and has contracted with the Bergen
County Utilities Authority for the removal and treatment of the wastewater
contained within the sanitary sewers of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs,
and
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs desires to assure that the sanitary sewers
operated and maintained by it will conform to the best sanitary engineering
practices and comply with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act.
§ 11-8.2. Compliance with Bergen County Utilities Authority.
The use of all sanitary sewers of the borough shall be in compliance with
the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
§ 11-8.3. System Adopted.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
a. The borough hereby adopts and enacts the user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system contained in the rules and regulations
of the Bergen County Utilities Authority, and authorize their immediate
implementation by the appropriate municipal official, to be designated
by resolution of the governing body.
§ 11-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-8.3
AO:233
§ 11-8.4. Copies on File.
Not fewer than three copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the office of the clerk of
the borough and are available for public inspection during normal business
hours.
§ 11-8.5. Copies Available for Cost.
Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority
can be obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of
publication.
§ 11-8.6. Amount of Charges.
The annual user charge shall be computed on the previous calendar year's
amount of water used and the current calendar year's charges imposed
by the Bergen County Utilities Authority upon the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs, together with all appropriate administrative costs for the operation
and maintenance of the Englewood Cliffs Sewer System.
§ 11-8.7. Exemption from User Charge.
There shall be allowed an exemption from the annual user charge for
all residential usage less than 300,000 gallons of water used, with the
exception of apartments for which provision is made hereinafter. With
respect to apartments, the exemption shall apply to usage less than 300,000
gallons of water used with respect to each separate and individual living
unit within the apartment complex.
§ 11-8.8. Allowances.
b. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the borough from challenging
any amendments to the rules and regulations which may be hereafter
adopted.
a. No allowance shall be made for water which is metered but which does
not enter the sanitary sewer system, unless the owner installs and
maintains, at his expense, a meter approved by the Borough to measure
the water so diverted from the sewer line.
b. In case of business or industry, where water is lost by evaporation, the
borough engineer, with the approval of the council, may make a proper
allowance for such evaporation.
c. Where sprinkler systems are maintained, a proper credit shall be given
for water contained or passing through such sprinkler system, which
water does not reach a sanitary sewer line.
d. Any owner may install and maintain, at his expense, a sewage flow
meter, approved by the borough engineer, to measure the flow into the
sewer lines. Where such a sewage flow is maintained, the owner shall
§ 11-8.3 ENGLEWOOD § 11-8.8
AO:234
§ 11-8.9. Transitional Provisions.
Chapter 12
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL CODE
§ 12-1. TITLE AND POLICY.
§ 12-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited as the air pollution control
code of the borough.
§ 12-1.2. Findings and Declaration of Policy.
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders,
soot, flyash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants
is a menace to the health, welfare, and comfort of the residents of the
borough and a cause of substantial damage to property. For the purpose of
be billed on the actual reading of such meter, at the same rate as
determined hereinabove.
e. In any specific case not contemplated or not clearly defined herein or
where the type of waste will place an extraordinary burden on the
sewage facilities either because of its quantity or its quality, the
borough council is hereby authorized, by contract or otherwise, to
establish a specific rate as may be necessary.
a. As soon as practical after the passage of this section, the chief financial
officer and the tax collector shall attend to the preparation of bills for
the period beginning the first day of the month following final passage
and publication of this section and ending December 31, 2007, such
period being hereinafter referred to as "the billing year of 2007."
b. User charges for the billing year 2007 shall be equal to the pro-rata
amount of the user charges which would have been imposed upon each
user for the calendar year 2007, under the terms of this section.
c. Bills for the year 2007 shall be mailed by the tax collector of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs to the owners of all properties incurring
such charges not later than July 1, 2007.
d. Bills for the billing year 2007 are due and payable to the tax collector on
October 1, 2007. If such charges are not paid in full as of that date, the
unpaid charges shall be deemed delinquent as of that date, and such
unpaid charges shall become a lien upon the properties incurring them
as of that date.
e. Except as modified by subsection 11-8.8, user charges for the billing
year 2007 shall be subject to all of the provisions of this section.
§ 11-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1.2
AO:235
controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to be
the policy of the borough to minimize air pollution as herein defined and
prohibit excessive emission of the same, to establish standards governing
the installation, maintenance and operation of equipment and
appurtenances relating to combustion which are a source or potential
source of air pollution, and in furtherance of this purpose to cooperate
and coordinate these efforts with the State Department of Environmental
Protection, Air Pollution Control Program.
§ 12-2. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter. The following terms wherever used herein of
referred to in this code shall have the respective meanings assigned to them
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
a. AIR POLLUTION – Shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere
of one or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are,
or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant
life, to property, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of
life or property throughout the borough as shall be affected thereby,
and excludes all aspects of employer-employee relationships as to
health and safety hazards.
b. ECONOMIC POISONS – Shall mean those chemicals used as
insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides, or
defoliants.
c. FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT – Shall mean any furnace, boiler, water
heater, device, mechanism, stoker, burner, stack oven, stove, kiln, still
or other apparatus, or a group or collection of such units in the process
of fuel burning for the generation of heat or power. Refuse burning
equipment, shall be considered incinerators as herein defined and not
as fuel-burning equipment under this definition. Ovens, stoves, or
ranges used exclusively for domestic cooking purposes are not included
herein.
d. INCINERATOR – Shall mean any device apparatus, equipment or
structure used for destroying, reducing, or salvaging by fire any
material or substance, including but not limited to refuse, rubbish,
garbage, debris, or scrap or facilities for cremating human or animal
remains.
e. ODOR – Shall mean a property of a substance which affects the sense of
smell.
f. OPEN BURNING – Shall mean any fire wherein the products of
combustion are emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto
through a stack or chimney.
g. OPERATOR – Shall mean any person who has care, custody, or control
of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without
knowledge of the owner thereof.
§ 12-1.2 ENGLEWOOD § 12-2
AO:236
§ 12-3. OPEN AIR BURNING PROHIBITED.
h. OWNER – Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have
charge, care, or control of any premises or part thereof including but
not limited to a dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the
owner, or as a fiduciary, including but not limited to: executor,
administrator, trustee, receiver, guardian, or as a mortgagee in
possession regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person
who is a lessee or sublessee of all or any part of any premises, including
but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling unit, shall be deemed to be a
co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility with the
owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased or subleased.
i. PERSON – Shall mean and include corporations, companies,
associations, societies, firms, partnerships, and joint stock companies,
as well as individuals.
j. RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART – Shall mean Ringelmann's Scale for
Grading the Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau
of Mines, or any chart, recorder, indicator or divide for the
measurement of smoke density which is approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection as the equivalent of the
Ringelmann's Scale.
k. RUBBISH – Shall mean solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, and shall include but not be limited to rags, old clothes,
leather, rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches,
yard trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry, and other
similar materials.
l. SALVAGE OPERATIONS – Shall mean any business, trade, or industry
engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or
material, including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping
containers, or drums.
m. SMOKE – Shall mean small gas-borne and airborne particles arising
from a process of combustion in sufficient observable.
n. TRADE WASTE – Shall mean all solid and liquid material or rubbish
resulting from construction, building operations, or the prosecution of
any business, trade or industry and shall include but not be limited to
plastic products, carton, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum
products, chemicals, cinders, and other forms of solid or liquid waste
materials.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit, open burning of refuse or
plant life nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning except as
provided in paragraph b.
§ 12-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3
AO:237
§ 12-4. SMOKE EMISSIONS FROM FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT.
§ 12-5. INCINERATOR REGULATION.
§ 12-5.1. Smoke Emissions.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit, smoke from any incinerator,
the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air; or emissions of such opacity
within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity
leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated
as No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
§ 12-5.2. New Fires.
The provisions of subsection 12-5.1 shall not apply to smoke emitted during
the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker
than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of no longer than
three consecutive minutes; or to emissions of such opacity within a stack
or chimney or exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or
chimney to a degree which is not greater than the emissions designated as
No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period no longer than three
consecutive minutes.
§ 12-5.3. Visible Particles.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles of
unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually large
enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
b. The open burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other
known method of disposal can be used without hazard to health or
property and the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by
the commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with Chapter II, of
Environmental Protection in accordance with Chapter II, Section 1.4 of
the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit, smoke from any fuelburning
equipment, the shade of appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted in the open air.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: Smoke emitted during
the cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, for a period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes
in any 15 consecutive minutes.
§ 12-3 ENGLEWOOD § 12-5.4
AO:238
§ 12-5.4. Odors.
No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used, any incinerator
which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell in any area of
human use or occupancy.
§ 12-5.5. Limitation on Time of Operation.
No person shall operate, and no owner or operator of any building in the
borough shall permit the operation of an incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m. of any day, and all operation shall be completely terminated
by 5:00 p.m., including complete extinction of the fire and removal of
material in a safe manner from the firebox to a noncombustible container;
provided, however that by special permit, the borough council may, because
of exceptional circumstances permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of
the public or of persons in the vicinity.
§ 12-6. PROHIBITION OF AIR POLLUTION.
No person or owner of property, and no person having possession or control
of property, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 12-7. INSPECTIONS AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
§ 12-7.1. Construction Code Officials's Duty.
All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
by the construction code official or his duly authorized representatives. All
rooms and areas in the building shall be available and accessible for such
inspection which shall be made during usual business hours if the premises
are used for nonresidential purposes; provided however, that inspections
may be made at other times if:
§ 12-7.2. Emergency Inspections; Inspection Refused.
Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
construction code official has reason to believe that a condition exists which
poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall
a. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection; or
b. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection during other
than the prescribed hours; or
c. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an
immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
§ 12-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.2
AO:239
take place only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance
of a warrant would render ineffective and immediate action necessary to
abate the condition. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by
the governor in times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with
R.S. 26:2C-32. Where the construction code official or his duly authorized
representatives is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or
prevented by the owner, occupant, or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this code and
subject to the penalties hereunder.
§ 12-7.3. Search Warrant or Access Warrant.
Construction code official may, upon affidavit, apply to the judge of the
municipal court of the borough for a search warrant setting forth factually
the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for
believing that a nuisance or violation of the code may exist on the premises,
including one or more of the following:
§ 12-8. PENALTIES.
a. That the premises require inspection according to the cycle established
by the building inspector for periodic inspections or premises of the
type involved.
b. That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash, soot,
odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief
that violations of this code exist;
c. Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment and/
or system, types of incinerator, particular use of premises or other
factor which renders systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
If the judge of the municipal court of the borough is satisfied as to the matters
set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant
permitting access to the inspection of that part of the premises on which the
nuisance or violation may exist.
a. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code, or who
shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be punishable as a disorderly person in accordance with the
general penalty as set forth in the Disorderly Persons Act of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey.
b. The violation of any section or subsection of this code shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this code. Each
day of violation shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct
offense.
§ 12-7.2 ENGLEWOOD § 12-9
AO:240
§ 12-9. CONSTRUCTION.
This code is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed, however, to the extent that the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed inconsistent with the provisions of the
zoning chapter and the ordinances supplementary thereto and admendatory
thereof, the provisions of the zoning chapter as supplemented and amended
shall control and shall supersede the provisions of the chapter. To the
extent that the terms of this chapter refers to uses prohibited by the zoning
chapter and the ordinances supplementary thereto and amendatory thereof,
the uses contained herein shall not be deemed to supersede or amend
the uses prohibited in the zoning chapter as supplemented and amended
and the prohibitions contained in the zoning chapter as supplemented and
amended shall obtain.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed incorporated by reference
in the zoning chapter as supplemented and amended.
Chapter 13
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION
§ 13-1. STREET OPENINGS.
§ 13-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter.
§ 13-1.2. General Conditions.
a. STREET – Shall mean any dedicated public thoroughfare, road, avenue
or highway, whether accepted or unaccepted, including the sidewalk
area.
b. ROADWAY – Shall mean that portion of the street lying between the
curb lines.
c. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS or SUPERINTENDENT –
Means the superintendent of public works appointed by the mayor and
council, or such person as shall succeed to his office, powers and duties
and is hereby designated the enforcement officer to enforce the
provisions of this section.
a. No permit authorized by this section shall be granted except upon
application in writing therefor signed by the person desiring such
§ 12-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.2
AO:241
§ 13-1.3. Regulations Concerning.
permit or his agent, which application shall set forth such facts as are
hereinafter required by the provisions of this chapter.
b. In case any permit shall be refused by any officer authorized to issue
the same, an appeal of such officers' determination may be taken to the
mayor and council and the mayor and council, after hearing the
applicant and such officer and such other evidence as may be produced,
may either direct the issuance of such permit or sustain the refusal of
the officer.
c. No permit shall be issued until the fee therefor shall have been paid to
the officer authorized to issue such permits. The permit fee for all work
started prior to the issuance of a permit covering same shall be twice
the regular fee as herein required.
a. Street opening. No person shall make any street opening in or tear up
or disturb the surface of the roadway of any street, park or public place
without a written permit therefore, provided however, that any public
utility corporation having pipes, conduits or rails in any public street or
place shall not be required to obtain any other permit than that
provided for in paragraph k of this subsection.
b. All permits required by this section shall be issued by the borough clerk
with a copy to the superintendent of public works. Permittee is to
secure street openings dates and specifications from the
superintendent of public works. A cash deposit in an amount sufficient
to defray the costs of replacing the pavement excavated in case the
applicant fails to replace such pavement in a manner acceptable to the
superintendent of public works prior to the issuance of the permit. This
deposit shall be then tendered to the borough clerk prior to the
issuance of any permit and in no event shall the amount of the cash or
bond deposit be less than $1,000, which bond shall be in a form
satisfactory to the borough attorney. Upon issuance of such a permit the
borough clerk shall forward a copy to the superintendent of public
works and chief of police.
c. The following permit fees are established and shall be paid to the
borough clerk before the permits are issued.
1. For opening any road paved with Portland cement concrete,
bituminous concrete, bituminous penetration macadam, water
bound macadam with or without bituminous dressing or asphalt
surface treated pavement, $5 per square yard or fraction thereof;
minimum fee $25.
2. For opening any unimproved road; $2 per square yard or fraction
thereof; minimum fee $5.
d. In making the excavation the permittee shall preserve the roadway
from needless destruction and shall cause the excavation, installation
§ 13-1.2 ENGLEWOOD § 13-1.3
AO:242
or repair of utility and backfilling to be one continuous operation.
The person to whom such permit is issued shall guard the excavation
or excavations by suitable barricades and warning signs by day and
suitable barricades and lights by night, and which shall be electrical or
mechanical and not inflammable, until the excavation is safely closed. It
is the responsibility of the permittee to maintain such road openings in
a safe condition for traffic until such time as he replaces the pavement
and said pavement replacement shall have been approved by the
superintendent.
e. The permit for any such excavation as aforesaid shall specify the date
the excavation is to be made and the maximum time allowed for the
completion of the excavation and the backfilling thereof. The backfilling
shall be completed within the time stated in such permit and shall be
done in accordance with applicable borough specifications. All refuse
and material shall be removed within 48 hours.
f. Temporary restoration of pavement is to be made immediately after the
superintendent of public works or the borough engineer has approved
the backfilling.
g. Where an excavation is to extend to the full width of the road, only onehalf
of the excavation shall be made at one time. This portion shall be
properly backfilled and inspected as herein provided before the other
half is excavated.
h. All trenches shall be backfilled with stonedust, bankrun sand or gravel
or pervious material free from foreign matter such as debris, stumps,
roots or sod. The backfilling shall be performed in layers of not more
than two feet in depth, each layer to be thoroughly tamped prior to the
backfilling of the next layer.
i. Permanent restoration of pavement shall be made within a reasonable
time and no more than within four months, weather permitting, from
the date the temporary pavement was installed and such permanent
restoration shall as nearly as possible duplicate the original pavement
in type, material, color and texture of the surface or in accordance with
borough specifications. The superintendent of public works shall be
notified three days prior to permanent restoration for quality control
and adherence to this section.
j. No opening permits will be issued between December 1 and March 1,
unless an emergency exists.
k. No excavation, repair or utility installation shall be commenced or
installed in or on any public street in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
without first obtaining a road construction or road opening permit
therefor from the borough clerk. Every application for such permit shall
be accompanied by duplicate plans and profiles of the proposed work
except where the borough engineer determines, in his discretion, that
plans are not necessary, or in the event of emergency. The said
application shall give the location of the proposed work, a detailed
§ 13-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.3
AO:243
description of the type of repair, the extent of the work and the method
of repair, a certified survey of the location thereof, the location of any
and all utilities, storm drains, sanitary sewer or sewer mains, within
close proximity to the proposed opening, and the estimated cost of such
work. The applicant shall pay, at the time of filing the application, for
inspection fees, the sum of $0.30 per lineal foot of street to be opened
and $0.15 for each lineal foot of utility line (including, but not limited
to, electric or gas, water or telephone) to be installed. In no event
shall the inspection fees be less than $100. In addition, the borough
engineer shall determine the amount of a cash bond, in sum sufficient
to guarantee the repair of the street, which bond shall be posted, for
a minimum of two years, as a condition to any road opening permit.
The minimum cash bond shall be $1,000. Such bond shall be renewed
each calendar year, where necessary, in the discretion of the borough
engineer.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of an emergency, a utility
company may undertake emergency repairs without precompliance
with the foregoing. However, prior to even emergency repairs, the
company shall notify the Englewood Cliffs Police Department in order
to report the location of the emergency and the nature of the problem.
Thereafter, the company shall file a complete report with the borough
in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
No road construction permit shall be issued until and unless the
borough engineer approves said application, plans, and profile and said
deposit is made. The borough engineer shall approve or reject said
application within 10 days after the application has been filed and,
in case of rejection, shall state in writing the grounds on which his
rejection is based. In the event that applicant is dissatisfied with the
rejection of the borough engineer, he shall, within 10 days thereafter,
file in writing with the borough clerk his ground of appeal from the
rejection of the borough engineer. The mayor and council shall hear
said appeal at the next regular meeting of the mayor occurring not
less than 10 days from the filing of the appeal, at which hearing the
mayor and council shall have the right to confirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the borough engineer.
The following specifications shall apply for all road opening restorations
of borough public streets:
1. Pavement.
(a) Base: Bituminous Stabilized Base Course shall be laid and
compacted over previously compacted fill. The total compacted
thickness of bituminous stabilized base course shall be not less
than three inches constructed in a single lift. The surface
elevation shall be the elevation of the adjacent existing
pavement. Where settlement of the bituminous stabilized base
course has occurred, the contractor shall construct a leveling
course of either bituminous stabilized base material or FABC.
§ 13-1.3 ENGLEWOOD § 13-1.3
AO:244
This base shall serve as a temporary pavement until the
surface course is applied.
*During winter months, if bituminous base material of FABC
is not available, cold mix Bituminous Concrete may be
substituted with the provision this material is removed and
replaced with bituminous base material and Bituminous
Concrete Surface (NJDOT) Mix 1-5 when these materials
become available.
(b) Surface course: Two inches of NJDOT Mix 1-5 Bituminous
Concrete Surface Course.
2. Excavation. The existing pavement must be cut with a compressor
or an approved mechanical cutting device, in a straight line, and to
its full depth of pavement before excavation of trench. The existing
pavement shall be sawcut in a straight line prior to the installation
of final pavement.
3. Backfill. When the material from the excavation is unstable for
backfilling, the contractor shall furnish, place, and mechanically
tamp bank run gravel, or bank run sand, or quarry processed stone,
as backfill. At least six inches of quarry processed stone must be
provided directly below the stabilized base course.
Bank run sand may be used as base fill only to within six inches of
the transmission pipe.
4. Temporary pavement.
(a) Upon completion of the backfilling of the trench, the exposed
edges of the existing pavement shall be cut back to straight
even lines parallel to the center line of the trench. The exposed
face of the existing pavement shall be clean and free of dirt or
other substances which would prevent proper bonding with the
new pavement.
(b) The subgrade shall be formed to the required line, grade and
cross section and properly rolled with a 10 ton roller or
approved equal. Any unsuitable material shall be removed and
replaced with suitable material.
5. Permanent pavement. Permanent pavement shall be placed as
specified by the Englewood Cliffs Department of Public Works or
borough engineer. When so stated on the Road Opening Permit, the
permanent pavement of Bituminous Surface Course NJDOT Mix 1-5
shall be applied with an approved self-propelled paving machine
from two feet beyond the outside edge of the trench to the curb line
but no less than eight feet wide.
§ 13-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.4
AO:245
§ 13-1.4. Maintenance for One Year.
The person receiving the permit shall be responsible for the proper
maintenance of that portion of the street over which the permit has been
issued, including continued backfilling, to compensate for a period of one
year from the date of the certification of the proper restoration of the
street by the superintendent of the department of public works and further
shall assume all liability for damages resulting therefrom or in any way
connected therewith.
§ 13-1.5. Failure to Restore or Maintain.
In the event of the failure to restore the street opening properly within
a reasonable time after the opening has been made or to maintain the
restored street properly for a period of one year from the date of the
aforesaid certificate of proper restoration, the department of public works
may upon three days' notice to the person receiving the permit, undertake
the restoration or maintenance work and have recourse to the deposit for
compensation.
§ 13-1.6. Return of Deposit.
The deposit shall be returned to the person receiving the permit one year
after the date of the certificate of the proper restoration.
§ 13-1.7. Conflicting Provisions.
In the event any provision of this ordinance shall conflict with the provision
of any statute, State or Federal, or with any rule or regulation of the Public
Utility Commission or Federal Power Commission, such provision to the
extent of such conflict shall not apply.
§ 13-2. CURB CUTS.
§ 13-2.1. Declaration of Purposes.
It is recognized that provision must be made for vehicular access to private
property from streets and alleys, but in so doing, due consideration shall be
given to pedestrian and vehicular safety, the need for on-street parking and
interference with public improvements caused thereby.
In establishing permissible curb-cuts in sidewalk driveway crossings for
access to private property, it shall be the policy of the borough to authorize
the same only where they are necessary and only where they would not
unreasonably interfere with the rights of the public in the adjacent street
or alley or unreasonably interfere with vehicular traffic or unreasonably
eliminate on-street parking spaces.
§ 13-2.2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter.
§ 13-1.4 ENGLEWOOD § 13-2.2
AO:246
§ 13-2.3. Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break or remove any curbing or
cause to have cut, broken or removed any curbing in the borough without
first obtaining a permit to do so from the building inspector.
§ 13-2.4. Application.
An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the municipal clerk an
application showing:
§ 13-2.5. Fees.
The following fee shall accompany an application for a permit hereunder.
§ 13-2.6. Standards for Issuance of Permit.
The municipal clerk shall issue a permit after the superintendent of the
department of public works or his designee finds:
a. SUPERINTENDENT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS –
Shall mean the person designated by the borough council as such
person as shall be entitled to his office power and duties.
a. Name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the property
abutting the proposed work area:
b. Name and address of the party doing the work;
c. Location of the work area;
d. Attached plan showing details of the proposed alteration;
e. Estimated cost of the alteration;
f. Such other information as the municipal clerk or superintendent of the
department of public works shall find reasonably necessary to the
determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder.
a. For each permit issued for a "curb-cut," the sum of $25.
b. A separate permit for the doing of any work under the provisions of this
section shall be issued for each lot, tract or parcel of land in front of or
along which such work is to be done, provided, however, that where two
or more lots, tracts or parcels of land actually adjoin and are owned by
the same person, a single permit may be issued to embrace the same
covering not more than 100 lineal feet for each permit.
c. The applicant shall further post a bond in the amount of $25 per linear
foot for the length of the proposed curb cut which monies shall be held
by the borough until such time as the completion of the project and
approval by the appropriate representative of the borough charged
with the inspection of such curb cuts.
§ 13-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.6
AO:247
§ 13-2.7. Regulations.
No permit issued under subsection 13-2.6 shall be in conflict with the
following regulations:
a. That the plans for the proposed operations have been approved by him.
b. That the work will be done according to the plans and specifications set
forth in subsection 13-2.7.
c. That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for on-street parking
spaces in the proposed work area, and the means of egress to and from
the property affected and adjacent properties.
a. The maximum width of all curb-cuts in business and industrial districts
shall not be more than 30 feet as measured at the top of the curbing. If
however, in the opinion of the building inspector the borough's interests
can best be served by extending the maximum width of curb-cuts to not
more than 36 feet, as measured at the top of the curbing, for entrance
into automobile service stations located on borough streets, or on State
or county routes within the borough, then the building inspector shall
have the power to modify the provision of this regulation accordingly.
The maximum width of all curb-cuts in residential districts is hereby
established to be 12 feet for one car garages and 20 feet for two or
more car garages.
b. The minimum distance between curb cuts serving the same lot or parcel
of land shall not be less than 50 feet as measured at the top of the
curbing.
c. The curb cut shall not exceed 33 1/3% of the frontage upon any street of
a lot or lots or parcel of land to be served thereby.
d. No curb cut shall be located so as to interfere with the intersecting
sidewalks, traffic signals, lampposts, fire hydrants or other public
improvements.
e. No permit shall be issued to remove any curbing unless a concrete
apron between the curbings and sidewalks is to be installed.
f. The necessary adjustments to utility facilities, light fixtures, fire
hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals or other public
improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the
borough.
g. All work shall be done under the supervision of the building inspector of
the borough and in accordance with borough specifications in effect at
the time of such work. Forms shall be inspected by the borough before
any concrete is poured. All debris and surface material shall be
promptly removed upon completion of the work.
§ 13-2.6 ENGLEWOOD § 13-2.7
AO:248
§ 13-2.8. Appeals.
In order that the provisions of this section may be reasonably applied in
instances where practical difficulties are apparent, or unnecessary hardship
will result from carrying out the strict requirements hereof, or in cases
where the applicant deems himself aggrieved, appeal may be made to the
mayor and borough council and the mayor and council shall have the power
to vary, by resolution, the mandatory provisions hereof, or to modify or
reverse the decision of the building inspector, in any specific case in such
manner that substantial justice is done and the spirit and purpose of this
section are upheld.
Such an appeal shall be made in writing to the mayor and council by filing
with the borough clerk a written notice of such appeal setting forth specific
grounds or basis thereof. Such notice must be filed within 30 days after such
action appealed from. The borough clerk shall forthwith set said matter for
hearing before the mayor and council and cause notice thereof to be given
to the applicant, not less than five days prior to such notice is waived in
writing by the applicant. At such hearing the applicant shall show cause
on the ground specified in the notice of appeal, why the action excepted to
should not be approved. The mayor and council may continue such hearing
and its findings and appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter.
§ 13-2.9. Subdivisions.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any construction in
connection with any minor or major subdivision approved by the planning
board of the borough.
§ 13-3. INSTALLATION OF SIDEWALKS.
§ 13-3.1. Discretion of Mayor and Council.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the land subdivision chapter or in
any other ordinance, it is and has been the intention of the mayor and
council that the installation of sidewalks in any subdivision be a mater of
discretion with the mayor and council and to that end, in connection with
every application for a subdivision within the borough to the planning board
pursuant to law.
h. The applicant shall maintain the premises in a safe manner, and shall
provide adequate barricades and lights at his own expense to protect
the safety of the public use in the adjacent streets or sidewalks, and
shall hold the borough free from any damage incurred by his
operations.
i. Curbs. All curbs installed shall be concrete vertical curb and shall be
constructed in accordance with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 21. Figure 4.1 (1 of 4) "Concrete
Vertical Curb" detail.
§ 13-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.1
AO:249
§ 13-3.2. Sidewalk Installation Required.
If sidewalks are required in any subdivision and are not waived as here
provided, then, and in that event, the sidewalks shall be installed in front
of any given plot in the subdivision prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy on any structure erected on the lot.
§ 13-4. SEPARATE COLLECTION OF NEWSPAPERS AND
PERIODICALS.
§ 13-4.1. Preamble.
It is the desire of the mayor and borough council on behalf of the residents
of the borough to assist in whatever why reasonably possible in the
preservation of trees and forest areas; and it is in the interest of the
beneficial to the general welfare of the residents of the borough to
participate in and to contribute to conservation and preservation of
landfilled areas; and it is in the interest of the citizens of the borough
to reduce whatever possible the cost of refuse collection. The separation,
bundling, and separate collection of newspapers, magazines, and other
periodicals all will contribute to the beneficial purposes hereinbefore
stated.
§ 13-4.2. Separation of Newspapers and Magazines.
Newspapers, magazines, periodicals, and the like will be separated from
other forms of refuse and will not be collected by the refuse collector of the
borough on the regular refuse collection days.
§ 13-4.3. Collection Days Established.
All newspapers, magazines, periodicals, and the like will be collected only
on the 1st Wednesday of each month from the north side of Palisade Avenue
north to the Tenafly line and the 1st Thursday of each month from the
a. The planning board shall make a determination whether, in its opinion,
sidewalks are or are not to be required in the subdivision and if so, to
what extent.
b. The determination of the planning board, together with its reasons
therefor, shall be communicated to the mayor and council within 30
days after the granting of any preliminary subdivision and:
1. If the determination of the planning board is that no sidewalks be
required, the communication shall be for information purposes
only.
2. If the determination of the planning board is that sidewalks be
required in all or part of the subdivisions then the mayor and
council may, upon application of the subdivider, waive or modify the
sidewalk requirements.
§ 13-3.1 ENGLEWOOD § 13-4.3
AO:250
south side of Palisade Avenue south to the Fort Lee Line. Other days as
will be designated by the councilman then serving as Commissioner of
Sanitation, any such change in collection date to be upon written notice to
the homeowners delivered no later than one week prior to such changed
collection date.
§ 13-4.4. Tied Bundles; Height Restriction.
All such newspapers, magazines, periodicals and the like, collectively, shall
be separated from the other forms of refuse, and tied securely no higher
than 18 inches and placed at the curbside or edge of the street by each
resident prior to the designated time and day of collection.
§ 13-4.5. Notification of Residents.
The councilman designated as Commissioner of Sanitation shall notify all
residents, in writing, of the content of this section at least two weeks prior
to the first collection date.
§ 13-5. LOADING AND UNLOADING OF AUTOMOBILE
TRANSPORTERS.
§ 13-5.1. Prohibition.
No person, business, or legal entity shall load or unload any automobile
transporter on any public street within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
Any loading or unloading of automobile transporters shall take place on
private property.
§ 13-5.2. Definition.
AUTOMOBILE TRANSPORTER — Shall mean any vehicle which carries one
or more automobiles.
§ 13-5.3. Penalty.
Any person, business or legal entity violating the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250, nor more than $1,000, for the
first offense. For subsequent offenses, the fine shall be not less than $500,
nor more than $1,000.
Chapter 14
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
§ 14-1. PREAMBLE.
The board of health of the borough has heretofore by an ordinance adopted
May 7, 1962 incorporated by reference into the ordinance of the board of
health of the borough the "Swimming Pool Code of the State of New Jersey
(1955)" and the board of health of the borough and the mayor and council
§ 13-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1
AO:251
deem it advisable that the ordinance be supplemented by an ordinance
regulating the location, construction, alteration, and operation of public
swimming pools and the establishing of license fees and permit fees in
connection therewith.
§ 14-2. DEFINITIONS.
The definitions set forth in Section 1 of the "Swimming Pool Code of the
State of New Jersey (1955)," heretofore adopted under an ordinance of the
board of health of the borough which section sets forth certain definitions,
is hereby incorporated by reference.
§ 14-3. LICENSE FROM BOARD OF HEALTH REQUIRED.
No persons shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool
until a license therefore shall have been issued by the board of health of the
borough.
§ 14-4. FEES AND CHARGES.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ 14-5. TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.
Licenses issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually
on December 31 of each year, and each of the licenses shall be for one
calendar year. Application for renewal of a license shall be submitted
together with the required fee, prior to December 15 of the year prior to the
calendar year during which the license is to be effective.
§ 14-6. LICENSES DENIED OR SUSPENDED; HEARING.
Licenses required by this chapter may be denied or suspended by the board
of health of the borough for failure on the part of the license-holder to
comply with the "Swimming Pool Code of the State of New Jersey (1955)"
which code was adopted by reference by the board of health of the borough
by an ordinance of May 7, 1962, or for failure to comply with the sanitary
code of the borough.
The board of health shall afford the person whose license to locate and
construct, alter and operate has been denied or suspended, an opportunity
to be heard in the public hearing.
a. For the issuance of a license to locate and construct a swimming pool -
$50.
b. For the issuance of a license to alter a swimming pool - $50.
c. For the issuance or removal of a license to operate a swimming pool -
$150.
§ 14-1 ENGLEWOOD § 14-7
AO:252
§ 14-7. VIOLATIONS.
Any person violation any of the provisions of this chapter or of the
"Swimming Pool Code of the State of New Jersey (1955)" heretofore
referred to shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty as
established in chapter 3, section 3-1.
Chapter 15
LAND SUBDIVISION
§ 15-1. TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as: The Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 15-2. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the borough in order to promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the municipality.
It shall be administered to insure the orderly growth and development, the
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
circulation, utilities, and services.
§ 15-3. APPROVING AGENCY.
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
governing body after favorable referral by the borough planning board in
accordance with Section 14 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953.
§ 15-4. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter.
a. SUBDIVISION – Shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
into two or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale or building development; except
that the following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions
provided, however, that no new streets or roads are involved: divisions
of land for agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are three
acres or larger in size, divisions of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions, or divisions of property upon court order.
Subdivision also includes resubdivision, and where appropriate to the
context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or territory
divided.
b. PLAT – Shall mean the map of a subdivision.
§ 14-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-4
AO:253
c. SKETCH PLAT – Shall mean the sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and
meeting the requirements of section 15-6.
d. MINOR SUBDIVISION – Shall mean any subdivision containing not
more than two lots fronting on an existing minor street, not involving
any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities and not
adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of
the master plan, official map, zoning ordinance or this chapter.
e. MAJOR SUBDIVISION – Shall mean all subdivisions not classified as
minor subdivisions.
f. PRELIMINARY PLAT – Shall mean the preliminary map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the borough
clerk for planning board consideration and tentative approval and
meeting the requirements of section 15-7.
g. FINAL PLAT – Shall mean the final map of all or a portion of the
subdivision which is presented to the planning board for final approval
in accordance with these regulations, and which if approved shall be
filed with the proper county recording officer.
h. SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE – Shall mean a committee of at least three
planning board members appointed by the chairman of the board for
the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the
provisions of this section, and such other duties relating to the land
subdivision which may be conferred on this committee by the board.
i. SUBDIVIDER – Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another.
j. OWNER – Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in
the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
k. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE – Shall mean any security which may be
accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made
before the planning board or other approving body approves a plat,
including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar
collateral or surety agreements.
l. MASTER PLAN – Shall mean a composite of the mapped and written
proposals recommending the physical development of the borough
which shall have been duly adopted by the planning board.
m. OFFICIAL MAP – Shall mean a map adopted in accordance with the
Official Map and Building Permit Act, Chapter 434 of the Laws of 1953,
§ 15-4 ENGLEWOOD § 15-4
AO:254
§ 15-5. PROCEDURE.
§ 15-5.1. Submission of Sketch Plat.
or any prior act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed
to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of the streets,
public parks and playgrounds, and drainage right-of-way shown
thereon.
n. LOT – Shall mean a parcel or portion of land separated from other
parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of
survey map or by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease or
separate use.
o. STREET – Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane,
parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing State, county
or municipal roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore
approved pursuant to law or approved by official action or a street or
way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county
recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the
grant to such board of the power to review plats, and includes the land
between the street lines whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter
streets shall be classified as follows:
1. ARTERIAL STREETS – Are those which are used primarily for fast
or heavy traffic.
2. COLLECTOR STREETS – Are those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system or arterial streets including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for circulation within such a development.
3. MINOR STREETS – Are those which are used primarily for access
to the abutting properties.
4. MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS – Are streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide
access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
5. ALLEYS – Are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
p. DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY – Shall mean the lands required for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required
along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against
flood damage in accordance with Chapter One of Title 58 of the Revised
Statutes.
§ 15-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-5.1
AO:255
§ 15-5.2. Submission of Preliminary Plat of Major Subdivision for
Tentative Approval.
a. Any owner of land within the borough shall, prior to subdividing or
resubdividing land as defined in this chapter, submit to the secretary of
the planning board at least 10 days prior to the regular meeting of the
board a sketch plat of the proposed subdivision for purposes of
classification and preliminary discussion.
b. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by unanimous action
of the subdivision committee, a notation to that effect will be made on
the sketch plat. The plat will then be forwarded to the mayor and
borough clerk for their signatures and returned to the subdivider within
one week following the next regular meeting of the borough council. No
further approval by the borough council shall be required.
c. Before the borough clerk returns any approved sketch plat to the
subdivider, the clerk shall have sufficient copies made to furnish one
copy to each of the following:
1. Borough clerk.
2. Borough engineer.
3. Building inspector or zoning officer.
4. Tax assessor.
5. Secretary of the planning board.
6. County planning board.
The cost of the copies will be charged to the subdivider and shall be
collected before the return of the original sketch plat to the subdivider, or
six copies may be provided by the subdivider at his own cost and expense.
d. Either a deed description or plat map drawn in compliance with
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953 shall be filed by the subdivider with
the county recording officer within 90 days from the date of return of
the approved sketch plat.
e. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect
shall be made on the plat which will be returned to the subdivider for
compliance with the procedure in subsections 15-5.2 and 15-5.3.
a. The applicant shall file with the secretary of the planning board at least
two weeks prior to the planning board meeting at which consideration
is desired, 10 prints of the preliminary plat, with three completed
application forms. At the time of filing, a basic fee of $125 plus a fee of
$2 per lot based on the number of lots shown on the preliminary plat,
shall be paid. Upon receipt of the above, the secretary of the planning
board shall forthwith notify all local departments involved of the
proposed subdivision and hearing date. In the event that the application
§ 15-5.1 ENGLEWOOD § 15-5.2
AO:256
for approval shall be rejected by the planning board or by the borough
council, or shall be withdrawn by the applicant in writing at any time
prior to approval of the final plat by the borough council, then and in
that event, $50 of the aforesaid fee shall, upon request in writing, be
refunded to the applicant.
b. The applicant shall notify by mail, at least five days prior to the hearing,
all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
subdivision as their names appear on the municipal tax records. The
notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, a brief description
of the subdivision, and that a copy of the subdivision has been filed for
public inspection. Proof of service of notice shall be submitted on date
of hearing.
c. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the secretary of the
planning board prior to the hearing to the following persons:
1. Secretary of county planning board.
2. Borough engineer.
3. Secretary of board of health.
4. Such other municipal, county or State officials as directed by the
planning board.
d. The planning board shall act on the preliminary plat within 90 days
after submission to the borough clerk, but in no case before the
expiration of the twenty-day period within which the county planning
board may submit a report on the subdivision. In all cases the
recommendations of the county board shall be given careful
consideration in the final decision of the local planning board. If the
county planning board has approval authority pursuant to R.S. 40:
27-12, its action shall be noted on the plat, and if disapproved, two
copies of reasons for disapproval shall be returned with the plat. If
either the planning board or county planning board disapprove a plat,
the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration. The person submitting a plat shall be notified of the
action of the planning board within 90 days of its submission. If
approval is required by any other officer or public body, the same
procedure as applies to submission and approval by the county
planning board shall apply.
e. If the planning board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, a notation to
that effect shall be made on the plat and it shall be referred to the
borough council for action. The borough council shall act within 30
days. Its action shall be noted on the plat, signed by the mayor and
returned to the subdivider for compliance with final approval
requirements.
f. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a two year period from the date of approval:
§ 15-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-5.2
AO:257
§ 15-5.3. Improvements or Guarantees Prior to Final Approval.
Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider will have
installed the improvements and requirements of this chapter, or the
planning board shall require the posting of an adequate subdivision or
100% performance bond as agreed upon by the borough engineer, planning
board, and borough attorney, to assure the installation of the required
improvements.
§ 15-5.4. Submission of Final Plat of Major Subdivision.
1. That the general terms and conditions under which preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed.
2. That the applicant may submit on or before the expiration date, the
whole or part or parts of the plat for final approval.
a. The final plat shall be submitted to the borough clerk for forwarding to
the planning board for final approval within three years from the date of
preliminary approval. The borough clerk shall immediately notify the
secretary of the planning board upon receipt of a final plat and the
planning board shall act upon the final plat within 45 days after the date
of submission for final approval to the borough clerk.
b. The original tracing, one translucent tracing cloth copy, two cloth
prints, 10 black on white prints and three copies of the application form
for final approval shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning
board at least five days prior to the date of a regular planning board
meeting. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes, the
final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required
by the planning board.
c. The applicant shall submit three "Application Forms for Final Approval"
properly signed and sealed and a check for $75 to cover filing fees; and
the final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the borough
engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed and
those to be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with one or
both of the following:
1. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations; or
2. A performance guarantee has been noted with the borough clerk in
sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
d. Any plat which requires county planning board approval pursuant to
R.S. 40:27-12 shall be forwarded to the county planning board for its
action prior to final approval by the borough council.
§ 15-5.2 ENGLEWOOD § 15-5.4
AO:258
§ 15-6. PLAT DETAILS.
§ 15-6.1. Sketch Plat.
The sketch plat shall be based on tax map information or some other
similarly accurate base at a scale not less than 200 feet to the inch to enable
the entire tract to be shown on one sheet and shall show or include the
following information:
e. If the planning board favorably refers a final plat to the borough
council, the borough council shall take action not later than the second
regular meeting following the referral, noting its action on the plat, and
the mayor affixing his signature thereto if this action is favorable.
f. Failure of the planning board and borough council to act within the
allotted time or a mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be
favorable approval and the borough clerk shall issue a certificate to that
effect.
g. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the planning board,
appeal in writing to the mayor and council may be taken within 10 days
after the date of the action of the planning board. A hearing thereon
shall be had on notice to all parties in interest, who shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the borough council may
affirm to reverse the action of the planning board by a recorded vote of
a majority of the total members thereof. The findings and reasons for
the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on the records of the
borough council, and the applying party shall be given a copy.
h. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the
planning board with the following:
1. Borough clerk.
2. Borough engineer.
3. Building inspector.
4. Tax assessor.
5. County planning board.
i. The final plat, after final approval by the borough council shall be filed
by the subdivider with the county recording officer within 90 days from
the date of such approval. If any final plat is not filed within this period,
the approval shall expire.
j. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer
unless it has been duly approved by the borough council and signed by
the mayor.
a. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
§ 15-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.1
AO:259
§ 15-6.2. Preliminary Plat.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall
be designed and drawn by a licensed (N.J.) land surveyor or by a planner
holding full or associate membership in the American Institute of Planners,
or by a licensed architect or landscape architect or any other qualified
person. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of
section 15-7 and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
b. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
c. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
d. The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
e. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
a. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
b. The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot number, date, reference
meridian, graphic scale and the following names and addresses.
1. Name and address of record owner or owners.
2. Name and address of the subdivider.
3. Name and address of person who prepared map.
c. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre.
d. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and
natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and tentative
cross-sections and center line profiles for all proposed new streets.
e. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
water courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, and any natural
features such as wooded areas and rock formations.
f. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas, and
electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed
utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or sewage
disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved
by the appropriate local, county, or State health agency. When a public
sewage disposal system is not available, the developer shall have
percolation tests made and submit the results with the preliminary plat.
Any subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the
established requirements of this ordinance or other applicable
regulations shall not be approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome
§ 15-6.1 ENGLEWOOD § 15-6.2
AO:260
§ 15-6.3. Final Plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 200 feet and in compliance with all of the provisions
of Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953. The final plat shall show or be
accompanied by the following:
§ 15-7. IMPROVEMENTS.
such a situation shall first be approved by the appropriate local, county,
or State health agency.
g. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
a. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian,
b. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all
curves.
c. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
d. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with number one.
e. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
f. Location and description of all monuments.
g. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
h. Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of plat.
i. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
j. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a
municipality, county or State, approval shall be certified on the plat.
k. Cross-sections and profiles of streets, approved by the borough
engineer may be required to accompany the final plat.
l. Contours, at five foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and
at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
m. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
n. Certificate from tax collector that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 15-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7.1
AO:261
§ 15-7.1. Performance Guarantees.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or
shall have furnished performance guarantees for the ultimate installation of
the following:
§ 15-7.2. Completion of Improvements Required for Planning Board
Approval.
No final plat shall be approved by the planning board until the completion
of all such required improvements has been certified to the planning board
by the borough engineer, unless the subdivision owner shall have filed with
the borough a performance guarantee sufficient in amount to cover the cost
of all such improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by
the borough engineer, and assuring the installation of such uncompleted
improvements on or before an agreed date. Such performance guarantee
may be in the form of a performance bond which shall be issued by a
bonding or surety company approved by the borough council, a certified
a. Streets.
b. Street signs.
c. Curbs and/or gutters.
d. Sidewalks.
e. Street lighting.
f. Shade trees: To be located on the street line so as not to interfere with
utilities or sidewalks and shall be of one of the following types: maple,
etc.
g. Topsoil protection: No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of
the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
h. Monuments: To be of the size and shape required by Section 4 of
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953, and shall be placed in accordance
with said statute.
i. Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers:
All such installations shall be properly connected with an approved system and
shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future development.
All of the above listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the borough engineer who shall be notified in writing by the developer at
least 48 hours prior to the state of construction. The notice shall be served
either personally or by registered or certified mail sent to the borough
engineer's office. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected
and approved.
§ 15-7.1 ENGLEWOOD § 15-7.2
AO:262
check, returnable to the subdivider after full compliance; or any other type
of surety approved by the borough attorney.
The performance guarantee shall be approved by the borough attorney as to
form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guarantee shall run for
a period to be fixed by the planning board but, in no case, for a term of more
than three years. However, with the consent of the owner and the surety,
if there be one, the borough council may by resolution extend the term of
such performance guarantee for an additional period not to exceed three
years. The amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced by the
borough council by resolution when portions of the required improvements
have been installed.
If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance with
the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety shall be liable thereon to
the municipality for the reasonable cost of the improvements not installed
and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof the borough shall install such
improvements.
§ 15-7.3. Requirements for Building Permit in Neighborhood or
Limited Business Zone. [Ord. No. 56R; Ord. No. 2014-01]
Before a building permit is granted on any parcel or plat in the
neighborhood and/or limited business zone as shown on the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, the following conditions
must be met:
a. 1. Curbs facing the entire frontage of the property involved shall be
installed under the supervision of the Borough Engineer or the
Superintendent of Public Works.
2. In the event that a house has been demolished or the property is
unimproved, then in that event the building permit shall require
that an entirely new curb be installed facing the entire frontage
and/or side yards of the property, if the property is located on a
corner, which shall be installed under the supervision of the
Borough Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works. The curb
shall be comprised of concrete only and not blocks.
3. Specifications for curbs can be obtained at the Building
Department.
b. A four-foot wide sidewalk shall be installed on the entire frontage of the
property.
c. The entire site involved shall be graded to the satisfaction of the
borough engineer and in accordance with the minimum specifications
set forth in the main ordinance of which this section is supplemental.
d. All commercial buildings hereafter erected must have their sanitary
system connected to the borough sewer system, if the system is
available within 500 feet of the property limits.
§ 15-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7.3
AO:263
§ 15-7.4. Establishing Inspection Fees.
In order to establish a more orderly method for the setting of inspection
fees to be paid to the borough engineer by any person, firm, partnership or
corporation involved in a major subdivision, the following procedures are
hereby set forth:
e. All commercial buildings hereafter erected on "paper" or on dedicated
streets shall improve the street in front of their property in a manner
acceptable to the borough engineer.
f. In cases of buildings erected on corner lots, the above conditions must
be met on both sides of the property.
g. Any and all fees and costs shall be born by the applicant for the building
permit or permits.
a. Upon the application for final approval of a major subdivision plat the
subdivider shall produce a performance guarantee in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. At the time that such performance
guarantee amount is established and before the issuance of any
building permit and before the start of any construction upon any job
site, the subdivider shall deposit with the borough clerk, a sum
equivalent to 3% of the performance guarantee as set by the planning
board and approved by the mayor and council but not less than $500
shall be deposited for subdivisions containing five plots or less and not
less than $1,000 shall be deposited for subdivisions containing more
than five plots. This deposit may be in cash or by certified check or
cashier's check. Once the deposit has been made with the borough
clerk, he shall notify the building inspector in writing of the deposit and
the building inspector is thereafter authorized to issue building permits
and/or certificates of occupancy. Whenever any deposit which has been
placed with the borough clerk has been drawn upon, in accordance with
the terms of this subsection, beyond 50% of the deposit, the building or
person making the deposit shall be notified immediately in writing that
the said deposit is below the required amount. The notice shall be sent
within three days from the drawing thereon and the account shall
thereafter be returned to its full amount as set forth above, within a
period of two days from the receipt of the letter. If the deposit is not
placed with the borough clerk within the time set forth, the borough
clerk shall immediately notify the building inspector and the borough
engineer and the former shall immediately cause all work on any part of
the project to be stopped until the deposit is brought to its full amount.
The provisions of this paragraph respecting the return of the deposit
account to its full amount shall not apply in cases where the borough
engineers are of the opinion that the residue of funds which remain in
the account are sufficient to cover any and all inspection costs
remaining.
b. The borough engineer, during the pursuit of his duties under this
subdivision chapter shall direct all bills by way of voucher to the
§ 15-7.3 ENGLEWOOD § 15-7.4
AO:264
§ 15-7.5. Shade Trees.
Shade trees within the street right-of-way inside curb line cannot be
removed until authorization of the Englewood Cliffs Shade Tree Commission
is received. The subdivider shall install shade trees as specified and
approved by the shade tree commission. A cash bond must be submitted
to the planning board before final approval, in an amount agreed upon
between the planning board and the shade tree commission.
§ 15-7.6. Cleaning of Streets and Other Properties.
borough clerk, who shall, at the following meeting of the mayor and
council present the vouchers for approval and upon approval,
thereafter have disbursed the amount of money so approved to the
borough engineer.
c. At the completion of any subdivision and the acceptance by the mayor
and borough council of all improvements covered by the performance
guarantee, the borough clerk shall be authorized to return to the
subdivider any such excess monies as may remain in the account
deposited to cover engineering inspection fees. Such authorization
shall only be given by the council after report in writing from the
borough engineer notifying the council of the satisfactory nature of the
improvements which were required under the preliminary and final
plat.
d. Any subdivider, developer, building or other person, firm, partnership
or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall,
after five days' written notice to cease and desist from the building
inspector, be subject to the penalty as stated in chapter 3, section 3-1
for each offense.
a. The subdivider shall post with the borough a cash bond in the amount of
$300 for each 10 lots or less involved, and $300 for each 10 lots
thereafter or part, to guarantee to the borough that all debris, soil, dirt,
dust, mud and refuse on any of the streets involved or leading to same
or on any property over which the borough can exercise jurisdiction
under the police powers shall be kept cleaned as directed by the
building inspector, so the condition does not impair public health, safety
and general welfare of the areas involved.
b. Failure to adhere to these requirements by any applicant shall be
sufficient authorization for the borough, after three days' written notice
to the subdivider, to take such steps to have the required work done,
and in such event the cost to the borough shall be charged to this
account.
c. After the completion of all offsite improvements, the planning board,
may recommend to the borough council the release of any or all of the
cash bond.
§ 15-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7.7
AO:265
§ 15-7.7. Engineering.
All the above listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the borough engineer, who shall be paid reasonable
engineering and inspection fees by the subdivider, the amount of said fees
to be agreed upon before the improvements are commenced. The borough
engineer shall be notified by the developer at least 24 hours prior to the
start of construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved.
This subsection is governed by the following regulations:
§ 15-7.8. Discharge of Water into Storm Drain.
Any artificial means for the removal of water, such as sump pumps,
swimming pool pumps, etc., shall discharge into storm drains where the
same are available, and in no event shall they discharge into streets or
roadways.
§ 15-7.9. Off-Tract Improvements.
As a condition of preliminary approval and prior to any construction and to
the filing of an application for final approval of a subdivision or site plan,
the applicant shall, at the direction of the board, make cash payments or,
with the consent of the board, install any and all off-tract improvements
stipulated by the board in the manner provided below with respect to the
immediate or ultimate installation of any required off-tract improvements
stipulated by the board.
a. Allocation of costs; criteria in determining allocation. The allocation of
costs for off-tract improvements as between the applicant, other
property owners and the borough or any one or more of the foregoing
shall be determined by the board, with the assistance of the appropriate
borough agencies, on the basis of the total cost of the off-tract
improvements; the increase in market values of the property affected
and any other benefits conferred; the needs created by the application;
population and land use projections for the general area of the
applicant's property and other areas to be served by the off-site
improvements; the estimated time of construction of the off-site
improvements; and the condition and periods of usefulness, which
periods may be based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
Requirements for off-tract improvements shall be consistent with P.L.
1975, C. 291, (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). In addition, the following
criteria may also be considered, as well as any other reasonable
criteria:
1. Street, curb, sidewalk, shade trees, streetlights, street signs, and
traffic light improvements may also be based upon the anticipated
increase of traffic generated by the application. In determining
such traffic increase, the board may consider traffic counts,
existing and projected traffic patterns, quality of roads, and
§ 15-7.7 ENGLEWOOD § 15-7.9
AO:266
sidewalks in the area and other factors related to the need created
by the application and the anticipated benefit therein.
2. Drainage facilities may also be based upon or be determined by the
drainage created by or affected by a particular land use,
considering:
(a) The percentage relationship between the acreage of the
application and the acreage of total drainage basin.
(b) The use of a particular site and the amount of area to be
covered by impervious surfaces on the site itself.
(c) The use, condition of status of the remaining area in the
drainage basin.
3. Sewerage facilities and the improvement of sanitary or storm
sewers and trunk lines or connection, may be based upon the
proportion that the total anticipated volume of sewage effluent or
flow of the applicant's property and other properties connected to
the new facility bears to the existing capacity of existing sewerage
facilities, including but not limited to lines and other
appurtenances leading to and servicing the applicant's property.
Consideration may also be given to the types of effluent and
particular problems requiring special equipment or added costs for
treatment. In the event that the applicant's property shall be
permitted to be connected to existing sewer facilities, the applicant
shall pay a charge or be assessed in accordance with the law.
4. The rehabilitation of the existing sanitary system may be based on
the Clinton Bogert Reports: (a) regarding infiltration and inflow
analysis; and (b) sewer system evaluation report of December, 1981
and the sewer system evaluation flow isolation report of June, 1984.
b. Determination of cost of improvements. The cost of installation of the
required off-tract improvements shall be determined by the board with
the advice of the borough engineer and appropriate borough agencies.
c. Manner of construction. When those estimates are received and the
work is not to be done exclusively by the applicant as specified by the
board, the mayor and council shall then decide whether the off-tract
improvements is to be constructed by the borough as a general
improvement: by the borough as a local improvement.
d. Payment of allocated cost.
1. The estimate costs of the off-tract improvement allocated to the
applicant, if deposited in cash, shall be paid by the applicant to the
borough treasurer, who shall provide a suitable depository thereof,
and such funds shall be used only for the off-tract improvements for
which they are deposited or improvements serving the same
purpose, unless such improvements are not initiated by the
§ 15-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7.9
AO:267
§ 15-8. DESIGN STANDARDS.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
borough within a period of 10 years from the date of payment, after
which time said funds so deposited shall be returned together with
accumulated interest or other income thereon, if any.
2. In the event that the payment by the applicant to the borough
treasurer provided for herein is less than its share of the actual cost
of the off-tract improvements, then the applicant shall be required
to pay its additional appropriate share of the cost thereof.
3. In the event the payment by the applicant to the borough treasurer
provided for above is more than its appropriate share of the actual
cost of installation of the off-tract improvements, or its successors
or assigns shall be repaid an amount equal to the difference
between the deposit and its share of the actual cost.
4. If the applicant and the planning board cannot agree with respect
to the applicant's appropriate share of the actual cost of the offtract
improvement or the determination made by the officer or
board charged with the duty of making assessments as to special
benefits, if the off-tract improvement is to be constructed as a local
improvement, no approval shall be granted; provided, however,
that the applicant may challenge such determination and seek to
have it revised in appropriate judicial proceedings in order to
compel subdivision or site plan approval.
e. Installation of improvements by applicant.
1. At the discretion and option of the borough and with the consent of
the applicant, the borough may enter into a contract with the
applicant providing for the installation and construction of the offtract
improvements by the applicant upon contribution by the
borough of the remaining unallocated portion of the cost of the offtract
improvement, if any.
2. In the event the borough so elects to contribute to the cost and
expense of installation of the off-site improvements by the
applicant, the portion contributed by the borough shall be subject
to passable certification and assessment as a local improvement
against the benefiting property owners in the manner provided by
law, if applicable.
f. Design standards. Should the applicant and the borough enter into a
contract for the construction and erection of the off-tract improvements
to be done by the applicant, it shall observe all requirements and
principles of this and other borough ordinances in the design of such
improvements.
§ 15-7.9 ENGLEWOOD § 15-8.1
AO:268
§ 15-8.1. General.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the municipality. Where either or both
an official map or master plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets,
drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown
on an officially adopted master plan or official map shall be considered
in approval of subdivision plats. Where no master plan or official map
exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat
in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953 and
shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of
the municipality and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the
following design standards:
§ 15-8.2. Streets.
a. The arrangement of streets not shown on the master plan or official
map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing
streets.
b. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
c. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the planning board
may determine appropriate.
d. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than the following:
1. Arterial streets - 80 feet.
2. Collector streets - 60 feet.
3. Minor streets - 50 feet.
4. Marginal access streets - 40 feet.
5. The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multi-family,
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
individual basis, and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for fire fighting equipment.
e. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the governing body under conditions
approved by the planning board.
f. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the master plan or official map or the street
width requirements of this ordinance shall dedicate additional width
§ 15-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-8.2
AO:269
along either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along
one side only, one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
g. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
h. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curb line with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
i. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
j. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
k. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
l. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
m. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turn around at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street.
If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turn around shall
be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
n. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
o. Driveways. All driveways shall be graded and paved one-quarter inch to
the foot starting two feet from the curb line above the top of the curb.
All paving shall be on normal sidewalk grade within the borough's rightof-
way.
p. Sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be four feet wide and installed under the
supervision of the borough engineer.
q. Street openings. No person shall open any street or roadway in any
subdivision for any purpose for a period of two years after the
installation of the street, except with the written consent of the borough
engineer and the placing within the borough of a cash bond in a sum
sufficient in the borough engineer's opinion, to guarantee the repair of
the street within the time period allowed by the borough engineer.
§ 15-8.2 ENGLEWOOD § 15-8.3
AO:270
§ 15-8.3. Blocks.
§ 15-8.4. Lots.
§ 15-8.5. Public Use and Service Areas.
a. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning
ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
b. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the planning board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
c. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
a. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
b. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets, and radial to curved streets.
c. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width
except lots fronting on streets described in subsection 15-8.2d4 and 5.
d. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
e. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the planning board may, after adequate
investigation withhold approval of such lots.
a. In large scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies
or municipal departments concerned.
b. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way
channel or street, there shall be provided a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
water course, and such further width or construction or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
c. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
§ 15-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-9
AO:271
§ 15-9. PENALTY.
If, before favorable referral and final approval has been obtained, any
person transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which
forms a part of a subdivision on which, by ordinance, the planning board
and the borough council are required to act, such person shall be subject to
the penalty as stated in chapter 3, section 3-1, and each parcel, plot or lot
so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation.
In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not such
that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet requirements
for a building permit under Section three of the Official Map and Building
Permit Act (1953) the borough may institute and maintain a civil action:
a. For injunctive relief.
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953, but
only if the borough has a planning board or a committee thereof with
power to act and which:
1. Meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis; and
2. Whose governing body has adopted standards and procedures in
accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953.
In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled
to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was
made that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or
successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price
paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing
expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years after the
date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of
the land, or within six years if unrecorded.
c. Any person, corporation, lessee, tenant or otherwise in the construction
or use of any building, violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, on conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty as stated in chapter
3, section 3-1.
d. No performance bond, or part of a bond on a major subdivision shall be
released in whole or in part until the following conditions and
requirements have been met:
1. All utilities such as gas, water, electricity, sanitary sewers, sewer
laterals to curbs, water laterals to curbs, pump stations, storm
system, curbs and paving, have been installed and in place for a
period of not less than six months.
2. A writing from the borough engineer certifying all of the above
improvements have been inspected and installed under his
supervision.
§ 15-9 ENGLEWOOD § 15-9
AO:272
§ 15-10. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 15-10.1. Minimum Standard Stated; Variances.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the borough. Any action taken by the borough council
and the planning board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the subdivider or his agent can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the
literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship, the planning board and borough council
may permit such variance as may be reasonable and within the general
purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by
this chapter.
§ 15-10.2. Inconsistent Ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinance other than the zoning ordinance of
the borough which are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 15-11. AMENDMENT OF BOROUGH TAX MAP.
Upon the approval of any minor or major subdivision, the applicant shall
pay to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs a fee of $50 per lot for the purpose
of updating and amending the borough tax map to reflect any necessary
changes occasioned by said subdivision.
3. All shade trees to be approved by the Englewood Cliffs Shade Tree
Commission. All monuments, on site grading, and other
requirements as specified in this ordinance shall have been
installed, and approved by the borough engineer.
4. As built plans of all public utilities shall be submitted before release
of any bonds.
5. Proof by affidavit that at least 15 days prior to the date on which
the release or reduction of the bond is being considered by the
mayor and council that notice was given to each of the residents of
Englewood Cliffs, living within the subdivision in question that the
application for a release or reduction of the bond was being made
and that if any of the residents object to the release or reduction
that they must file in writing their objections with the borough
within 10 days from the date of notice.
The planning board shall review all of the above requirements and shall
then recommend to the mayor and council what portion of the performance
bond or bonds shall be released.
§ 15-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-11
AO:273
Chapter 16
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION
[Editor's Note: Former Chapter 16, Zoning, previously codified
herein was repealed by Ordinance No. 9306. See Chapter 30 for
Zoning Regulations.]
§ 16-1. SOLICITATION PERMITTED. [Added 4-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall permit all volunteer public safety
organizations of the Borough certain that qualify as charitable
organizations under N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 to solicit contributions in roadways
situate in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs in accordance with the provisions
contained herein.
§ 16-2. PERMIT APPLICATION. [Added 4-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
All volunteer public safety organizations of the Borough that qualify as
charitable organizations as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 who desire to
solicit contributions in roadways situate in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
shall file an application for a permit with the Englewood Cliffs Borough
Clerk on a form supplied by said Clerk specifying the following information:
a. Name of applicant organization.
b. Address of applicant organization.
c. Telephone number of applicant organization.
d. Contact person of applicant organization.
e. Specific location or locations of proposed charitable solicitation.
f. Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
g. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any county highway,
or intersection of a county highway, said application shall include a
copy of an authorization from the Bergen County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to permit said charitable solicitation.
h. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any state highway
or intersection of a state highway, said application shall include a copy
of an authorization from the Commissioner of Transportation of the
State of New Jersey to permit said charitable solicitation.
i. Identify the manner in which the motorist solicitation will be conducted
and the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of the members of
the public who will be traveling the roadways situate in the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ 15-11 ENGLEWOOD § 16-3
AO:274
§ 16-3. APPROVAL. [Added 4-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06]
Upon the filing of a complete application in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, the Englewood Cliffs Borough Clerk shall present same
to the Englewood Cliffs Borough Mayor and Council for its review and
consideration, after which the Borough Mayor and Council shall grant or
deny the applicant's request. In the event the Borough Mayor and Council
grants the applicant's request, the Borough Clerk shall issue a permit to
the applicant which shall be subject to the representations contained in the
applicant's application and any conditions imposed by the Borough Mayor
and Council.
§ 16-4. MINIMUM AGE. [Added 4-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06]
In no event shall any charitable organization requesting authorization from
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for said charitable solicitation use any
individual under the age of 18 years to perform any function or task
associated with the said charitable solicitation in any roadway.
§ 16-5. COMPLIANCE. [Added 4-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06]
Any charitable organization requesting authorization from the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs for said charitable solicitation shall comply with all of the
terms and conditions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L. 1997, Chapter
82, approved April 30, 1997.
§ 16-6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Added 4-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-06]
Any person guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable for
a fine of $100 for each day of such violation. Tickets shall be written by the
state, county or local police against N.J.S.A. 39:4-60.
§ 16-7. STATUTORY AUTHORITY. [Added 4-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
This chapter is adopted pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-60.
Chapter 17
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 17-1. through §17-8. (RESERVED)
§ 17-9. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY CODE.
§ 17-9.1. Preamble.
Whereas, the Uniform Fire Safety Act. (P.L. 1983, c.383) was enacted for
the purpose of establishing a system for the enforcement of minimum fire
§ 16-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-9.1
AO:275
safety standards throughout the State of New Jersey; and-the Uniform Fire
Safety Act authorizes municipalities to provide for local enforcement and to
establish local enforcement agencies for that purpose; and it is in the best
interest of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs to have the Uniform Fire Safety
Act enforced locally.
The fire department has agreed to the plan, which is set forth herein, for
the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Fire Safety Code.
§ 17-9.2. Local Enforcement.
Pursuant to section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c.383) the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ 17-9.3. Agency Designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Englewood Cliffs Fire Prevention
Office which is hereby created in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 17-9.4. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of Englewood Cliffs, other than
owner-occupied one and two family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply
with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire
Code.
§ 17-9.5. Life Hazard Uses.
The local enforcing agency established by subsection 17-9.3 shall carry out
the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the commissioner of community affairs.
§ 17-9.6. Organization. [Ord. No. 8522 § 5; Ord. No. 2002-11; Ord.
No. 2015-16]
The local enforcing agency established by subsection 17-9.3 shall be part
of the Englewood Cliffs Fire Department and shall be under the supervision
and control of the Fire Official, who shall report to the Chief of the Fire
Department.
§ 17-9.7. Appointment of Fire Official.
The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision of a fire
official who shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the borough,
upon recommendation of the line officers of the fire department. The fire
official shall serve for a term of one year. Any vacancy shall be filled for
the unexpired term. The fire official need not be a member of the fire
§ 17-9.1 ENGLEWOOD § 17-9.7
AO:276
department nor a resident of the borough. The mayor and council shall
specify the salary to be paid to the fire official.
§ 17-9.8. Inspectors — Employees. [Ord. No. 8522 § 6B; Ord. No.
2002-11; Ord. No. 2015-16]
Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary for the local
enforcing agency to properly carry out its responsibilities shall be appointed
on an annual basis by the Mayor and Council of the Borough upon
recommendation of the Fire Official. The Mayor and Council shall designate
the salaries to be paid to inspectors or other employees.
§ 17-9.9. Qualifications for Fire Official and Fire Inspectors.
The fire official shall have the following qualifications:
§ 17-9.10. Removal From Office. [Ord. No. 8522 § 6D; Ord. No.
2002-11; Ord. No. 2015-16]
The fire official, inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency
shall be subject to removal by the governing body of the Borough for
inefficiency or misconduct. Each inspector or employee to be so removed
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or
a designated hearing officer.
§ 17-9.11. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency (or agencies) shall
have the right to appeal to the construction board of appeals of the borough.
§ 17-9.12. Non-Life Hazard Use Fees. [Ord. No. 8522 § 8; Ord. No.
2002-11; Ord. No. 2015-16]
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act (for lifehazards
uses), registration and fees shall be required for all non-life hazards
and shall be billed and collected at the expenses of the fire official, as per
a. Seven years active fire service.
b. Fire subcode officials license.
c. Fire protection inspector/industrial commercial specialists license.
d. Fire official/fire inspectors certification qualifications:
1. Fire inspectors certification.
2. Two years active fire service; and
3. Active member in good standing of Englewood Cliffs Fire
Department.
§ 17-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-9.12
AO:277
the inspection fee schedule below. The fees shall be paid within 30 days of
notification or shall be considered delinquent.
a. Annual inspection of all buildings up to 3,000 gross square feet
(includes basements and parking garages) - Inspection fee to be $100.
b. Annual inspection of all buildings between 3,001 gross square feet and
5,000 gross square feet (includes basements and parking garages) -
Inspection fee to be $125.
c. Annual inspection of all buildings between 5,001 gross square feet and
25,000 gross square feet (includes basements and parking garages) -
Inspection fee to be $140.
d. Annual inspection of all buildings between 25,001 gross square feet and
50,000 gross square feet (includes basements and parking garages) -
Inspection fee to be $210.
e. Annual inspections of all buildings from 50,001 gross square feet and
100,000 gross square feet (includes basements and parking garages) -
Inspection fee to be $300.
f. Annual inspections of all buildings between from 100,001 gross square
feet and 250,000 gross square feet (includes basements and parking
garages) - Inspection fee to be $325.
g. Annual inspections of all buildings from 250,001 gross square feet
(includes basements and parking garages) - Inspection fee to be $500.
h. Vacant buildings shall pay an amount of one-half of the required
inspection fee.
The agency shall notify the building owner in writing of the annual fee,
which shall be paid to the local agency within 30 days of notification.
Unpaid fees outstanding after the 30th day may result in a penalty
equal to the amount of the unpaid fee. Ten additional days will be
granted for payment of the fee plus penalty.
1. Any person who fails to immediately pay a money judgment entered
against him pursuant to this subsection is subject to the penalties
in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.S.A.
5:18-2.12 (c).
2. All moneys recovered in the form of penalties shall be paid into the
treasury of Englewood Cliffs and shall be appropriated for the
enforcement of the Act.
3. If the fee and penalty remain unpaid after the ten-day extension
period, the enforcing agency may institute legal proceedings in
Municipal Court pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1 et seq.).
§ 17-9.12 ENGLEWOOD § 17-9.13
AO:278
§ 17-9.13. Certificate of Fire Code Status. [Ord. No. 8522 § 9; Ord.
No. 2002-11; Ord. No. 2015-16]
Upon request of the owner or bona fide purchaser of a building or structure,
the enforcing agency having jurisdiction over the building or structure shall
issue a certificate, either enumerating the violations indicated by its record
to be unabated and the penalties or fees indicated therefor, to be unpaid or
stating that its record indicates that no violations remain unabated and no
penalties or fees remain unpaid. The fee for such service shall be $50.
§ 17-9.14. Permits. [Ord. No. 8522 § 10; Ord. No. 2002-11; Ord. No.
2015-16]
The application fees for permits as listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70.2.9(c) of the
Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey.
§ 17-9.15. Technical Amendments and Modifications to Subchapter
3, of the 2006 International Fire Code, New Jersey Edition. [Ord.
No. 8522 § 11; Ord. No. 8823 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-11; Ord. No.
2015-16]
A. Paragraph 503.1.1 is deleted in its entirety and substituted therefor:
503.1.1. Designation: The Fire Official may designate fire lanes or fire
zones on private property to which the public is invited or which is
devoted to public use, if it is necessary to provide safety for the public
or to provide proper access for Fire Department operations in the event
of an emergency. The size of the fire zones and/or fire lanes shall be set
at the discretion of the Fire Official based upon the size of the property
and such other facts the Fire Official may deem relevant. A site plan
shall be submitted showing the existing buildings, parking spaces and
curb cuts for indicating the designated fire zone(s) or fire lane(s) by the
Fire Official.
B. The following shall be added to 503.2 Specifications:
a. Marking of Fire Lanes or Fire Zones: The marking of fire lanes shall
be the responsibility of, and at the expense of the property owner
and shall be accomplished within 30 days of receipt of notification,
and shall be finally approved by the Fire Official.
b. Designated Fire Lanes or Fire Zones shall be marked with a
minimum three-inch yellow border line and permanently mounted
metal sign(s).
c. Signs. Metal signs shall be a minimum of 12 inches by 18 inches in
dimension with reflective red letters stating "No Parking Fire Zone"
or "No Parking Fire Lane' on a white background. The sign shall be
posted a minimum of seven feet above grade level facing
approaching traffic. Sign placement shall be determined by the
Fire Official.
§ 17-9.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-9.15
AO:279
d. Jurisdiction. The Englewood Cliffs Fire Prevention Office and the
Police Department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall have
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce Section 503.4.a.
C. The following shall be added to 503.4 Obstructions of fire apparatus
access roads:
a. Obstructions: It shall be a violation of this code for any person to
park a motor vehicle in or otherwise to obstruct a fire lane or a fire
zone. Any obstruction or vehicle may be removed by the authority
having jurisdiction with all expenses incurred being paid by the
owner of said obstruction or vehicle. In the event the owner of the
obstruction is non-determinable the expense shall be borne by the
owner of said property in which the obstruction lies.
b. Marking of Fire Lanes or Fire Zones: The marking of fire lanes shall
be the responsibility of, and at the expense of the property owner
and shall be accomplished within 30 days of receipt of notification,
and shall be finally approved by the Fire Official.
c. Jurisdiction: The Englewood Cliffs Fire Prevention Office and the
Police Department of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall have
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce Section 503.4.a.
d. Violations: Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of Section 503.4 a. (Obstructions) shall, upon the
first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $50. Same may be
payable through the Violations Bureau. For each and every
subsequent offense, the violation shall be fined not less than $50,
nor in excess of $500, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fines and
imprisonment. Each day that the violation exists shall be deemed
and taken to be a separate and distinct offense for which separate
penalties may be imposed.
D. The following shall be added to Section 506 Key Boxes:
506.3 Key Box. Any building other than a residential building which has
a fire alarm system or other fire protection system, the fire official may
require a secure key box where immediate access is necessary for life
saving or firefighting purposes. The key box shall be a type approved by
the Fire Official, and shall be installed in a location approved by the fire
official. Such Key Box shall contain the following:
a. Keys to locked points of egress whether interior or exterior of such
buildings.
b. Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
c. Keys to locked electrical rooms.
d. Keys to elevator controls.
§ 17-9.15 ENGLEWOOD § 17-9.15
AO:280
§ 17-10. IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING OF ALL BUILDINGS OF
TRUSS TYPE CONSTRUCTION.
§ 17-10.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to identify and mark buildings of truss type
construction in order to safeguard the occupants and emergency personnel
in the event of fire or other hazardous condition. The provisions of this
section shall apply to the owner/occupant of any building or structure of
truss type construction as determined by the fire official.
§ 17-10.2. Definitions.
§ 17-10.3. General Regulations.
e. Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Official.
E. The following shall be added to Section 912, of the "State Fire
Prevention Code".
912.7 Markings of Fire Department Connections
They shall be painted as follows:
1. Serving standpipe or fire pump only: Bright red.
2. Service automatic sprinklers throughout the building: Bright
green.
3. Serving sprinklers covering less than the entire building:
Aluminum.
4. Serving a combined sprinkler and standpipe system throughout the
building: Yellow.
a. TRUSS TYPE CONSTRUCTION – Shall mean a single plane framework
of individual structural members connected at their ends to form a
series of triangles to span a distance greater than would be possible
with any of the individual members on their own.
b. OWNER/OCCUPANT – Shall mean any natural person or individual, or
any firm, partnership, association, limited partnership, sole
proprietorship, corporation, or other business entity or any government
agency on their own.
c. FIRE OFFICIAL – Shall mean the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Fire
Official or their designated representative as defined by N.J.A.C.
5:18-1.5 Uniform Fire Code.
d. BUILDING/STRUCTURE – Shall mean any construction or combination
of materials used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use of
occupancy, including but not limited to commercial, residential,
governmental, educational and any other place of public assembly.
§ 17-9.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-10.3
AO:281
§ 17-10.4. Fees.
§ 17-10.5. Penalties.
Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code, State
of New Jersey N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.12(b).
§ 17-10.6. Change of Form of Emblem.
The form of the identification emblem can be changed by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs at any time upon reasonable notice to the property owner/
a. This section shall be enforced by the fire official as required by the
mayor and council.
b. Upon inspection and identification of a building of truss type
construction, the owner/occupant shall be notified by the fire official of
the requirements of this section in accordance with the Uniform Fire
Code of the State of New Jersey.
c. Upon such notification, the owner/occupant shall be required to
permanently affix an Englewood Cliffs Fire Department approved
emblem. This emblem shall be an isosceles triangle 12 inches across
the base with a height of six inches. The triangle shall be of permanent
material, and colored reflective yellow. Along the base of the triangle
there shall be a three-fourths inch high black lettering containing the
words "FIRE DEPT.". Above that in the center of the triangle there shall
be a minimum one and three-eighths inch high black letter(s)
corresponding to the truss type construction as designated by the fire
official ("R" - Roof; "F" - Floor or "R/F" - Roof and Floor). The emblem
shall be placed to the left side of the main streetside entrance
approximately six feet zero inches to eight feet zero inches above
ground level, or other approved location(s) as designated by the fire
official. The identification emblem shall be properly installed within 30
days of receipt of written notice. The initial identification emblem shall
be supplied by the fire official.
d. The owner/occupant shall be required to maintain the approved
identification emblem at the designated location(s) on the building.
Missing or damaged identification emblems shall be reported to the fire
official immediately. Replacement cost shall be the responsibility of the
owner/occupant. Replacement must be made within 10 days of written
notice from the fire official. Approved identification emblems shall be
available from the fire official at the sole cost of the owner/occupant of
the premises.
a. Initial identification and marking fee - $50.
b. Replacement emblems will be billed based on current costs per unit.
c. The mayor and council may waive fees for non-profit and charitable
organizations.
§ 17-10.3 ENGLEWOOD § 17-10.6
AO:282
occupant. Any cost associated or relating to the change of the emblem shall
be borne by the owner/occupant.
Chapter 18
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 18-1. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 18-1.1. Establishment.
There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. in the
borough a planning board of nine members consisting of the following four
classes:
Class I The mayor.
Class II One of the officials of the borough other than a member of the
borough council to be appointed by the mayor.
Class III A member of the borough council to be appointed by the borough
council.
Class IV Six other citizens of the borough to be appointed by the mayor.
The members of class IV shall hold no other municipal office. A member of
the environmental commission who is also a member of the planning board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a class IV planning board member.
§ 18-1.2. Terms.
The term of the member composing class I shall correspond with his or
her official tenure. The terms of the members composing class II and class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective
terms of office whichever occurs first. The term of a class IV member who
is also a member of the environmental commission shall be for three years
or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a member of the
environmental commission, whichever occurs first.
§ 18-1.3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as provided by law for the unexpired term.
a. Alternate Members. There shall be four alternate members who shall be
appointed by the mayor each to serve a two-year term. The alternates
shall hold no other municipal office. Alternate #1 and alternate #2 shall
serve for two-year terms and alternate #3 and alternate #4 shall
initially serve a one-year term. In the event that a choice must be made
as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate #1 shall vote,
followed in succession by alternate nos. 2, 3 and 4.
§ 17-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-1.4
AO:283
§ 18-1.4. Organization of Board.
The planning board shall annually elect a chairman and vice chairman from
the members of class IV and select a secretary who may be either a member
of the planning board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 18-1.5. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of planning board attorney. The planning
board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
of compensation of the planning board attorney who shall be an attorney
other than the municipal attorney.
§ 18-1.6. Experts and Staff.
The planning board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The board shall not
however exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the borough council for its use.
§ 18-1.7. Powers and Duties Generally; Planning Board to Act as
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2012-05, all references to Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall mean Planning Board acting as the Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to law.
The planning board is authorized to adopt by-laws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
a. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a master plan for the
physical development of the borough including any areas outside its
boundaries, which in the board's judgment bear essential relation to the
planning of the borough in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of the land use and development
regulations of the borough, including but not limited to land
subdivision, site plan review and zoning regulations in accordance with
the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
c. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulations.
d. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
e. To consider and make report to the borough council within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the planning board by the
§ 18-1.4 ENGLEWOOD § 18-1.7
AO:284
§ 18-1.8. Time.
administrative officer, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26b.
f. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the zoning board of adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c from lot area, lot
dimensional setback and yard requirements provided that such
relief from lot area requirements shall not be granted for more than
one lot.
2. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of permit for
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
3. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 act for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street. Whenever
relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a hearing
on the application for development shall include reference to the
request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit as the
case may be.
g. (Reserved)
h. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the borough council for the aid and assistance of the
borough council or other agencies or officer.
i. Planning Board to Act as Zoning Board of Adjustment.
1. The planning board shall have all of the powers conferred by
planning boards by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25a and b and Articles 3, 4, 5,
6, 7 and 8 of the Municipal Land Use Law referred to therein.
2. In addition, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c, the planning board
shall exercise to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions, all of the powers of a zoning board of adjustment
provided, however, the class I and the class III members shall not
participate in the consideration of applications for development
which involve relief pursuant to subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40-55D-70.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the planning board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of planning board approval unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of the "Map Filing Law," or a deed clearly describing the approved
§ 18-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-1.8
AO:285
§ 18-1.9. Applications; Procedure for Filing.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the planning board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be filed with the
secretary of the planning board. Applicant shall file at least 14 days before
the date of the monthly meeting of the board 12 copies of a sketch plat;
12 copies of applications for minor subdivision approval; 12 copies of an
application for major subdivision approval or 12 copies of an application for
site plan review, conditional use approval, or planned development. At the
time of filing the application but, in no event less than 10 days prior to the
date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this ordinance or any rule of
the planning board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the county recording
officer, the borough engineer and the Borough tax assessor. Any such
plat or deed must be signed by the chairman and secretary of the
planning board before it will be accepted for filing by the county
recording officer.
b. Preliminary Approval Major Subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the planning
board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots the planning board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the planning board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
c. Ancillary Powers. Whenever the planning board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in section 18-1, subsection 7f of this chapter, the planning board
shall grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application and a certificate of the administrative officer
as to the failure of the planning board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant.
d. Final Approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days
from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat
shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording
officer. The planning board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of signing of the plat.
§ 18-1.8 ENGLEWOOD § 18-1.9
AO:286
secretary of the planning board. The secretary of the board shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the regular
meeting date of the board.
§ 18-1.10. Advisory Committee.
The mayor may appoint one or more persons as a citizens advisory
committee to assist or collaborate with the planning board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the mayor.
§ 18-1.11. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the environmental commission has prepared and submitted to
the planning board an index of the natural resources of the borough the
planning board shall make available to the environmental commission an
informational copy of every application of development to the planning
board. Failure of the planning board to make such informational copy
available to the environmental commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 18-1.12. Rules and Regulations.
Within 60 days the board shall adopt such written rules and regulations
where feasible as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of
oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.
shall apply.
§ 18-2. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 18-2.1. Dissolution of Zoning Board of Adjustment; Exercise of
Powers by the Planning Board; Appeal of Certain Decisions to the
Borough Council.
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2012-05, adopted on April 8, 2012, the board of
adjustment is dissolved and its powers shall be exercised by the planning
board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(c) and any development applications
now pending before the board of adjustment shall be transferred to the
planning board and all provisions of Section 18-1.1 et seq. through 18-5.7
shall be exercised by the planning board acting as the board of adjustment.
When the planning board exercises its jurisdiction under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d, the grant of a use variance shall be appealable to the borough
council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17 and Section 18-4.3.
§ 18-2.2. through § 18-2.5. (Reserved)
§ 18-2.6. Powers of the Planning Board Acting as the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
§ 18-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-2.6
AO:287
§ 18-2.7. Appeals and Applications.
a. The powers of the planning board acting as the zoning board of
adjustment shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-69 et seq. and
amendments and supplements thereto, and with the provisions of this
chapter.
b. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the planning board
acting as the zoning board of adjustment as full and complete powers as
may lawfully be conferred upon such board, including, not by way of
limitation, the authority, in connection with any cause, action or
proceeding before the board, to interpret and construe the provisions of
this chapter and the zoning regulations of the borough, or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof, and the zoning map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction, applicable to legislative
enactments.
c. The board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein, and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter and the zoning regulations of the borough would work undue
hardship. The powers and duties of the board having been delegated to
and imposed upon it by statute, the board shall in all cases follow the
provisions applicable to it in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or subsequent
statutes in such case made and provided, and it shall from time to time
furnish to any person requesting the same a copy of its rules and
information as to how appeals or applications may properly be filed
with the Board for its decision thereon.
a. Appeals to the planning board acting as the board of adjustment may be
taken by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board or
bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the
administrative officer. Each appeal shall be taken within the 20 days
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72) prescribed by the statute by filing a notice of
appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was taken, together with
five copies of the notice with the secretary of the board. The notice of
appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appeal from was taken.
b. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the planning board
acting as the board of adjustment without prior application to an
administrative officer, shall be filed with the zoning officer of the
borough. Five copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of
filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior
to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans,
maps, or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter
§ 18-2.6 ENGLEWOOD § 18-2.7
AO:288
§ 18-2.7A. Application Checklists.
The Planning Board hereby adopts the attached checklist to be completed
with the application by all applicants seeking development pursuant to
the statute and that furthermore, in the event that the applicant fails to
provide the necessary information pursuant to said checklist, the above
municipal agency shall notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies
in the application within 45 days of submission of the application. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission requirements be
waived, in which event the agency or its authorized committee shall grant
or deny the request within 45 days.
The checklist referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter.
§ 18-2.8. Power to Reverse or Modify Decisions.
In exercising the above mentioned power, the planning board acting as
the Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or amendments thereto or subsequent statutes applying
reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and make such other
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that
end have all the powers of the administrative officer from whom the appeal
was taken.
§ 18-2.9. Expiration of Variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
planning board acting as the board of adjustment permitting the erection or
alteration of any structure or structures, or permitting a specified use of any
premises shall expire by limitation unless such construction or alteration
shall have been actually commenced on each and every structure permitted
by the variance, or unless such permitted use has actually been commenced
within nine months from the date of judgment or determination of the
board; except, however, that the running of the period of limitation herein
or any rule of the planning board acting as the board of adjustment.
The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the secretary of the
board. The secretary of the board shall inform the applicant of the steps
to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of
the board.
c. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by
the Superior Court of New Jersey on application or notice to the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 18-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-2.9
AO:289
provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision
of the planning board acting as the board of adjustment to the borough
council, or to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any
manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 18-2.10. Powers Granted by Law.
The planning board acting as the board of adjustment shall have such
powers as are granted by law to:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning ordinance;
b. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the zoning map or
ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which
such board is authorized to pass by any zoning or official map
ordinance, in accordance with this act;
c. (1) Where: (a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or (b) by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific
piece of property, or (c) by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional
situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the
structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq. would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and
undue hardship upon, the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such
strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship; (2) where in an application or appeal relating to a specific
piece of property the purposes of this act or the purposes of the
"Educational Facilities Construction and Financing Act," P.L. 2000, c. 72
(C. 18A:7G-1 et al.), would be advanced by a deviation from the zoning
ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to article 8 of this act; provided,
however, that the fact that a proposed use is an inherently beneficial
use shall not be dispositive of a decision on a variance under this
subsection and provided that no variance from those departures
enumerated in subsection d of this section shall be granted under this
subsection; and provided further that the proposed development does
not require approval by the planning board of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use, in conjunction with which the planning board has
power to review a request for a variance pursuant to subsection a of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60; and
d. In particular cases for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to article 8 of this act to permit:
(1) a use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use
§ 18-2.9 ENGLEWOOD § 18-2.10
AO:290
§ 18-2.11. Additional Powers.
The planning board acting as the zoning board of adjustment shall in
addition to the powers specified in subsection 18-2.10 have power given by
law to:
or principal structure, (2) an expansion of a nonconforming use, (3)
deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to section 54 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-67) pertaining solely to a conditional use, (4)
an increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in section 3.1 of
P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C.40:55D-4), (5) an increase in the permitted density
as defined in section 3.1 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C.40:55D-4), except as
applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or twodwelling
unit buildings, which lot or lots either an isolated undersized
lot or lots are resulting from a minor subdivision or (6) a height of
a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum
height permitted in the district for a principal structure. A variance
under this subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at
least five members, in the case of a municipal board, or two-thirds of
the full authorized membership, in the case of regional board, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-77 et seq.
If an application development requests one or more variances but not
a variance for a purpose enumerated in subsection d of this section,
the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered
under subsection c of this section.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently
beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will
not substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan
and zoning ordinance. In respect to any airport safety zones delineated
under the "Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983," P.L. 1983, c. 260
(C.6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted under
the terms of this section permitting the creation or establishment of
a nonconforming use which would be prohibited under standards
promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a permit by
the Commissioner of Transportation. An application under this section
may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report;
provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within
which the zoning board of adjustment shall act. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70)
a. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the official
map.
b. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
§ 18-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-2.11
AO:291
§ 18-2.12. Time for Decision.
The planning board acting as the board of adjustment shall render its
decision not later than 120 days after the date:
§ 18-3. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING
BOARD AND PLANNING BOARD ACTING AS THE ZONING BOARD
OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 18-3.1. Conflicts of Interest.
No member of the planning board or planning board acting as the zoning
board of adjustment shall act on any matter in which he has either directly
or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such member
shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he shall not
continue to sit with the board on the hearing of such matter nor participate
in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 18-3.2. Meetings.
The board shall have the power to grant to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the planning board subdivision or site plan approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. or conditional use approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the board is reviewing an application for approval
for a use variance pursuant to subsection 18-2.10d.
a. An appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative officer; or
b. The submission of a complete application for development to the board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.
Failure of the board to render a decision within such 120-day period or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a
decision favorable to the applicant.
a. Meetings of the Board shall be scheduled no less often than once a
month and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
cancelled for lack of applications for development to process.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the chairman or on
the request of any two board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying
§ 18-2.11 ENGLEWOOD § 18-3.2
AO:292
§ 18-3.3. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the board, the findings, if
any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the municipal clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for
in the rules of the board.
§ 18-3.4. Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2017-08]
There is hereby established in connection with various applications for
development and other matters which are the subjects of this chapter the
following schedule of fees, which shall be paid by the party seeking relief to
the secretary of the land use board (hereafter "Board"):
On April 18, 2012, Ordinance 12-05 dissolved the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and transferred its statutory powers to the Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c. Thus, the fees and initial escrow deposits
herein established relate to development applications before the Planning
Board.
any matters to come before either board shall not be deemed a regular
or special meeting in accordance with the provisions of C. 40:55D-9.
Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
a. Development Application Fees. The developer shall, at the time of filing
a submission, pay fees as established below to the Secretary of the
Board by certified check or bank money order. Proposals involving more
than one use shall pay a fee equaling the sum of the fees for the
component elements of the application. Proposals requiring a
combination of approvals, such as subdivision, site plan and/or a
variance, shall pay a fee equal to the sum of the fee for each element.
These application fees shall be separate and apart from escrow deposits
for professional services as hereinafter set forth:
1. Copy of the decision of the governing body to the interested party
in connection with an appeal pursuant to subsection 18-4.3 - $10.
2. Publication in a newspaper of the decision of the governing body of
an appeal pursuant to subsection 18-4.3 - Cost of publication.
3. Development applications.
(a) Sketch plat, simple lot line charge - $50.
(b) Minor subdivision - $250.
§ 18-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-3.4
AO:293
(c) Major subdivision - $350 plus $50 per lot for each lot shown on
the plat.
(d) Site plan approval - $350 for the first 10,000 square feet of
floor space and $100 for each additional 10,000 square feet, or
part thereof, of floor space.
(e) Use variance without subdivision or site plan approval - $250.
(f) Use variance with subdivision or site plan approval - $500.
(g) Conditional use applications - $250.
(h) Interpretation of zoning map or zoning regulations - $250.
(i) Appeal of decision of Zoning Officer - $250.
(j) Bulk variances (on one application) (lot area, dimensions,
height, setbacks) - $150.
(k) Sign variance - $100.
(l) Certified list of property owners within 200 feet of a proposed
development - $20.
(m) Additional Fees for Special Meeting:
Scheduling and other expenses and services - $1,000.
Attendance of the Board Secretary at Special Meeting - $300.
Attendance of the Board Attorney at Special Meeting - $500.
The Applicant shall pay these fees into escrow maintained by the
Borough pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Laws. The fees set forth
herein for a Special Meeting shall be paid into escrow by the Applicant
no later than five business days before the Meeting. The fees set forth
herein for a Special Meeting of the Board are in addition to any other
fees, costs and escrows previously collected.
b. Escrow Deposit for Professional Fees.
1. In addition to the filing fees or any other fees required in this
Article, an applicant shall file with the Administrative Officer an
escrow deposit fee of adequate funds to cover the costs incurred
for the technical review of the application by planners, attorneys
and any other professionals, stenographic transcripts and/or
experts employed by the Borough on a consultant basis whose
services are deemed, by the Borough, necessary to report upon the
application and to cover any and all costs in processing the
application. The Chief Financial Officer shall place all such deposits
in an escrow account in the name of the applicant and shall charge
against such account all disbursements in connection with the
costs referred to above. Technical review fees shall be calculated in
§ 18-3.4 ENGLEWOOD § 18-3.4
AO:294
accordance with the actual time required for review at rates
established by a schedule of professional fees filed annually with
the Administrative Officer and approved by the Planning Board,
which schedule shall be maintained in the office of the Borough
Clerk for public inspection. The administration of technical review
escrow deposits and payments made to professionals from these
deposits shall be in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1 and Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c.256. At the time of
filing an application for development, the applicant shall pay to the
Borough an initial deposit for technical review fees as established
and set forth below:
2. Said initial escrow deposits shall be as follows:
(a) Major subdivision:
(1) Preliminary subdivision approval without variances or site
plan - $7,500;
(2) Preliminary subdivision approval with variances and/or
site plan - $8,000;
(3) Final subdivision approval without variances or site plan -
$3,000;
(4) Final subdivision approval with variances and/or site plan -
$4,000;
(b) Minor subdivision:
(1) Subdivision approval with or without variances - $3,000;
(2) Subdivision approval with site plan - $5,000.
(c) Major site plan.
(1) Preliminary site plan without variances - $3,000;
(2) Preliminary site plan with variances - $4,000;
(d) Minor site plan:
(1) Site plan without variances - $2,000;
(2) Site plan with variances - $3,000;
(e) Business signs - $2,500.
(f) Other variance applications:
(1) New home construction - $1,800;
(2) Additions to existing home - $1,200;
(3) Any other variance, including accessory structures, pools
and tennis courts - $1,000;
§ 18-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-3.4
AO:295
(g) Any other application not previously enumerated, such as
appeal from Zoning Officer's decision under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a) and Interpretation of Zoning Map or Zoning
Ordinance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b) - $1,500.
3. Discretion to Impose Lesser Application Fee or Escrow.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board shall have the
authority to waive the aforesaid application fees and/or escrow
deposits, or require an amount less than the amounts set forth in
the chapter, based upon exceptional circumstances and/or the nonprofit
status of the applicant, and upon the written request of the
applicant stating the reasons therefore.
4. Administration of Technical Review Deposit Fees. The
administration of technical review escrow deposits shall be in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1 and Section
13 of P.L. 1991, c.256 and as provided below.
(a) Each technical review escrow deposit shall be held by the
Borough in a trust account separate from the general funds of
the Borough.
(b) The Borough agency shall not process and/or take action on
the application unless all fees and deposits required in the
manner described herein have been paid by the applicant.
Property taxes shall have been paid to date.
(c) In the event that the funds in the escrow account should
become depleted prior to the completion of the application
procedure and additional funds are necessary to cover the cost
of processing the application, the applicant shall deposit
additional funds in the amount as requested by the
Administrative Officer. In order to expedite the processing of
applications by the Borough agency, the Administrative Officer
shall notify the applicant in writing when additional funds are
necessary. Such additional funds shall be deposited no later
than one week prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Board (if payment is made less than one week prior to the
next Board meeting, then payment must be made by official
bank check, certified or bank cashier's check), and the
applicant's failure to comply shall constitute grounds for
postponement or dismissal of the application. In the event that
such failure to deposit shall continue for more than 30 days
after the date of the Administrative Officer's written
notification to the applicant, then the Board chairperson shall
make a motion to dismiss the application at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board.
(d) All bills submitted to a Borough agency by the planning
consultant, engineer, attorney or other professional containing
charges to be applied to an escrow account authorized and
§ 18-3.4 ENGLEWOOD § 18-3.4
AO:296
§ 18-3.5. Hearings.
established pursuant to this section shall specify the services
performed in relation to individually identified applications for
which the charges have been made.
(e) Unit charges (i.e., per diem or hourly fees, inspection or expert
testimony charges) levied by an engineer, planning consultant,
attorney or other professional for services applied to an escrow
account authorized and approved pursuant to this section may
not exceed those unit charges contracted for and/or approved
by the Borough agency for services by these professionals
which may not, under this section, be subject to compensation
by an escrow account.
(f) Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 shall be
deposited by an applicant with the Borough for technical
review deposits pursuant to this chapter, said money shall be
deposited in an interest-bearing account and, until repaid or
applied to the purposes for which it is deposited, including the
applicant's portion of the interest earned thereon, shall
continue to be the property of the applicant and shall be held in
trust by the Borough in escrow. All interest earned and paid to
the applicant shall be in conformity with Chapter 315 of the
Laws of 1985.
(g) Any of the funds remaining in the escrow account upon
completion of the application procedure, as well as any interest
the applicant may be entitled to pursuant to Chapter 315 of the
Laws of 1985, shall be returned to the applicant, via a
resolution adopted by the Governing Body or the Board
releasing remaining escrows, and the account shall be
terminated.
(h) All escrow charges which are due and owing shall become a
lien upon the property which is the subject of the application
for development and shall remain so until paid. Overdue
escrow charges shall accrue the same interest as established
for real property taxes in the Borough. The Borough shall have
the same remedies for collection of escrow charges with
interest, cost and penalties as it has by law for the collection of
other fees.
a. Rules. The board may make rules governing the conduct of hearings
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of C. 40:55D-1
et seq. or of this chapter.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
§ 18-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-3.5
AO:297
§ 18-3.6. Notice Requirements for Hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to R.S. 40:55D-1 et seq. the applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law,
N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq. shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the board may exclude irrelevant immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
e. Records. Each board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
a. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the borough at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
b. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which applicant's
land is located. Such notice shall be given by:
1. Serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the current tax
duplicate or his agent in charge of the property; or
2. Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the current tax duplicate. A return receipt is
not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by
service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be
made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may
be made by service upon its president, a vice president, secretary
or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept
service on behalf of the corporation.
c. Notice of all hearings and applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to subsection 18-3.6b to the owners of lands in such
adjoining municipalities which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
§ 18-3.5 ENGLEWOOD § 18-3.6
AO:298
§ 18-3.7. List of Property Owners Furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-12c, the tax assessor of the
borough shall within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon
receipt of payment of a fee of $10 make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to subsection 18-3.6b.
§ 18-3.8. Decisions.
d. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the county
planning board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the official county map or on the county master plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
e. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the borough clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.
g. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an
affidavit of proof of service with the board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
h. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
i. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this ordinance shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
borough tax assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the board, which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
b. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
§ 18-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-3.8
AO:299
§ 18-3.9. Publication of Decision.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the borough. Such publication shall be arranged by the
secretary of the planning board or zoning board of adjustment, as the case
may be, without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice shall be sent
to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any
such decision.
§ 18-3.10. Payment of Taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application; or if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on
said property any approvals or other relief granted by the board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments
or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in such manner
that the borough will be adequately protected.
§ 18-3.11. Retention of Independent Wetland Consultants.
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed in the office of the borough clerk, who shall make a copy of such
filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the Borough.
a. Authority. The board, in addition to all other powers previously
delegated to those entities by statute or ordinance, shall have the right
and authority to retain independent wetland consultants in order to
prepare technical reviews, findings of fact, reports, surveys or other
documents, and/or to provide oral reports and/or testimony with
respect to any developmental application.
The estimated fees for such services shall be approved by the board,
which shall thereafter direct the applicant to deposit funds to meet
such estimates, which funds shall be required to be placed in an escrow
account for that purpose.
The board shall take no formal action on the application until all fees
and escrow funds have been deposited with the borough. Any monies
left in the escrow account, upon completion of the wetlands survey or
upon final determination by the board, as the case may be, shall be
returnable to the application as soon as possible.
b. Applications for Sewer Extension Permits. Whenever the mayor and
council are requested to execute and file an application for a sewer
§ 18-3.8 ENGLEWOOD § 18-3.11
AO:300
§ 18-4. APPEALS.
§ 18-4.1. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the planning board acting as the zoning board of adjustment
may be taken by any interested party affected by any decision of the
administrative officer of the borough based on or made in the enforcement
of the zoning ordinance, or official map. Such appeal shall be taken within
20 days (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72) by filing a notice of appeal in the manner set
forth in subsection 18-2.7a, and in accordance with the provisions of Article
9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.
§ 18-4.2. (Reserved)
§ 18-4.3. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to Borough
Council.
An appeal from any final decision of the planning board acting as the zoning
board of adjustment approving an application for development pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, may be taken to the borough council provided such
appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such final
decision of the planning board acting as the zoning board of adjustment.
Such appeal shall be made in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17.
§ 18-5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 18-5.1. Definitions of Terms.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
extension permit with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, or take any other action with regard to any development
including but not limited to, the acceptance of public improvements
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, the governing body may retain an
independent wetlands consultant in order to prepare technical reviews,
findings of fact, reports, surveys or other documents, and/or to provide
oral reports and/or testimony with respect to any development. The
mayor and council may obtain estimates for such services and direct
the developer to deposit funds necessary for said purpose, which
monies shall be placed in escrow and disbursed upon the submission of
appropriate voucher(s) by the consultant.
The mayor and council shall take no final action with respect to the
development until all fees and escrow funds have been deposited with
the Borough.
Any monies left in the escrow account, upon completion of the Wetlands
survey or upon final determination by the mayor and council, as the
case may be, shall be returned to the developer as soon as possible.
§ 18-3.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-5.1
AO:301
definition of such term found in the statute, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 18-5.2. Repeals.
All sections of the land subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance, site plan
review ordinance or any other ordinance of the borough which contains
provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby
(to the extent of such inconsistency), repealed.
§ 18-5.3. Ordinance Continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of C. 291 Laws of 1975 Section 81, the
substantive provisions of the existing land subdivision ordinance, zoning
ordinance and site plan review ordinance of the borough and the
development regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and
effect for a period of six months from the effective date of said act or until
the borough exercises the authority delegated by the ordinance to regulate
development, whichever occurs first.
§ 18-5.4. Pending Applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of section 18-4.
§ 18-5.5. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs."
§ 18-5.6. Effective Date.
This chapter shall take effect on December 21, 1976.
§ 18-5.7. Copy to be Filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter the borough clerk shall file a
copy of this ordinance with the county planning board as required by law.
The clerk shall also file with the county planning board copies of all other
ordinances of the borough relating to land use, such as the subdivision,
zoning and site plan review ordinances.
Chapter 19
SIGNS, BILLBOARDS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
§ 18-5.1 ENGLEWOOD § 19-1
AO:302
§ 19-1. REPEALER.
All ordinances dealing with the regulation and/or construction of signs,
billboards or other advertising display within the Borough are hereby
repealed and replaced by this chapter.
§ 19-2. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to cover construction, erection, use,
maintenance, regulating, restricting, limiting, prohibiting signs (both indoor
and outdoor), billboards, lights, outdoor display structures, and certain
outdoor advertising to minimize the abuses and hazards incident to the use
of such signs and which would be injurious to property in the vicinity and
to the public interest and to prevent the danger to public health, safety and
morals.
§ 19-3. DEFINITIONS.
a. SIGN – Shall mean and include every sign, billboard poster, symbol
display, advertising or advertising device for visual communication,
either indoor or outdoor (which may be viewed from outdoors), that is
used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of
the public, but not including any flag, badges or insignias of any
government or governmental agency or of any civic, charitable,
religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar organization. A sign is any
structure or part thereof, or any device attached to a structure or
painted or represented on a structure, whether inside the structure or
on the outside thereof, which shall display or include any letter, work
model, banner flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as,
or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction or
advertisement.
b. ILLUMINATED SIGN – Shall mean any sign designed to give forth any
artificial light or designed to reflect such light deriving from any source
which is intended to cause such light or reflection. See also Chapter
9-19 entitled "Lighting Restrictions."
c. FLASHING SIGN – Shall mean any illuminated design on which the
artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and
color at all times, when in use.
d. ROOF SIGN – Shall mean a sign erected, constructed and maintained
above the roof of any building.
e. BUSINESS SIGN – Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a
business or profession conducted or to products sold upon the same lot.
A premises sign is a business sign.
f. ADVERTISING SIGN – Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the same lot.
§ 19-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-3
AO:303
§ 19-4. PERMIT REQUIRED.
No sign shall hereafter be erected, constructed or maintained except as
provided in these requirements and until a permit for the same has been
issued by the Building Subcode Official. The application for a permit shall
be in such form as the Building Subcode Official may prescribe and shall
include such information and drawings as may be required by the Building
Subcode Official for a complete understanding of the proposed work. No
sign permit shall be issued until the written permission of the owner or
proof of a bona fide lessee of the property, upon which it is to be erected,
has been filed with the Building Subcode Official.
g. OFF-SITE ADVERTISING BILLBOARDS – Shall mean and include any
and all erections annexed to the land or building in the nature of a
fence, structure or a wall for the purpose of posting advertising bills
and posting other than those defined in Subsection h defining on-site
advertising billboards.
h. ON-SITE ADVERTISING BILLBOARDS – Shall mean and include any
and all erections annexed to the land or building in the nature of a
fence, structure or a wall for the purpose of posting advertising bills
and posters which advertise the business which the owner or lessee of
the lands are conducting: or advertise the products sold by the owner or
lessee of the land on the land.
a. Exemptions.
1. An occupancy sign, such as used for professional, religious,
fraternal or charitable purposes, containing not more than two
square feet. Said sign shall be at least 10 feet from any lot line.
Political campaign signs on commercial properties and on
residential properties so long as the signs on residential properties
are no larger than nine square feet in area.
Signs in residential zones indicating the name or addresses of the
occupant provided that they shall not be larger than two square
feet in area. Only one such sign per dwelling unit shall be
permitted.
Signs accessory to parking areas, provided that they designate
entrances or exits to or from a parking area, and are limited to one
sign for each such exit or entrance, with a maximum size of four
square feet for each sign.
A memorial sign or tablet, which indicates the name of the building
and/or date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or
when constructed of bronze or other, incombustible materials.
[Amended 7-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
2. The exemptions permitted in Subsection a1 of this section shall
apply only to the requirement of a permit and shall not be
§ 19-3 ENGLEWOOD § 19-4
AO:304
§ 19-5. INSPECTION; REMOVAL OF SIGNS.
Every sign, billboard light or structure erected for advertisement or display
purposes upon completion shall be inspected by the Building Subcode
Official and in case of projecting signs, annually thereafter. All signs,
billboards, lights or structures erected for advertising or display purposes
shall be properly secured, supported and braced and shall be kept in perfect
structural condition, clean and well painted at all times. The Building
Subcode Official may order the removal of any sign(s) that are not
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 19-6. POSTING SIGNS; PERMISSION REQUIRED.
No person shall paint, post, place or affix any business or commercial
advertisement, house numbers or markings, or cause same to be done
on or to any curb stone, flagstone or any other portion of any street or
sidewalk, or upon any tree, lamp post, telegraph, electric light, telephone
pole, hydrant within the limits of any street within the Borough unless by
special permission from the construction code official.
§ 19-7. SIGNS SUBJECT TO SUPERVISION OF COUNCIL AND
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Danger, warning, automobile director, street, safety signs and signs
designated primarily to indicate the location on the premises of utility
facilities for the use of the general public shall be subject to the supervision
of the Mayor and Council and Police Department.
§ 19-8. REBUILDING OR RELOCATING SIGNS.
No sign erected before September 15, 1980, shall be rebuilt or relocated
without conforming to these requirements except as otherwise provided by
law or by this chapter.
§ 19-9. INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
All electrical equipment used in connection with outdoor advertising display
signs, shall, in the absence of specific requirements, be installed in
accordance with the National Electrical Code, American Standard CL -
1946, of the latest edition thereof approved by the American Standards
Association Incorporated, and certification from the construction code
official will be required showing compliance.
§ 19-10. TEMPORARY SIGNS ACCESSORY TO CONSTRUCTION.
All temporary signs used as accessory to new construction or alteration on
the premises are permitted only after a building permit for said construction
and sign has been issued; provided, however, that said temporary sign shall
construed as relieving the owner of the sign for erection of the sign
in a good and safe condition.
§ 19-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-10
AO:305
not be larger than 12 square feet and must be removed prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for said construction.
§ 19-11. OFF-SITE BILLBOARDS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect an off-site sign or
billboard as defined herein within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 19-12. REMOVAL OF POLITICAL SIGNS.
Every sign, billboard, poster, or structure erected for advertisement
pertaining to any candidate or organization for a local, county, State or
National elective office shall be removed by the person or persons
responsible for the erection of such sign, billboard, poster or structure
within 10 days after the date of the election to which such sign, billboard,
poster or structure pertains.
§ 19-13. PROHIBITED ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 19-14. RULES GOVERNING THE THREE DISTRICTS.
Signs in residential districts. The following kinds of signs shall be permitted
in residential districts known as R-B and R-B1 Residential Zones, upon
payment for a permit as hereinafter provided.
a. Erect an off-site billboard.
b. Equip with electrical lights, battery operated light or illumination of any
other type than by natural means, any off-site billboard, as defined
herein, now in existence.
c. Equip any sign, as defined herein, with an artificial light which is not
maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
when in use.
d. Erect or equip any sign or advertising that employs flashing,
intermittent illumination, rotating or other movement.
e. Erect any illuminated sign.
a. One sign advertising a permitted use or indicating the home or office of
a member of a recognized profession provided that such sign shall not
exceed a size of one foot in length and four inches in height.
b. (1) One temporary sign indicating real property for sale or rent which
shall be not larger than four square feet maximum advertising the
sale or letting of only the premises on which it is maintained. The
sign may remain on the property until a certificate of occupancy is
issued in regard to the rental of the property. In the event that
there is a sale and not a rental, the sign may remain until the actual
closing of the property.
§ 19-10 ENGLEWOOD § 19-14
AO:306
§ 19-15. SIGNS IN B-1, B-3 and B-4 ZONES.
The following kinds of signs and advertising shall be permitted in B-1, B-3
and B-4 Zones, upon payment for a permit as hereinafter provided:
§ 19-16. SIGNS IN B-2 ZONES. [Ord. No. 8102 § 16; Ord. No. 9303
§ 1; Ord. No. 9601; Ord. No. 9705]
The following kinds of signs and advertising shall be permitted in the B-2
Zones:
(2) An additional Open House sign shall be allowed on the property on
the day and during the hours of a scheduled Open House, but it
shall be removed at the end of the day. The maximum size shall be
four square feet.
c. One temporary sign shall be permitted bearing the builder's or general
contractor's name and other pertinent information. Prior to obtaining
the certificate of occupancy, the sign must be removed and the sign
shall not be larger than four square feet (24 inches by 24 inches). No
subcontractor's sign shall be permitted.
a. All types of signs permitted in residential districts:
b. Signs attached to buildings (whether inside or outside of the structure,
permanent or temporary).
1. A premises sign or sign advertising either a business conducted or
products made or sold or services rendered upon the premises, or
on the lot adjacent thereto.
2. Signs attached to and parallel to buildings shall not exceed 32
square feet of total sign area and in no event shall exceed four feet
in height or 16 feet in length.
3. Only one sign shall be permitted for each building; however, where
a building has frontage of 200 feet or more, one additional sign
shall be permitted for every 100 lineal feet of building facing the
front street side. Where two signs are permitted, they shall be at
least 100 feet apart from each other.
4. Signs shall not extend above the parapet or the main roof level, as
distinguished from towers, pylons or other similar structures.
a. All types of signs permitted in residential districts.
b. All types of signs permitted in B-1, B-3 and B-4 Zones.
c. Billboards or ground signs shall be permitted provided they do not
exceed 32 square feet total sign area and shall in no event exceed four
feet in height or eight feet in length and shall contain only the
advertisement of the person owning the property and/or the
occupancy(s) of the premises. In no event shall the total height of the
§ 19-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-16
AO:307
§ 19-17. VERTICAL PROJECTING SIGNS. [Ord. No. 8102 § 17]
Signs may project from the walls of buildings provided they shall be so
fastened so as to be at right angles to the building line of same. No such
sign shall be more than one foot in thickness and may not project more than
one foot from the building line. Total area of advertisement shall not exceed
16 square feet on each face.
§ 19-18. REGULATION OF OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS. [Ord.
No. 8102 § 18]
Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises
is hereby prohibited in all cases except those provided for in this chapter.
§ 19-18.1. Municipal Recreation Fields. [Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 19-19. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 8102 § 19]
The construction of all advertising signs in the business and industrial
districts shall meet the standards of the American Standard Building Code
requirements for sign and outdoor display structures approved April 6,
1949, by the American Standard Association, Inc., and these building code
requirements are incorporated in this chapter and made a part hereof,
sign, and any stand or base upon which the sign rests, exceed the
height of six feet, to be measured from the ground. Only one billboard
or ground sign shall be permitted within the property boundary lines
of any business establishment. No billboard or ground sign shall be
located closer than 30 feet of any street or avenue line or within 20 feet
of any lot line.
a. Advertising signs may be placed on the interior portion of the fences
surrounding the Borough's recreation fields.
b. Advertising may be placed on the scoreboards on the Borough's
recreation fields.
c. Any sign placed pursuant to Subsections a and b above can be no bigger
than 16 square feet.
d. A sign placed pursuant to Subsections a and b above cannot be
illuminated.
e. The Borough shall be permitted to accept donations for the signs placed
pursuant to Subsections a and b above. Said donations shall be
dedicated to the Englewood Cliffs Parks and Recreation Donations
Trust.
f. The terms and conditions relating to the placement of signs on
municipal recreation fields shall be governed by a recreation field
advertising policy that is to be adopted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 19-16 ENGLEWOOD § 19-19
AO:308
except wherein there is any conflict with any of the terms of this chapter,
in which event the terms of this chapter shall supersede and make null and
void any of the requirements of the American Standard Association, Inc.
§ 19-20. COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 8102 § 20]
No sign shall hereafter be erected, constructed or maintained except in
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 19-21. PERMITS AND FEES. [Ord. No. 8102 § 21]
§ 19-22. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 8102 § 22]
Any person, including any business or entity, violating the provisions of
this chapter may be fined a sum not to exceed $100. A violation of the
provisions herein shall be deemed continuing, and for each and every day or
part thereof that a violation of this chapter is found to exist, the court may
impose a separate penalty as stated herein.
Chapter 20
RECYCLING
§ 20-1. PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to comply with the mandatory, statewide
recycling program, L. 1987. Ch. 102 and the Clean Communities and
Recycling Act. N.J.S.A. 13: 1E-92, et seq.
§ 20-2. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS (C/D) (COMMERCIAL) —
Shall mean source separated, nonputrescible recyclable material generated
from the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition
of structures within Bergen County. This material shall include concrete,
bricks, block, ferrous and non-ferrous scrap, asphalt, asphalt shingles,
recyclable wood scrap and any and all other material generated from the
construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition of a
a. No sign of any type whatsoever shall be constructed which in any
manner projects over or upon any public sidewalk or thoroughfare.
a. A permit fee for all types of signs of $10 shall be paid to the
construction code official before any permit is granted or sign erected.
b. There shall be a monthly fee of $5 for any temporary sign accessory to
construction.
§ 19-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2
AO:309
structure or structures within Bergen County that a municipality may deem
recyclable.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD (MUNICIPAL/COMMERCIAL) — Shall mean
structural material shaped in parallel furrows and ridges for rigidity, used
to make packing and shipping containers.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those recyclable
materials, including metal, glass, paper or plastic containers, food and
waste, corrugated and other cardboard, newspaper, magazines, or high
grade office paper designated in this chapter to be source separated.
DISPOSITION OR DISPOSITION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS — Shall mean the transportation, placement, reuse, sale,
donation, transfer or temporary storage for a period not exceeding six
months of designated recyclable material for all possible uses except for
disposal as solid waste.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall include a one-family home and a two family home.
FERROUS METAL SCRAP — Shall include all items made of steel, cast-iron,
tin-plated steel and white goods (such as stoves and refrigerators).
GLASS — Shall include all products made from silica or sand, soda ash
and limestone (the produce being used for packaging or bottling of various
matter) and all other material known by this term, excluding however, blue,
white, "flat" glass commonly known as window or plate glass.
GRASS (MUNICIPAL) — Shall mean green herbage sending up spike-like
shoots or blades.
HI-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Shall mean and include white typing and
ledger paper, white note pad paper, copy paper, carbon-less computer
printout paper, manila tab cards and file folders.
MAGAZINES — Shall include all magazines or periodicals printed on glossy
stock or paper of heavier quality than that commonly recognized as
"newsprint."
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE STREAM — Shall mean all residential,
commercial and institutional solid waste generated within the boundaries of
the borough, as measured in tons.
NEWSPAPERS — Shall include paper of the type commonly referred to
as "newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest.
NON-FERROUS METAL SCRAP — Shall include all items made of
aluminum, copper, lead or brass.
PAPER — Shall mean and include all newspaper, high grade office paper,
fine paper, bond paper, offset paper, exeroxgraphic paper, mimeo paper,
duplicator paper, and related types of cellulosic material containing not
more than 10% by weight or volume of non-cellulosic material such as
laminates, binders, coatings, or saturants.
§ 20-2 ENGLEWOOD § 20-2
AO:310
PAPER PRODUCT — Shall mean any paper items or commodities, including
but not limited to, paper napkins, towels, corrugated and other cardboard,
construction material, toilet tissue, paper and related types of cellulosic
products containing not more than 10% by weight or volume of
noncellulosic material such as laminates, binders, coating or saturants.
PERSONS — Shall include all individuals, partnerships, corporations,
owners, tenants, lessees, firms, societies, schools, churches, and
associations, either profit or nonprofit, within the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Shall mean containers such as polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE - #1) soda bottles, high-density polyethylene (HDPE -
#2), milk, water or detergent bottles, low density polyethylene (LDPE - #4)
containers, vinyl (V - #3) or polyvinyl chloride (PVC - #5) bottles and rigid
and foam polystyrene (PS - #6).
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean those materials which would
otherwise become municipal solid waste, which may be collected, separated
or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
RECYCLABLE PAPER PRODUCT — Shall mean any paper product
consisting of not less than 50% secondary waste paper material.
RECYCLED PAPERS — Shall mean any paper having a total weight
consisting of not less than 50% secondary waste paper materials.
RECYCLING — Shall mean any process by which materials which would
otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RECYCLING CENTER — Shall mean any facility designed and operated
solely for receiving, storing, processing and transferring source separated,
nonputrescible or source separated commingled nonputrescible metal,
glass, paper, plastic containers, corrugated and other cardboard or other
recyclable materials approved by the department of environmental
protection.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person appointed by the
mayor and council who shall be authorized to coordinate the borough's
recycling program and assist with the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
RECYCLING SERVICES — Shall mean the services provided by persons
engaged in the business of recycling, including the collection, processing,
storage, purchase, sale or disposition, or any combination thereof, of
recyclable materials.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean recyclable
materials, including but not limited to, paper, metal, glass, food waste,
office paper and plastic which are kept separate and apart from residential,
commercial and institutional solid waste by the generator thereof for the
purposes of collection, disposition and recycling.
§ 20-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2
AO:311
STEEL CANS — Shall mean rigid containers made exclusively or primarily
of steel or tin-plated steel and steel and aluminum cans used to store food,
beverages, paint and a variety of other household and consumer products.
WHITE GOODS (MUNICIPAL/COMMERCIAL) — Shall include used
appliances such as refrigerators, washers, dryers and stoves.
§ 20-3. ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS RECYCLING COORDINATOR.
There is hereby created the position of Englewood Cliffs Recycling
Coordinator.
§ 20-4. DESIGNATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
The following materials are designated as recyclable under the Englewood
Cliffs Mandatory Program:
§ 20-5. MANDATORY SEPARATION.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be mandatory for all
persons who are owners, lessees, and occupants of property in the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs, to separate the recyclable materials designated in
section 20-4 above from all other solid waste.
§ 20-6. LEAF SEPARATION AND PREPARATION.
a. Leaves.
b. Newspapers.
c. Glass.
d. Aluminum.
e. Non-ferrous metal scrap.
f. Hi-grade office paper.
g. Ferrous scrap.
h. Tin (ferrous) cans.
i. Grass.
j. Corrugated cardboard.
k. Construction and demolition debris.
l. Household batteries.
a. Leaves must be source separated from other disposable waste by each
person within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs. No person shall attempt
to place leaves for collection, along with other disposable material, as a
solid waste, to be collected by the borough's scavenger.
§ 20-2 ENGLEWOOD § 20-6
AO:312
§ 20-7. METHODS OF DISPOSAL.
§ 20-7.1. Curbside Disposal.
Newspapers shall be bundled separately in units not to exceed 30 lbs. in
weight and 12 inches in height. Bundles may be placed in paper bags, string
tied, placed in reusable wooden or plastic boxes or placed at the curb for
collection on days and at times in such a manner, as shall be designated by
the recycling coordinator under rules and regulations promulgated by this
chapter.
§ 20-7.2. Recycling Site Disposal.
At the option and expense of persons required to separate newspapers,
newspapers may be brought to the recycling center owned and operated
by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs. In this event, bundling required in
curbside disposal in the above section is waived and subject to rules and
regulations in effect at the recycling site.
§ 20-7.3. Separation.
Glass shall be separated by color, reasonably rinsed, metal caps removed.
This glass can be placed at curbside in reusable metal or plastic containers.
Aluminum cans shall be reasonably rinsed and placed at curbside in
reusable metal or plastic containers.
§ 20-7.4. Volunteer or Charitable Recycling Drive Disposal.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit volunteer, charitable
or other organizations from conducting newspaper drives. The date, time,
place and nature of these collections shall be presented in advance and in
writing to the recycling coordinator who shall approve or disapprove the
date, time, place and nature of the collection in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the recycling coordinator.
§ 20-7.5. Other Lawful Disposals.
At the option and expense of persons required to separate newspapers,
other methods of lawful disposal such as sale to other recycling centers,
may be utilized provided that in no event shall newspapers be disposed of
as part of solid waste.
b. During the period from January 1 to October 14, of each year, leaves
shall be placed in a biodegradable or plastic bag and placed curbside
for pickup.
c. During each year from October 15, through December 31, leaves shall
be placed in loose condition along the curb line of each dwelling unit. A
space shall be maintained between the leaf row and curb to allow for
normal surface water in the event of rain.
§ 20-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-7.6
AO:313
§ 20-7.6. Buy Back Program.
The borough shall establish a buy back program whereby persons may bring
their recyclables to the center for redemption of cash.
§ 20-8. FERROUS METAL INCLUDING WHITE GOODS.
Collection of ferrous metal material, including domestic or household bulky
items such as washing machines, refrigerators, stoves, household
appliances, tires, and other household furnishings, shall not be placed at the
curb for collection unless special arrangements have first been made with
the department of public works.
§ 20-9. COLLECTION.
Collection from curbside of recyclable materials shall be made by borough
employees or by contract for outside services, as directed by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, with primary administrative
supervision under the control of the recycling coordinator.
§ 20-10. AUTHORIZATION TO SELL.
The recycling coordinator may be authorized from time to time to sell and
deliver, by bid or by contract approved by the mayor and council, recyclable
materials so collected in order to obtain the best possible price.
§ 20-11. PRIVATE DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit any owner, lessee or
occupant of disposing of recyclable materials privately through a sale or
gift provided that in no event shall such recyclable materials be left at the
curb for any private pick-up and further provided that in no event shall any
recyclable materials be disposed of as part of the solid waste pick-up by the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs in accordance with the normal pick-up by the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 20-12. OWNERSHIP AFTER PLACEMENT AT CURB.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curb by the owner,
lessee or occupant for collection by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs such
recyclable materials shall become the property of the borough. It shall be
a violation of this chapter for any person unauthorized to collect or pickup
or cause to be collected or picked up any such recycling materials for
any purpose whatsoever once the same has been placed at the curb. Any
and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more premises
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 20-7.6 ENGLEWOOD § 20-13
AO:314
§ 20-13. ANNUAL REPORT.
The recycling coordinator shall annually submit a recycling tonnage report
to the New Jersey Office of Recycling.
§ 20-14. NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC.
§ 20-14.1. Public Notice; Notification by Mail.
The recycling coordinator, no later than December 31, 1987, shall notify
all persons owning, leasing or occupying property within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs of the borough's recycling opportunities and the source
separation requirements of this chapter. This notice shall be done by placing
an advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs and by posting a notice in public places where public notices are
customarily posted by the borough and by a mailing to all residential
taxpayers.
§ 20-14.2. Six Month Follow-up Notice.
Every six months after the initial notification, the recycling coordinator
shall notify all persons occupying residential commercial and institutional
premises within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs of local recycling
opportunities and the source separation requirements of this chapter. Said
notification shall be done by placing an advertisement in a newspaper
circulation in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and by posting by the
borough.
§ 20-15. REFERRAL TO PLANNING BOARD.
This chapter shall be referred to the Planning Board of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs for a revision of the Master Plan in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 13: 1E-99.16(c), specifically with regard to the collection,
disposition and recycling of designated recyclable materials within any
development proposal for the construction of 25 or more units of single
family residential housing and any commercial or industrial development
proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square feet of land. The planning board
shall also make recommendations to the mayor and council for amendments
to the borough's zoning ordinance and subdivision and site plan ordinance
in accordance with this section.
§ 20-16. ENFORCEMENT.
The recycling coordinator, department of health, superintendent of the
department of public works, or a designee thereof, and police department
are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. The recycling
coordinator is hereby authorized and directed to establish and promulgate
reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection
of recyclable materials in accordance with the terms hereof; said rules and
regulations are subject to change, modification, repeal or amendment by
majority vote of the mayor and council.
§ 20-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-17
AO:315
§ 20-17. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provision of this chapter
shall be liable to a maximum penalty at the discretion of the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for not more than $25
for the first offense, not more than $50 for a second offense, and not more
than $100 for each and every subsequent offense; excepting that a person
violating section 20-11 of this chapter shall be liable to a maximum fine of
$100 for the first offense thereof.
§ 20-18. PERMITS FOR DEMOLITION, CONSTRUCTION,
RENOVATION AND DUMPSTERS AND PODS®. [Ord. #9412, § II;
Ord. #12-18; Ord. #13-01; Ord. No. 2014-07]
Provisions of Ordinance 92-01, as amended, are hereby incorporated herein
such that prior to the demolition, construction or renovation of any
structure pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17 or other applicable regulation,
person, firm or entity making such application, shall obtain a permit from
the construction official, which charges shall be as follows:
§ 20-19. DISPOSAL OF APPLIANCES REQUIRING REFRIGERANT
REMOVAL.
Any person, entity or business disposing of refrigerators or air conditioning
units shall hereinafter be charged the sum of $15, representing the cost
of removal of noxious substances during the recycling procedure. The
recycling coordinator shall collect the $15 charge per appliance, which shall
be utilized by the borough to offset the cost of the environmental procedure
and which is charged to the borough.
Any person, business or entity falling to comply with the payment
requirements as set forth above shall be liable, in accordance with Chapter
20, section 20-17 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ 20-20. YARD WASTE.
a. The dumpster permit fee for new construction shall be $100 and will be
valid for one year.
b. The dumpster permit fee for renovations or for any other purpose shall
be $100 and will be valid for six months.
c. The permit fee for Pods® shall be $100 and shall be valid for six months
and nonrenewable. Said Pods® shall be permitted to be placed only in
the driveway.
These charges shall be paid by the person actually requesting the dumpster
and/or Pod to be placed on the property.
§ 20-17 ENGLEWOOD § 20-20.1
AO:316
§ 20-20.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 20-20.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
§ 20-20.3. Yard Waste Collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this section. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
section.
§ 20-20.4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police department or
the superintendent of the department of public works or his designee of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 20-20.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-20.5
AO:317
§ 20-20.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.
§ 20-21. PERMISSIBLE ITEMS TO BE DEPOSITED AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS' PROPERTY AT 342 HUDSON
TERRACE.
Chapter 21
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 21-1. FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT CRITERIA.
The provisions of Title 44-Code of Federal Regulations. Parts 59 and more
particularly subpart 60.3(a) thereof entitled "Flood Plain Management
Criteria for Flood-Prone Areas" are hereby adopted by reference.
a. The department of public works is a designated organization to receive
recyclables from persons who are residents of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
b. The designated site and place for recyclables to be deposited are the
bins and containers provided by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
located at 342 Hudson Terrace.
c. The only permissible items to be deposited as recyclables are:
newspapers, glass, aluminum, non-ferrous metal scrap, hi-grade office
paper, tin (ferrous) cans, corrugated cardboard, magazines, plastic and
glass bottles.
d. It shall be illegal to deposit any other materials which are not
recyclables on the aforesaid property site.
e. All recyclables must be deposited in the bins and containers provided
by the borough.
f. Any person throwing, dumping, casting or depositing any materials
upon the property occupied by the department of public works located
at 342 Hudson Terrace, is hereby prohibited.
g. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section or may be promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and each violation of any of the provisions of this section
and each day that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 20-20.5 ENGLEWOOD § 21-2
AO:318
§ 21-2. REGULATIONS.
A copy of the regulations above described are annexed hereto by reference.
§ 21-3. REGULATIONS ON FILE IN CLERK'S OFFICE.
Two copies of the rules and regulations adopted by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, as above described, have been placed on file in the
office of the borough clerk and shall remain on file so that the public at large
might view and examine same.
§ 21-4. BOROUGH CLERK'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE
WITH ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENT.
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs hereby designates the borough clerk as
the official responsible for complying with the eligibility requirement set
forth in the paragraph 59-21 et seq.
Chapter 22
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 22-1. PURPOSE OF THE CHAPTER.
The municipality hereby grants to Vision Cable Television Company, a
Corporation of the State of New Jersey, which name is designated on the
amended application and filed with the Public Utility Commission of the
State of New Jersey, its consent to place in, upon, along, across, above,
over and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and
public places in the municipality, poles, wire, cables, underground conduits,
manhole and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the municipality of a cable television system
and cable communications system.
§ 22-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. 76.5) and the Cable Television Act
(N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.) and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter
or conflict with the Federal or State definitions:
a. MUNICIPALITY – Is the Municipality of Englewood Cliffs. County of
Bergen, in the State of New Jersey.
b. COMPANY – Is the grantee of rights under this chapter and is known as
Vision Cable Television Company, a Corporation of the State of New
Jersey, which name is designated on the amended application filed with
the Public Utility Commission of the State of New Jersey.
§ 21-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2
AO:319
§ 22-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS.
Public hearing concerning the franchise herein granted to the company
were held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of
the Act and pursuant to communications with the Public Utility Commission,
and on dates meeting the approval of representatives of all applicants. The
hearings have been held as above stated and having been fully open to the
public, and the municipality having received at these hearings all comments
regarding the qualifications of the company to receive this franchise, the
municipality hereby finds that the company possesses the necessary legal,
technical, character, financial and other qualifications, and that the
company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate and
feasible.
§ 22-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE.
The consent herein granted shall expire 15 years from the date of the
expiration of the original certificate of approval as issued by the board of
public utilities. This term shall be automatically renewed for a period of 10
years unless either the municipality or the company shall, not later than 60
days before the expiration of the initial term, serve upon the other party
notice of its intention not to accept such automatic renewal as set forth in
N.J.S.A.S. 48:5A-25.
§ 22-5. FRANCHISE EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
If the company seeks a successive consent it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval
in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and 16
and applicable state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall
also petition the board for a certificate of approval authorizing continued
operation during the period following expiration of the consent granted
herein, and until such a time that a decision is made by the municipal
governing body relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ 22-6. FRANCHISE FEE.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid from subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the municipality, or any amount permitted by the New
Jersey Cable Television Act or otherwise allowed by law. The Borough of
Englewood Cliffs acknowledges the right of the Public Utility Commission of
the State of New Jersey to audit the books and records of the company for
purposes of accurately determining the franchise fee.
c. ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT – Is Chapter 186 of the General Laws
of New Jersey, 1972, Section 48:5A-1 et seq.
§ 22-2 ENGLEWOOD § 22-7
AO:320
§ 22-7. FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
municipality of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, and any property hereafter
annexed by the municipality by law.
§ 22-8. CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE.
The company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application. The time-table as
presented in the application incorporated herein has been determined to be
reasonable by Englewood Cliffs.
§ 22-9. EXTENSION OF SERVICE.
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
franchise territory described herein, in accordance with the proposal for
the provision of services as described in the application. Any additional
extension of the system will be made in accordance with the proposal in the
application.
§ 22-10. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 22-10.1. Restoration.
In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces in the natural
topography, the company shall at its sole expense restore and replace such
places or things so disturbed in as good condition as existed prior to the
commencement of said work.
§ 22-10.2. Relocation.
If any time during the period of this consent the municipality shall alter or
change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the company,
upon reasonable notice by the municipality, shall remove, re-lay and
relocate its equipment at the expense of the company.
§ 22-10.3. Temporary Removal of Cables.
The company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of its
facilities to allow moving of buildings, machinery or in other similar
circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party requesting such
action except when requested by the municipality, in which case the
company shall bear the cost.
§ 22-10.4. Removal or Trimming Trees.
During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
§ 22-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-10.4
AO:321
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the municipality so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires
and cables of the company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent
necessary to maintain proper clearance for the company's facilities.
§ 22-11. LOCAL OFFICE.
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment, malfunctions and similar matters. The present address of the
company for such purpose is 200 Roosevelt Avenue, Palisades Park, New
Jersey. Such local business office shall be open during normal business
hours, but in no event less than 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
§ 22-12. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICE.
The Cable Television Advisory Committee formed by the mayor and council
of the municipality, or any designated persons or entity which may be
appointed from time to time by the mayor and council of the municipality,
shall be empowered to receive any complaints and to process these
complaints to the Office of Cable Television, which is hereby designated as
the Complaint Officer for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b).
All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-7.1.
§ 22-13. PERFORMANCE BOND.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give a performance
bond to the municipality of Englewood Cliffs in the sum of $25,000. Such
bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of
the company as represented in its application for municipal consent
incorporated herein.
§ 22-14. RATES FOR CATV RECEPTION SERVICE.
The municipality, having determined the rates proposed in the application
for cable television receipt service are reasonable, approves them as
presented, subject to review and regulation by the board, if permitted by
law.
§ 22-15. ALLOCATION OF CHANNELS.
The municipality herein approves the allocation of channels as set forth
in the application for certification of approval filed with the Public Utility
Commission. This approval is subject, nevertheless, to the approval and
consent of the relevant agencies having authority over such allocation.
§ 22-10.4 ENGLEWOOD § 22-16
AO:322
§ 22-16. BASIC SERVICE.
The basic service includes those channels which the company is required to
carry by FCC rules and any channel which the company carries without a
separate or additional charge.
§ 22-17. EMERGENCY USES.
The company shall be required to have the capability at the head end to
override the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting
of emergency messages by the municipality. The company shall in no way
be held liable for any injury suffered by the municipality or any other
person, during an emergency, if for any reason the municipality is unable
to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated herein. The
municipality shall also establish reasonable procedures for such uses.
§ 22-18. FACILITIES FOR ACCESS TO THE SYSTEM.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing
other specialized services, then the company shall be required to apply to
the board for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions
of such contract. All costs for such application to the board shall be borne
by the contractee.
§ 22-19. INTERCONNECTION.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing
interconnection services, the company shall be required to apply to the
board for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions of
such contract. All costs for such application to the board shall be borne by
the contractee.
§ 22-20. TWO-WAY SERVICES.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing
two-way service, the company shall be required to apply to the board
for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions of such
contract. All costs for such application shall be borne by the contractee.
§ 22-21. FREE SERVICES.
The cable company shall provide the installation of one outlet and basic
monthly service to each school (and/or library) in the municipality free of
charge. Each additional outlet installation shall be paid for by the institution
on a materials plus labor basis. Monthly service on such additional outlets
shall be charged at the regular tariffed rates for additional outlets.
§ 22-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-22
AO:323
§ 22-22. LIABILITY INSURANCE.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as an insured and
insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of (1) $150,000 for bodily injury or death
to any one person, within the limit, however, of $500,000 for bodily injury
or death resulting from any one accident; (2) $100,000 for property damage
resulting from any one accident, and (3) $50,000 for all other types of
liability; or for any other amounts statutorily mandated.
§ 22-23. INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION.
We note that any portion of the application which is in conflict with the
provisions of the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5a-1 et seq., the Cable
Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. 521 et seq., and/or FCC Rules and
Regulations, 76.1 et seq., as amended, is not to be construed as effective
under the terms of this chapter.
§ 22-24. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
The company shall hold the municipality harmless for any liability arising
out of the company's operation and construction of its CATV system.
§ 22-25. SEPARABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 22-26. CONSISTENCY WITH FUTURE FEDERAL AND STATE
RULES, REGULATIONS AND ORDERS.
It is understood that should any state or federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent consistent with the application dates specified in the
change.
§ 22-27. EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE CHAPTER.
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which
the municipality received written notification that the company accepts the
terms and conditions herein.
Chapter 23
TENNIS COURTS
§ 22-22 ENGLEWOOD § 23-1
AO:324
§ 23-1. SHORT TITLE.
This chapter enacted by the mayor and council of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs to provide rules and regulations, standards and procedures for the
development and use of tennis courts in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs,
and in order to promote the public health, comfort, safety and general
welfare and to insure the ordinary development of the municipality shall be
known and may be cited: "The Tennis Court Ordinance of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs."
§ 23-2. DEFINITIONS.
§ 23-3. APPROVING AGENCY.
The provisions of the chapter shall be administered by the Englewood Cliffs
Planning Board.
§ 23-4. PROCEDURE.
§ 23-5. PLAN DETAILS.
The plan shall be drawn on a map to a scale not smaller than one inch equals
40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include and
show the following information:
a. The word "court" shall be used to designate a tennis court constructed
or to be constructed in any residential zone in the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
b. The word "owner" shall apply to any land owner, lessee, tenant or other
person occupying or in possession of lands lying within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
a. Any owner shall, prior to the construction of a court as defined by this
chapter, submit to the zoning officer a plan of the proposed court and
such other information as may be required in section 23-6 below.
b. Within 10 days of the receipt of the proposed plan the zoning officer
shall submit the said plan and other required information to the
Englewood Cliffs Planning Board. The planning board shall render a
decision within 45 days of the submission of the plan to the zoning
officer or within such further time as may be consented to by the owner,
otherwise the plan shall be deemed to be approved.
a. The name and address of the applicant and the owner and the name,
address and title of the person proposing the plan, maps and
accompanying data, the date of preparation, and the dates of each
revision where applicable.
b. An appropriate place for the signature of the chairman and secretary of
the planning board.
§ 23-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-5
AO:325
§ 23-6. DESIGN STANDARDS.
Each plan shall provide for the following:
c. The lot and block number or numbers of the lot or lots from the borough
tax maps; length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed project.
d. Scale and north sign and key map.
e. The zone district in which the lot is located.
f. The location, names and pavement and right of way width at all existing
and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question, the property
lines of all abutting properties together with the names and addresses
of the owners as disclosed on the borough tax map and tax rolls as of
the date of the site plan application and the location of existing
buildings within 200 feet of the site in question.
g. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings or
structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing present and
finished grade elevations at all corners.
h. Present and proposed topography based on New Jersey geodetic
control survey datum at two feet contour intervals including sufficient
distance outside the site to show the relationship to adjoining
properties.
i. All existing and proposed setback dimensions, landscape areas in trees
of six-inch caliper on the site attached by the proposed court and
fencing.
j. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening for noise.
k. Any and all other information and data necessary to meet any of the
requirements of this chapter not listed above.
a. A court shall be located only in the rear yard in all residential districts.
The rear yard is determined as follows:
1. In the case of a corner lot that one-half of the lot depth furthest
from the fronting street and no nearer the side street line as
required for the main building.
2. In the case of an interior lot that one-half of the lot depth furthest
from the fronting street.
3. In the case of a through lot, that one-half of the lot depth other than
that one-quarter of the lot depth nearest each and every street.
b. No court shall be located within 10 feet of the rear line or 20 feet of the
side line.
c. A tennis court shall be enclosed by a fence which shall be erected to a
height of 10 feet. The fencing shall be at least 75% open and
§ 23-5 ENGLEWOOD § 23-6
AO:326
§ 23-7. SITE IMPROVEMENT.
Each plan shall provide the following:
§ 23-8. SCHEDULE OF FEES.
The application fee for a permit to construct a court shall be $25 for each
court. In addition, the owner shall deposit $500 to cover the cost of review
services provided by the borough engineer, planning consultant, borough
attorney, planning board attorney, other borough personnel, the publication
of notices and other required expenses. The borough clerk shall place the
deposit in a trust account in the name of the owner and shall charge
thereto all disbursements for said review services. Any unused portion of
the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. If the cost of review services
unobstructed. Windscreens shall not cover more than 25% of the
fencing.
d. All setbacks required for courts shall be measured from the fence
enclosing the tennis court.
e. No owner shall be permitted to construct more than one tennis court.
f. The setback and sideyard provisions hereof shall only apply in the event
that the adjacent property is zoned residential.
g. No artificial, electric or any other type of lighting shall be permitted to
be erected or installed in connection with any tennis court.
h. No platform tennis court shall be permitted within the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
a. Adequate screening and landscaping including shrubbery, bushes, trees
and other plantings to provide protection from noise.
b. Standards for grading, drainage and other improvements found
necessary shall be provided and approved by the borough engineer
where applicable. Any off tract or drainage improvements required as a
result of the improvement shall be paid for by the owners under
standards described in the subdivision ordinance of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
c. Where any portion of the retaining structure for the court is more than
three feet above the elevation of the ground measured at the nearest
point of the property line of the lot on which the court is located, the
retaining structure and ground area intervening between it and the
property line shall be terraced and landscaped in a manner approved by
the board after review and comment by the borough engineer. In
reviewing the plan, the board shall consider proper drainage of the site
and shall minimize the visual impact of the court on adjoining property
owners by the installation of landscaping and, if necessary, the
reduction in the elevation of the court.
§ 23-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8
AO:327
exceeds the amount of deposit, sufficient additional funds will be deposited
before any zoning permit shall be issued. Upon receipt of approval from the
planning board to construct a court, the owner may secure a zoning permit
from the zoning officer upon the payment of a fee of $5.
§ 23-9. PERFORMANCE BOND.
The planning board shall, upon the granting of approval to construct a court
hereinbefore stated, require the applicant and its contractor to post a joint
performance bond in the amount of not less than $2,500 as a condition
to obtainment of a building permit. Said performance bond shall be in
form approved by the borough attorney and with surety acceptable to the
borough, and in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
The performance bond shall be released after certification by the borough
engineer that the construction has been accomplished in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the approval.
§ 23-10. RELIEF FROM THE CHAPTER.
Any person other than the owner or applicant aggrieved by the terms of this
chapter may appeal the decision of the planning board to the mayor and
council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 23-11. EXISTING COURTS.
Whenever any court existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter
violates any of the provisions hereof and the condition creates a nuisance by
reason of noise, light or drainage adversely attesting adjacent properties,
then upon written notification by the mayor and council, the zoning officer,
or any officer of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, the owner of said court
shall submit a plan of said court to the zoning officer which will correct the
said violation and nuisance in accordance with the terms of this chapter
within 30 days of said notification. The correction of this type of nuisance
is necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ 23-12. PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall for each and
every violation thereof and for each and every day that such violation
continues be subject to a fine of not more than $100 per violation at the
discretion of the magistrate of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 23-13. ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The zoning officer of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs is hereby designated
as the public officer charged with the enforcement of the terms of the
chapter. All complaints for alleged violation at any of the terms of this
chapter shall be submitted in writing to the zoning officer.
§ 23-8 ENGLEWOOD § 23-13
AO:328
Chapter 24
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
§ 24-1. REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS IN CONNECTION WITH
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENTS.
§ 24-1.1. Definition.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Shall mean any items used to extinguish any fire
and/or stop or control or contain any leaks or spill involving any hazardous
material which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after
that particular fire, leak or spill. These include but are not restricted to
fire fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand,
recovery drums and specialized protective equipment to include, but not
restricted to, acid suits, acid gloves, goggles, and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Shall mean any material, solid, liquid or gas,
listed as a hazardous substance or material including but not necessarily
limited to such substances and materials listed under N.F.P.A. Guide of
Hazardous Material, the Department of Transportation Guide Book, and
the List of Hazardous Substances and Toxic Pollutants designated by the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any motorized equipment registered or
unregistered, including but not limited to a passenger car, motorcycles,
truck, tractor-trailer, construction equipment, farm machinery, water craft,
aircraft.
VESSEL — Shall mean any container, drum, box, cylinder, bottle or tank
used to hold or contain or carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 24-1.2. Reimbursable Items.
Costs incurred by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and/or Mid Bergen
Hazardous Material Team and/or other mutual aid responding units for
the following items in connection with the suppressing, control or clean-up
of a fire, leaking or spillage involving any hazardous substances shall be
reimbursed to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs by the responsible parties
as set forth in subsection 24-1.3 below.
a. The cost of replacement of expendable items.
b. The expenses incurred by the borough for wages (regular and/or
overtime) paid to its employees/agents, as a result of a hazardous
materials incident.
c. Any and all medical costs incurred by responding personnel.
d. Any and all environmental tests required insuring a hazardous-free
environment (soil-water-air).
§ 23-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.2
AO:329
§ 24-1.3. Parties Responsible for Reimbursement.
The following parties shall make reimbursement to the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs for any reimbursable items, as set forth above.
§ 24-1.4. Period of Payment.
Any responsible party, as set forth in subsection 24-1.3 hereof, shall
reimburse the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and/or the Mid Bergen
Hazardous Materials Team for the full price of any reimbursable items used
to extinguish such a fire, or contain such a leak, or control and clean up
such a spill within 45 days after receipt of a bill for such items from the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs. Billing is to include a 20% administrative fee.
§ 24-1.5. Penalties.
Any responsible party, as set forth in subsection 24-1.3 hereof, who fails to
reimburse the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for reimbursable items within
the time limit set forth in subsection 24-1.4 hereof, shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 or imprisonment for a
period of not more than 90 days, or both. Upon the failure to reimburse
the borough for such cost of such items within said forty-five-day period,
and in addition to any penalty provided for in subsection 24-1.5 hereof, the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs may take such action, as may be provided by
law, to recover such costs from the responsible party.
e. A fixed hourly rate for the use of apparatus at incidents computed at the
rate of $200 per hour for use of Haz Mat truck to the Mid Bergen
Hazardous Materials Team and $150 per hour for the use of any other
vehicle to the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
f. All expenses incurred by the Mid Bergen Hazardous Materials Team
and/or other responding mutual aid responding units.
g. Services rendered by any recovery company, towing company or other
technical assistance called for by the fire department to handle such
incidents.
a. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak or
spill of hazardous materials.
b. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or private property,
whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through
negligence.
c. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates.
d. Any person responsible for any fire leaks or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property.
§ 24-1.2 ENGLEWOOD § 24-1.5
AO:330
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
ZONING
§ 30-1. PURPOSES. [Ord. #9306, A I]
There is hereby established a comprehensive zoning plan for the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs which plan is set forth in the text, map and schedule
that constitute this chapter. Said plan is adopted for the purposes set forth
in Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975 and more particularly for the
protection and promotion of the public health, safety and welfare in the
following manner:
a. Guide to the future growth and development of the Borough in
accordance with a comprehensive plan of land use and population
density, as set forth in the Master Plan of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs that represents the most beneficial, economically productive, and
socially satisfactory relationships among the residential and
nonresidential areas within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs having
regard to their suitability for the various uses appropriate to each of
them and their potentiality for such uses, as indicated by existing
conditions and trends in population, in building development, and in
economic activity, considering such conditions and trends both within
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and with respect to its relation to
adjacent areas and to the larger community of Bergen County as part of
the New York-New Jersey Metropolitan Region.
§ 24-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-1
AO:331
§ 30-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #9306, A II; Ord. #9608, § 1; Ord.
#9715, § 1; Ord. #9717; Ord. #9801, § 1; Ord. #9905; Ord. #9908;
Ord. #9909, § 1; Ord. No. 2000-02, § 1; Ord. #2002-01; Ord.
#2005-38]
b. Protecting and conserving the value of land throughout the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs and the value of buildings appropriate to the various
districts established by this chapter.
c. Assuring a harmonious relationship among the various districts
established by this chapter, minimizing such conflicts among uses as
may arise in connection with the orderly expansion of various use
districts in accordance with the purposes and the intent of this chapter
and in furtherance of the objectives of the Master Plan of the Borough,
and bringing about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and
buildings throughout the Borough of Englewood Cliffs to the
comprehensive zoning plan set forth in this chapter.
d. Aiding in bringing about the most beneficial relation between the uses
of land and buildings and the movement of traffic through and the
circulation of traffic within the Borough, having particular regard to the
avoidance of congestion on the highways and streets in the Borough
and provision of safe and convenient traffic access appropriate to the
various uses of land and buildings throughout the Borough.
e. Aiding in providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient
provision of public facilities and services, and for private enterprise in
building development, investment and other economic activity relating
to the uses of land and buildings throughout the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs.
a. General. All words used in this chapter in the present tense include the
future tense; all words in the plural number include the singular
number and all words in the singular number include the plural
number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates
otherwise. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured
horizontally. The word "building" includes the word "structure"; the
word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "used" shall be deemed
also to include "designed, intended or arranged to be used"; the term
"erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed,"
"reconstructed," "altered," or "moved"; and the word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory. The word "zone" includes the word
"district"; the word "Borough" means the "Borough of Englewood Cliffs
in the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey." The terms "Borough
Council," "Board of Adjustment," "Planning Board," "Administrative
Officer" and "Zoning Officer" mean the respective said boards and
officers of said Borough.
b. Specific Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and
terms used herein are defined as follows, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
§ 30-1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-2
AO:332
AFFORDABLE — Shall mean a sale or rent within the means of low or
moderate income households as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
AGENCY — Shall mean the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance
Agency established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Shall mean man-made trees,
clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of
antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Shall mean any structure, combination of materials or
form of apparatus which is designed and used for the purpose of
sending, transmitting, receiving or relaying low-power mobile radio
waves for commercial communications systems or other similar
technologies. Antenna shall not include conventional television
antenna.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — Shall mean, in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 8:36-1 et seq., an assisted living residence shall be defined
as a facility which is licensed by the Department of Health to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that
assisted living services are available when needed, for four or more
adult persons unrelated to the proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette,
and a lockable door on the unit entrance.
ATTIC — Shall mean a space directly below a pitched roof and located
between the roof rafters and the ceiling beams of the story below, which
space is not used for human occupancy.
AUTHORITY — Shall mean the entity designated by the Borough for the
purpose of monitoring the occupancy, resale and rental restrictions of
low and moderate income housing units.
AUTO SALES LOT — Shall mean any area, where two or more vehicles
in operating condition are offered for sale or lease or are displayed
other than within a completely enclosed building.
AVAILABLE SITE — Shall mean a site with a clear title, free of
encumbrances which preclude development for low and moderate
income housing.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — Shall mean the lines that connect a
provider's tower/cell site to one or more cellular telephone switching
offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched
telephone network.
BASEMENT — Shall mean a story partly underground and having more
than half of its clear height below the finished grade. A basement
shall not be considered a story for purposes of height measurement
in determining the permissible number of stories when used solely
for incidental or accessory storage or for the housing of mechanical
equipment which services the building. Computers are not permitted
mechanical equipment.
§ 30-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2
AO:333
BERM — Shall mean a mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used
as a view obstruction.
BLOCK — Shall mean that property abutting on one side of a street
and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets,
or nearest intersecting or intercepting street, parking boundary, or
waterway.
BUFFER — Shall mean an area within a property or site, generally
adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either consisting of
natural, existing vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs,
fences and/or berms, designed to continuously limit view of and/or
sound from the site to adjacent sites or properties.
BUILDING — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous
occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA — Shall mean the total of interior areas measured
on a horizontal plane to the exterior wall of all building levels of the
principal building and all accessory buildings, inclusive of covered and
uncovered porches, terraces, chimneys, steps, stairs and extensions.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Shall mean that in all zones except residential
and the B-2 zone, the height of building shall be the vertical distance
exclusive of chimneys and similar features measured from the mean
curb level to the highest point of the building. In the B-2 zone, the
height of the building shall be limited to 35 feet or less from the curb
level immediately adjacent to the front of the building.
In residential zones building height shall be 30 feet (measured by
taking the four corner elevations and the four midpoint elevations and
dividing them by eight by utilizing the house box) of the existing grade
or the finished grade, whichever is greater. In any event the height
of the measure from the mean curb level to the highest point of the
building shall not be more than 32 feet exclusive of chimneys.
BUILDING LINE — Shall mean a line parallel to the front lot line or side
lot line and removed from it by the depth or distance of the required
front yard or side yard requirement.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — Shall mean a one-story subordinate
building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main
or principal building on the same lot. Cabanas, gazebos, prefabricated
utility sheds and other structures of this type are considered accessory
buildings.
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL — Shall mean a building in which is
conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household determined to
be income eligible for a low and moderate income housing unit by
a municipal authority after the Authority has verified the household's
gross annual income, credit history and compared the household's
§ 30-2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-2
AO:334
family size to the occupancy requirements delineated in N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.a(b)14.
CLUB — Shall mean premises or building reserved for the exclusive use
of members of an organization and their guests for civic, charitable,
social or recreational purposes not conducted for gain, provided that
there are no sales on the premises of any merchandise or service except
to members and except for occasional sales, not more than four times
per year for fund raising for club purposes.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Shall mean every type of vehicle used
for commercial purposes, such as transportation of goods, wares,
merchandise and passengers excepting vehicles of the passenger car
type and the type commonly known as station wagons, but including
trailers and construction equipment of every kind.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE - "COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED" — Shall mean any community
residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448 (C. 30:11B-1
et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally disabled
or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but
not be limited to: group homes, half-way houses, intermediate care
facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels.
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use permitted in a particular
zoning district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location
will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or
operation of such use as contained in the Zoning Ordinance, and upon
the issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Share Housing Act and which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance
with sound regional planning considerations in the State.
COURT — Shall mean an unoccupied space on a lot other than a yard.
An outer court is one that extends to a street line or to a front or rear
yard. An inner court is any other court.
COVERAGE — Shall mean the percentage of the lot covered by the
principal and accessory building area.
CURB LEVEL — Shall mean the mean level of the existing or proposed
curb or in the absence of a curb, of the lot at the street line.
DECK, PARKING — Shall mean a horizontal surface which forms a roof
or platform supported on columns or walls.
DECK, PORCH OR RAISED PLATFORM — Shall mean a horizontal
surface extending or cantilevered from the main body of the dwelling,
which may be supported on columns or footings, enclosed by an open
railing extending around its perimeter.
§ 30-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2
AO:335
DISTRICT, MORE RESTRICTED OR LESS RESTRICTED — In the
following list each district shall be deemed to be more restricted than
the districts the symbols for which follow it: R-A, R-B, R-B1, B-1, B-2,
B-3, B-4, I. Individual uses shall be deemed to be more restricted or less
restricted in accordance with their classification in the foregoing list of
districts.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean an area leading from a public or private
thoroughfare into any property used especially by automobiles and
surfaced with macadam, concrete or crushed stone.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building containing a dwelling unit. The
term "dwelling" or "one-family dwelling" shall not be deemed to include
hotel or other accommodations used for more or less transient
occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a building or portion thereof having
cooking and plumbing facilities for one family.
DWELLING, DETACHED — Shall mean a one-family dwelling which is
completely surrounded by open space which constitutes yard standards
as required by this chapter.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT — Shall mean a statement
which shall provide information needed to evaluate the effects of a
proposed project upon the environment of the Borough and the
surrounding area and which shall include the following:
An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project
site and in the surrounding region which shall describe air quality,
water quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soils, topography,
vegetation, wildlife, aquatic organisms, ecology, demography, land
use, zoning, aesthetics, history and archaeology.
a.
A project description which shall specify what is to be done and
how it is to be done, during construction and operation.
b.
A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals as required by
law and the status of each.
c.
An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics
described in paragraph a hereinabove.
d.
A listing of adverse environmental impacts which cannot be
avoided.
e.
Steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts
during the construction and operation, both at the project site and
the surrounding region.
f.
Alternatives to all or any part of the project with reasons for their
acceptability or unacceptability.
g.
A reference list of all pertinent published information relating to
the project, the project site, and the surrounding region.
h.
§ 30-2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-2
AO:336
FAA — Shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — Shall mean the unrestricted price of a low or
moderate income housing unit if sold at the current real estate market
rate.
FAIR SHARE PLAN — Shall mean that plan or proposal, which is in
a form that may readily be converted into an ordinance, by which
the Borough proposes to satisfy its obligation to create a realistic
opportunity to meet its fair share of low and moderate income housing
needs of its region and which details the affirmative measures the
Borough proposes to undertake to achieve its fair share of low and
moderate income housing, addresses the development regulations
necessary to implement the housing element, and addresses the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7 through 11.
FAMILY — Shall mean one or more persons related by blood, adoption
or marriage exclusive of household servants. A number of persons but
not exceeding two living and cooking together as a single housekeeping
unit although not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall also be
deemed to constitute a family for purposes of this chapter. A family
shall also include foster children placed with a family by the New Jersey
Department of Institutions and Agencies, Division of Youth and Family
Services or a duly incorporated child care agency and children placed
pursuant to law in single family dwellings known as group homes.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
FENCE — Shall mean an artificially constructed barrier made of wood,
masonry, stone, wrought iron or wire.
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the entire floor area of each floor measured
to the interior perimeter of the exterior walls of the building.
GARAGE, ACCESSORY — Shall mean a one-story accessory building or
part of a main building used only for the storage of motor vehicles as
an accessory use.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Shall mean a garage in which no business,
commercial service or industry connected with motor vehicles is
carried on.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — Shall mean any establishment
supplying and selling gasoline or other motor fuel or oil directly to
motor vehicles from a pump located outside a building and on private
property, and wherein the building establishment shall be permitted the
sale of accessories; and also repair and service of passenger vehicles,
within a part of the building limited in area to a space not exceeding
that required to house three passenger vehicles, but not including auto
body work, welding, spray painting or car washing, except where the
car washing is incidental to the general servicing of the vehicles.
GRADES — New grades may exceed up to 18 inches from the original
grade of the subject lot for the purpose of height calculations if
permitted by the Borough Engineer.
§ 30-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2
AO:337
GROUND FLOOR LOBBY — Shall mean space located on parking level
(grade level) with offices above and shall be limited to stairwells and/
or elevator. Reception area or areas which require occupancy by
personnel are prohibited. Ground floor lobby area shall be excluded
from gross area for parking requirements.
HEIGHT — Shall mean, when referring to a tower, the distance
measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to the highest
point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any
antenna. The height of the antenna shall not include any lightning rod
mounted at the top of the tower.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a development
containing low and moderate income units. This term includes, but
is not necessarily limited to, new construction, the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to a residential structure and the creation
of new low and moderate income units through the substantial
rehabilitation of a vacant residential structure.
LOADING SPACE — Shall mean any off-street space not less than 12
feet wide and 30 feet long or longer, surfaced to be available in all
weather, suitable for the loading or unloading of goods and having
direct access to a street or alley.
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established
by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit; and occupied by one building and accessory
building incidental to it.
LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean that portion of a lot covered by the
largest floor area of all structures, both principal and accessory.
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the mean distance between its mean front
lot line and its mean rear lot line.
LOT LINE — Shall mean the line of demarcation between public and
private properties or adjoining private properties.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the mean width of a lot measured at right
angles to its mean depth.
LOT, CORNER — Shall mean a lot at the junction of and abutting on
two or more intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection
does not exceed 135°.
LOT, FRONTAGE — Shall mean the narrower side of the lot abutting a
street, regardless of the location of the principal entrance of a building
thereof. Where two lot lines abutting streets are of equal width, the
owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — Shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, PARKING — Shall mean an area not within a building where
passenger vehicles may be stored for the purpose of short-term, daily,
or overnight off-street parking.
§ 30-2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-2
AO:338
LOW INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean housing affordable according
to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the standards included in this chapter for home ownership and rental
costs, occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross
household income level equal to 50% or less of the median gross
household income for households of the same size within the housing
region in which the housing is located, and which is subject to
affordability controls promulgated by COAH.
MARKET RATE UNITS — Shall mean housing within an inclusionary
development, not restricted to low and moderate income households,
that may sell at any price determined by a willing seller and a willing
buyer.
MOBILE CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (SATELLITE
ANTENNA) — Shall mean any structure, combination of materials or
form of apparatus which is designed and used for the purpose of
sending, transmitting, receiving or relaying low-power mobile radio
waves for commercial communications systems or other similar
technologies. Satellite antenna shall not include conventional television
antenna.
MOBILE CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS TOWER (TOWER) — Shall
mean a free standing structure of any type which is designed, intended
or constructed for the installation of or on which is fixed a mobile
cellular communications antenna or antennas.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean housing affordable
according to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development or the standards in this chapter for home ownership and
rental costs, occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with
a gross household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median gross income for households of the same size within the housing
region in which the housing is located, and which is subject to the
affordability controls promulgated by COAH.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure, the size,
dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use or activity which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — Shall mean that part of a building wherein
the clerical and administrative functions of a business are conducted;
or where professional services are provided to clients or patients;
such as offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers, engineers, architects,
accountants, professional planners and insurance agents.
§ 30-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2
AO:339
PARKING AREA — Shall mean any open unoccupied space used or
required for use for parking of private automobiles or other private
vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories
are sold and no other business is conducted.
PARKING SPACE — Shall mean an off-street space (a) available for the
parking of one motor vehicle, (b) being at least nine feet wide and 19
feet in length, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant
thereto, and (c) having direct usable access to a street or alley. All
parking spaces, whether open or enclosed shall be paved in accordance
with the Borough Engineer's specifications.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — Shall mean a criterion established to
control noise, air or water pollution, vibration, fire or explosion hazards,
glare, heat or other condition harmful to the health, safety and comfort
of humans, animals and plants which conditions are generated by or
inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — Shall mean a meeting hall, club
house, auditorium, church, synagogue, or other structure or portion of
a structure, accommodating 10 or more persons and used at regular
or periodic intervals as a gathering place for purposes of conference,
deliberation, worship, entertainment, amusement, recreation or
education, or performance of social, athletic or cultural programs.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Shall mean
any tower or antenna for which a building permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance,22 including
permitted towers that have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and not expired.
REALISTIC DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL — Shall mean the municipal
obligation as calculated pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:5:93-4.2(e).
RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a separate
building designated for, or occupied by, exclusively a one-family unit.
A separate entrance, a separate kitchen and a separate bathroom shall
be prima facie proof that it is the intention of the owner to create a
multi-family dwelling and the same shall be prohibited in a single family
residential district.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an establishment serving food and/or
beverages for consumption within the building in which the food is
prepared.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Shall mean an establishment where
orders are primarily taken and food is dispensed to the public at a
take-out counter or drive-in window, whether for on-premises or offpremises
consumption (excluding luncheonette, diner, tavern counter
or bar service).
22.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 9909 was adopted June 16, 1999.
§ 30-2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-2
AO:340
SCHOOL BUSINESS — Shall mean a school limited to special
instruction such as a business, art, music, trades, handicraft, dancing
or riding.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — Shall mean an elementary or intermediate school
giving regular instruction capable of meeting the requirements of State
compulsory education laws and approved as such and operating at least
five days a week for a normal school year and supported by other than
public funds.
SENDING MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean for purposes of an RCA, a
Borough which transfers a portion of its fair share obligation to another
willing municipality.
SERVICE AREAS — Shall mean areas used for corridors, washrooms,
stairwells, elevators, electrical rooms and mechanical rooms.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean a business employing less
than six employees and occupying less than 2,000 square feet of floor
area conducted to render a personal service including shoe repair
shops, dry cleaning shops, laundries or conducted to render a
household service including the repair of watches, clocks, locks,
furniture, radios, television sets and other household appliances, but
not including the repair of furnaces and boilers, refrigerators, air
conditioners and other articles of similar bulk and weight.
SET-ASIDE — Shall mean the percentage of housing units devoted
to low and moderate income households within an inclusionary
development.
SETBACK (FRONT) — Shall mean the distance between the street
right-of-way line and the front line of a building, or any projection
thereof, excluding uncovered steps.
SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more lots
on which is shown (a) the existing and proposed conditions of the
lot including but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation,
drainage, flood plains, marshes and waterways, (b) the location of
all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways,
means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services,
landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening devices, and (c)
any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter requiring
review and approval of site plans by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
STORY — Shall mean that portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there
be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it. When applying to the permissible height of a building,
the term "story" shall not include a basement as defined in this section.
In a structure having floors that do not extend across the entire length
and width of the structure at one height, commonly known as splitlevel
design, the number of stories shall be determined by counting
§ 30-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2
AO:341
the number of floors directly over each other at that side or end of
the building having the greater number of floors or levels. For office
buildings, ground level parking below an office floor shall not constitute
a story. The overall building height limit in feet shall apply also.
STORY, HALF — Shall mean that portion of a building situated above
a full story and having at least two opposite exterior walls meeting a
sloping roof at a level not higher above the floor than five feet.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way (1) which is an existing State, County
or municipal roadway, or (2) which is shown upon a plat heretofore
approved pursuant to law, or (3) which is approved by official action
as provided for by law, or (4) which is shown on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and to grant to such board the power
to review plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the
street lines.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Shall mean any change in or addition to
the supporting members of a structure.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on,
above, or below the surface of a parcel of land except:
TENANT — Shall mean an occupant of the building renting internal
space and not renting any portion of the building for the sole purpose
of erecting or affixing an antenna or tower upon the building.23
TOWER — Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antenna for
telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
Any area adjacent to a dwelling improved by pavement or other
construction material to be used for outdoor dining or other
recreational purposes commonly known as a "patio" provided that
the surface of said improved area shall not be more than six inches
above the ground level and that said improved area shall be
without walls or railings of any kind and without a roof, canopy or
other, similar permanently fixed coverages; and
a.
Any permanently surfaced walkway or driveway installed at ground
level shall not be deemed to be a "structure" within the meaning of
the term as used in this chapter.
b.
23.This definition pertains to mobile cellular communications antennas and towers, Section
30-20.
§ 30-2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-2
AO:342
§ 30-3. DIVISION OF BOROUGH INTO ZONES. [Ord. #9306, A III;
Ord. #9608, § 2; Ord. #9909, § 9; Ord. #9910; Ord. No. 2012-20,
§§ 1, 5]
In order to regulate and restrict the location of buildings intended for
residential and nonresidential purposes; to regulate and limit the size and
height of buildings; to regulate the use and limit the intensity of the use of
the land and the density of population; and to regulate and determine the
size of yards and other open spaces surrounding buildings, the Borough is
hereby divided into districts, of which there shall be 10 in number, known
as:
R-A Residential, Single-Family
R-B Residential, Single-Family
R-B1 Residential, Single-Family
B-1 Office
structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any
support thereto.
USE — Shall mean the specific purpose for which land or a building
is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. The term
"permitted use" or its equivalent shall be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — Shall mean a use which is customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal use of a lot or a building and located
on the same lot therewith.
USE, PRINCIPAL — Shall mean the specific purpose for which land or
building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be
occupied or maintained.
YARD — Shall mean an open space of uniform width or depth on the
same lot with a building, which open space lies between the building
and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward except for certain features specified in Section 30-6.
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean a yard extending across the full width of
the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest point
of the building.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean a yard extending across the full width of the
lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest point of
the building.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean a yard between the side line of the lot and
the nearest point of the building or structure and extending from the
front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of either of such yards, to
the front or rear lot line, as may be.
Note: Any structure (retaining walls excluded) below grade shall
conform to the side yard, rear yard and front yard requirements.
§ 30-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3
AO:343
B-2 Limited Business
B-2A Limited Business Southeast Overlay
B-3 Special Retail
B-4 Restricted Commercial
I Institutional
The aforesaid districts are hereby established by the designations, locations
and boundaries thereof set forth and indicated on a map entitled "Zoning
Map, Borough of Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey" and dated 10 January 1979,
as revised to April 11, 1996, which map is hereby adopted as part of this
chapter insofar as it indicates said designations, locations and boundaries.24
a. In construing the said map the following rules shall apply:
1. Zone lines follow existing lot lines, municipal boundaries and street
center lines, or are straight-line extensions thereof. Zone line
setback dimensions are indicated where zone depth exceeds one lot
or is less than one lot.
2. The Zoning Officer or in his absence the Administrative Officer
shall interpret the Zoning Map and in case of doubt, the district
boundary lines shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment.
3. Questions arising from the application or interpretation of this
section shall be decided by appeal to the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975 in such
case made and provided.
b. Zoning Map Amendments.
1. Amend map to create B-2A Limited Business Southeast Overlay at
the following parcels:
Block 207 Lot 5
Block 207 Lot 6
Block 207 Lot 7
Block 412 Lot 1
Block 412 Lot 2
Block 412 Lot 3
Block 412 Lot 4
Block 412 Lot 5
Block 412 Lot 6
Block 412 Lot 7
Block 412 Lot 8
24.Editor's Note: The map referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk.
§ 30-3 ENGLEWOOD § 30-3
AO:344
§ 30-4. EFFECT OF ESTABLISHMENT OF REGULATIONS. [Ord.
#9306, A IV]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be
used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose other than a purpose
which is included among the uses permitted in the district in which such
building or land is located nor conducted in any manner contrary to any of
the requirements specified in said district.
No building shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered
to exceed in height, the limit designated for the district in which such
building is located.
No building shall hereafter be erected, nor shall any existing building be
structurally altered, enlarged, rebuilt, or moved, nor shall any open space
contiguous to any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner,
except in conformity to the yard, lot width and area, building location,
percentage of lot covered by building area, minimum habitable floor area,
off-street parking space, off-street loading space, and other applicable space
and area regulations designed for the district in which such building or
space is located, subject to such modifications thereof and such general
provisions as are set forth in said district.
Off-street parking space and off-street loading space shall be provided as
specified and shall be provided with necessary passageways and driveways
appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto. All such parking space and
loading space, together with such passageways and driveways, shall be
deemed to be required space on the lot on which the same is situated and
shall not thereafter be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except
as otherwise provided.
No yard or other open space provided contiguous to any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered
as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or
other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open
space for a building on any other lot.
Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building,
such separation shall be effected in such manner as not to impair any of
the requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing buildings and
Block 412 Lot 9
Block 412 Lot 10
Block 412 Lot 11
Block 515 Lot 3
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-4
AO:345
all yards and other open spaces in connection therewith, except as may be
otherwise required or provided by law, and no permit shall be issued for the
erection of a building on the new lot thus created unless it complies with all
of the provisions of this chapter.
Existing Zone Lots of Record. In the case of any lot or plot substandard in
area or width by the terms of this chapter, the rights acquired or existing
therein for the use of said lot or plot as a building parcel, shall terminate
and become non-existent and void when the said substandard plot merges
in fee with any adjoining land or property. Such merger shall be deemed
to occur when the same person or persons acquire, obtain or have fee
ownership in both parcels whether by purchase, sale, devise, gift or
otherwise.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction, or designated use of any building, actual construction
of which was lawfully commenced prior to the time this chapter or any
amendment thereof affecting the same takes effect and on which building
actual construction is completed within one year after such time.
For single-family detached dwellings, there shall be only one principal
structure per lot. For nonresidential uses, there shall be only one principal
use per lot although more than one structure shall be permitted; if there
are several lessees or owners occupying separate principal structures, a
subdivision shall be required so that there will be only one principal
structure per lot.
§ 30-5. USE REGULATIONS. [Ord. #9306, A V]
Within the various zones as indicated on the Englewood Cliffs Zoning Map
and subject to all dimensional requirements and other regulations,
requirements and conditions set forth in this chapter, land, buildings and
structures may be used only in accordance with the following subsections.
Any use not listed as a principal permitted use or as a conditional use is
specifically prohibited.
§ 30-5.1. Permitted in R-A District (Single-Family Residential).
[Ord. #9306, A V; Ord. #9906; Ord. #2000-05, § 1; Ord. #2006-06;
Ord. #2008-07]
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Single-family detached dwellings used as a residence by not more
than one family and not to exceed one such dwelling unit on each
lot.
2. Private garage or other accessory buildings customarily incidental
to any permitted use, and provided that no such accessory building
shall be occupied for residential purposes.
3. Public schools.
§ 30-4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-5.1
AO:346
4. Public parks and public recreation areas.
5. Driveway access to any residential lot shall be limited to a driveway
width and cut of no more than 16 feet per single vehicle driveway
and no more than 22 feet for a two or three car wide driveway
located in the required front yard setback area.
In the case of a circular driveway located in the required front yard
area or in front of the front building wall of the residence, the width
and cut of the driveway shall be limited to 10 feet and not exceed
30% coverage of the required front yard area. A circular driveway
may exceed a width and cut of 10 feet and up to a maximum of
12 feet provided that it is constructed of pavers. If this occurs,
the coverage of the required front yard area shall not exceed 35%.
There shall be no paving of any other portion of the front or side
yards except for sidewalks. It being expressly the intent of the
governing body to prohibit paving of said areas for parking or other
purposes.
6. In R-A zones, a driveway shall have a minimum side yard of three
feet. In RB and RB-1 zones, a driveway shall have a minimum side
yard of two feet.
b. As permitted accessory uses:
1. Home office use, meaning an office activity carried on for gain by a
resident in a dwelling unit, shall be permitted accessory use in
residential zone districts, provided:
(a) The use is limited solely to office use;
(b) The use is operated by or employs in the residence only a
resident or residents who are permanent full-time residents of
the dwelling unit, and no other persons;
(c) No nonresident employees, customers, or business invitees or
guests shall visit the dwelling unit for business purposes;
(d) The use shall be located in only one room of the dwelling unit,
which shall not be served by an entrance separate from the
household;
(e) Interior storage of materials shall only consist of office
supplies;
(f) There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or
structures because of the use, and no outside appearance of a
business use, including, but not limited to parking, storage,
signs or lights;
(g) The use operates no equipment or process that creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic
§ 30-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-5.1
AO:347
§ 30-5.2. Permitted in R-B District (Single-Family Residential).
[Ord. #2000-05, § 1]
§ 30-5.3. Permitted in R-B1 District (Single-Family Residential).
[Ord. #9306, A V; Ord. #2000-05, § 1]
§ 30-5.4. Permitted in the B-1 District (Office). [Ord. #9306, A V;
Ord. #9612]
§ 30-5.5. Permitted in the B-2 District (Limited Business). [Ord.
#9306, A V; Ord. No. 9802; Ord. #2000-10]
interference, including interference with telephone, radio or
television reception, detectable by neighboring residents;
(h) The use does not require any increased or enhanced electrical
or water supply;
(i) The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as
other residential uses in the zone district;
(j) The capacity and quality of effluent is typical of normal
residential use, and creates no potential or actual detriment to
the sanitary sewer system or its components;
(k) Delivery trucks shall be limited to U.S. Postal Service, United
Parcel Service, Federal Express, and other delivery services
providing regular service to residential uses in the zone
district;
(l) All vehicular traffic to and from the home office use shall be
limited in volume, type and frequency to what is normally
associated with other residential uses in the zone district.
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Any use permitted in the R-A District.
b. As permitted accessory uses:
1. Home office use as permitted in the R-A District.
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Any use permitted in the R-B District.
b. As permitted accessory uses:
1. Home office use as permitted in the R-A District.
a. Business offices, professional offices and governmental offices. Medical
or dental clinics and facilities for rehabilitation and therapy are
expressly prohibited.
§ 30-5.1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-5.5
AO:348
§ 30-5.6. Permitted in the B-3 District (Special Retail). [Ord. #9306,
A V; Ord. #9904; Ord. #2000-10]
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Business offices, professional offices, governmental and corporate
offices.
2. Laboratory and research facilities.
3. (Reserved)
4. House of worship.
5. Accessory parking areas on the same lot as the principal use.
b. As conditional uses:
1. Fraternal organizations.
2. Private clubs with social and recreational facilities which are
accessory to a permitted use.
c. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this zone:
1. The operation of a taxi, limousine or livery service or other similar
businesses and the parking and storage of said vehicles in
connection with said business.
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Boutique-type retail establishments not exceeding 1,600 square
feet of ground floor total area, including florist, gift shop, apparel
shop, drug store/pharmacy, jewelry store, portrait studio, art
gallery, specialty sports store, luggage store.
2. Accessory parking areas on the same lot as the principal use.
3. Professional offices.
b. As conditional uses:
1. Eating and drinking establishments, excluding fast food
restaurants.
c. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this zone:
1. Sales of VCR's, radios, televisions, cell phones or any electrical
appliances; sale or rental of video tapes, records, discs and toys.
2. The operation of a taxi, limousine or livery service or other similar
businesses and the parking or storage of said vehicles in
connection with said business.
§ 30-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-5.7
AO:349
§ 30-5.7. Permitted in the B-4 District (Restricted Commercial).
[Ord. #9306, A V; Ord. #2000-10]
§ 30-5.8. Permitted in the I Zone (Institutional). [Ord. #9306, A V;
Ord. #9905; Ord. #9908]
§ 30-5.9. Lands Under Jurisdiction of the Palisades Interstate Park
Commission. [Ord. #9306, A V]
Lands under the jurisdiction of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission
shall be used for park purposes only; any new construction shall be subject
to site plan approval by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Planning Board.
§ 30-5.10. Permitted Uses in the P-1 Public Zone.25 [Ord. #9909,
§ 9]
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Business offices, professional offices and governmental offices.
2. Banks without drive-in facilities.
3. Accessory parking areas on the same lot as the principal use.
b. As conditional uses:
1. Banks with drive-in facilities.
2. Eating and drinking establishments, excluding fast food
restaurants.
c. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this zone:
1. The operation of a taxi, limousine or livery service or other similar
businesses and the parking or storage of said vehicles in
connection with said business.
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Accredited colleges and universities.
2. Accessory garages and parking areas on the same lot as the
principal use.
3. Student dormitories.
4. Residential assisted living facilities.
a. As principal permitted and accessory uses:
25.Editors Note: Former subsection 30-5.10, Uses Permitted in the R-C Residential District
(Single-Family Affordable Residential Zone, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance No. 9608 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 9910.
§ 30-5.7 ENGLEWOOD § 30-5.10
AO:350
§ 30-5.11. Permitted in the B-2A District (Limited Business
Southeast Overlay). [Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2]
§ 30-6. REGULATIONS AS TO BULK, HEIGHT AND OTHER
REQUIREMENTS.
§ 30-6.1. Schedule. [Ord. #9306, A VI; Ord. #9608, § 4; Ord. #9703;
Ord. #9717; Ord. #9905; Ord. #2008-07; Ord. #2012-20, § 3]
The schedule entitled "Schedule of Regulations" hereto attached and made
a part hereof and properly identified as part of this chapter by the signature
of the Mayor and Borough Clerk, is hereby adopted and declared to be
a part of this chapter, and may be amended in the same manner as any
other part of this chapter. The regulations listed in said schedule for each
district are hereby adopted and prescribed for each district, and unless
otherwise indicated, shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements in
every instance of their application.26
§ 30-6.2. Exceptions to Height Requirements. [Ord. #9306, A VI]
1. Public and governmental uses including police stations, firehouses,
libraries and other municipal buildings and uses.
2. Accessory parking areas on the same lot as the principal use.
3. Accessory buildings and uses.
4. Wireless communication towers as a principal or accessory use.
b. As conditional uses:
1. Public parks and public recreation areas.
a. As principal permitted uses:
1. Business offices, professional offices, and corporate offices.
2. Laboratory and research facilities.
b. As permitted accessory uses:
1. Accessory parking lots on the same lot as the principal use,
including parking garages, which are limited to a maximum height
of four levels and 60 feet on a parcel greater than 20 acres, and
three levels and 40 feet on a parcel at least five acres to 20 acres.
a. Elevators, bulkheads, water tanks, air conditioning equipment and
similar structures and appurtenances may be erected on a building to a
height greater than the limit for the district in which the building is
located; provided that such structures and appurtenances are screened
26.Editor's Note: The schedule referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 30-5.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-6.2
AO:351
§ 30-6.3. Extensions into Required Front, Side or Rear Yard. [Ord.
#9306, A VI; Ord. #2008-07; Ord. No. 2012-04]
§ 30-7. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.
§ 30-7.1. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. #9306, A VII; Ord. #2001-13]
Any use not listed as a regularly permitted use or as a conditional use is
specifically prohibited. For further clarification the following prohibitions
are specifically noted.
on all sides; and provided further that no such exception shall cover
at any level more than 25% of the area of the roof on which it is
located; and provided further that no such exception shall be used for
occupancy of any kind.
b. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to chimneys,
church spires, belfries or standpipes. Flag poles shall be limited to the
height of the building.
c. Satellite dish antennas may be installed on the roof if the installation
complies with the regulations contained in Ordinance No. 8305.
a. Extensions of a structure into a required front, side or rear yard shall be
permitted as follows:
1. By cornices, canopies, eaves and similar extensions which are 10
feet or more above grade: two feet. Also controlled by subsection
30-7.9 as applicable.
b. Stationary Generators.
1. All stationary generators within the residential zones of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs are hereby permitted and they are
required to be located within the front, side or rear yard.
2. The size of the stationary generator may not exceed 10 square feet
and would be required to be located no more than three feet from
the residential dwelling and be a minimum of five feet from any
operable window or door.
3. The stationary generator must be maintained in good working
order consistent with manufacturer specifications, may only be
powered by natural gas or propane, and shall not exceed a noise
level of 85 dBA.
4. All stationary generators placed in the front yard shall be screened
so as to not be visible from the street.
a. Within any district, no building, structure or area shall be used in whole
or in part for any business purpose which shall in any way affect
adversely the public health, safety and welfare, nor shall any such
building, structure or area or the use thereof, interfere with the
§ 30-6.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-7.1
AO:352
comprehensive plan of this zoning chapter as set forth herein and
as supplemented by the official map, the master plan, and any other
ordinance pertinent hereto.
b. No space in a building or structure on the same floor with, behind,
below or above where a business is conducted shall be used for
dwelling or residential purposes.
c. No building or structure shall be used in whole or part for a motor
court, hotel, motel, tourist cabin, tourist camp, or use of similar nature.
d. No space or area shall be used as a trailer camp, trailer court, or use of
similar nature.
e. No building or structure shall be used in whole or part for that use
commonly known as "road stand," or use of similar or like nature, where
the sale of food, refreshments, kindred and miscellaneous items are
sold and not consumed indoors and within the confines of the main
building or structure.
f. No other building or premises used for any trade, industry, or purpose
that is noxious or offensive by reason of emission of odors, dust, smoke,
gas or noise or is dangerous to the public health or safety of the
Borough.
g. Uses specifically prohibited in any zone are:
1. Poultry farms, rabbit, mink raising or any animal of similar nature;
stock yards; cemeteries, mausoleums; crematories; landing fields
for any aircraft whatsoever; miniature golf course, driving range;
pony tracks or other outdoor places of amusement; junk yards;
open air car lots; second hand material establishments; surplus
materials or any other business using the outdoors for display or
storage purposes; outdoor storage of contractor's equipment; stone
or monumental works; quarries or pits; glass furnaces and coke
ovens; lumber yards or masonry material yards; drive-in theaters;
open air food markets.
2. Manufacture of nitroglycerine, gun cotton, gun powder, dynamite
or other high explosive; fertilizer, acetylene, gas, ammonia,
chlorine or bleaching powder; asphalt, brick or tile and masonry
block; carbon, lamp black, shoe blacking or stove polish; celluloid
or other cellulose products; creosol; fireworks or matches; enamel,
printing ink, pyroxine, plastic or articles therefrom; rubber from
crude or scrap material; sauerkraut; soap, soda and washing
compounds; sulphurous, nitric or hydrochloric acids; tallow,
grease, lard or candles; tar and dyes; vinegar; yeast.
3. Refining of crude oil or petroleum.
4. Operation of blast furnaces.
§ 30-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.1
AO:353
5. The making of boilers, pipes, metal forms, locomotives, or railway
cars; and shops operating reciprocating riveting hammers or
chisels.
6. Operation of coke ovens.
7. Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
8. Rendering of fats.
9. Incineration, reduction or dumping of offal, garbage or refuse
except as maintained and operated by the Borough for municipal
purposes.
10. No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, used,
permitted or allowed in any business zone where the principal
purpose of such business or use is the washing of automobiles,
trucks or vehicles of a similar nature.
11. Professional or commercial offices in a residence are not permitted
in any zoning district.
h. No swimming pool of any kind or nature shall be erected, constructed,
used, permitted or allowed in any business zone.
i. No space outside the confines of a building shall be used for sales or
storage of materials, equipment, merchandise, etc. in any business
zone. No outdoor business of any kind or nature shall be permitted.
j. In any residence zone, there shall be no storage or overnight parking of
commercial vehicles.
k. Massage Parlors.
1. Within any district, no building, structure or area shall be used in
whole or in part as a massage parlor.
2. Massage parlor shall be defined as the following: Any premises
which are used, in whole or in part, to administer acupressure,
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy, or involving the act of
holding, touching, positioning, mobilizing, applying friction or
pressure manually and/or by mechanical or vibratory apparatus to
body tissues, including, but not limited to, employing the
procedures of acupressure, reflexology, moving, stroking,
pounding, rubbing, manipulating, kneading and/or tapping or the
use of oil rubs, heat lamps, salt flows, hot or cold packs, vibration,
percussion, medical gymnastics, helio-therapy, hydro-therapy,
external application of topical preparations or rub, shower or
cabinet baths, but excluding the practice of medicine, physical
therapy or chiropractic by an osteopath, medical doctor, physical
therapist or chiropractor, licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey.
§ 30-7.1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-7.2
AO:354
§ 30-7.2. Accessory Structures. [Ord. #9608, §§ 5, 6; Ord. #2008-07]
a. Yard Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
1. In any residential district, no accessory building permitted by this
chapter shall exceed the aggregate ground area of 15% of the
required rear yard.
2. In a business or institutional zone the aggregate area covered by
accessory buildings shall not exceed 25% of the required rear yard.
3. No accessory building shall be less than 10 feet from the rear of the
principal building in a residential zone.
4. No accessory building shall be located in the front yard.
5. No accessory building shall be constructed for parking garages in
the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 zones.
6. Minimum side and rear yard requirements shall be as follows:
Zone Side Yard Rear Yard
R-A 5 feet 5 feet
R-B 3 feet 3 feet
R-B1 3 feet 3 feet
R-C 5 feet 5 feet
B-1 10 feet 20 feet
B-2 30 feet *
B-3 10 feet *
B-4 10 feet 20 feet
I 30 feet 30 feet
* Same as Buffer Requirements, subsection 30-7.10.
b. Accessory buildings attached to the principal building shall be
considered part of the principal building.
c. Height requirements for accessory buildings.
Residential Zones (R-A, R-B, R-B1, RC)
1 story; 14 feet
Business Zones (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4) 1 story; 14 feet
Institutional 2 stories; 22 feet
d. No portion of an accessory building shall be used for living quarters.
e. Permanent barbeque pit or structure shall only be permitted within 10
feet of the principal building.
§ 30-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.3
AO:355
§ 30-7.3. Gasoline Stations. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
§ 30-7.4. Walls, Steps and Fences. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
The requirements of this chapter respecting yards and courts shall not
apply to any accessory retaining walls, steps or fences which are less than
six feet in height. Fences shall not exceed six feet in height. The type of
fence shall be determined by the Planning Board in conjunction with site
plan approval.
§ 30-7.5. Signs. [Ord. No. 8102; Ord. #9306, A VII]
Signs in all zones shall be controlled by the Englewood Cliffs Sign
Ordinance.
§ 30-7.6. Special Considerations for Recreational Uses. [Ord.
#9306, A VII]
Recreational uses as conducted in and identified with Little League
baseball, tennis courts, outdoor swimming pools, shuffleboard and other
allied recreational facilities shall be permitted on Borough-owned land at
places now marked and designated as park and playground areas on the
official map of the Borough provided the facilities are used and conducted
on a nonprofit basis in accordance with this chapter and other applicable
laws, rules and regulations and provided further that prior approval of any
such facilities granted by the Mayor and Council in accordance with the
terms and conditions which may be imposed by said Mayor and Council.
§ 30-7.7. Restrictions on Residential Zones (R-A, R-B, R-B1 and RC).
[Ord. #9306, A VII; Ord. #9608, § 7]
a. No part of any gas station shall be used for dwelling purposes.
b. No part of any building shall be used as a gas station and no gas pumps,
car lifts or other service appliance used to serve or supply motor
vehicles shall be erected within 20 feet of any residential boundary line.
c. No fuel or oil pump, no oiling or greasing mechanism and no other
service appliance installed in connection with any gas station property
shall be within 10 feet of any property lines.
a. Building with crawl spaces or built on ground shall be in accordance
with the provisions as prescribed in the building code.
b. In all dwelling zones specified above, facilities for off-street parking or
garages for no less than three vehicles shall be provided for:
c. Flat roofs in any dwelling zones are not permitted over the main portion
of the roof structure; additions or extensions having flat roofs are
permitted if the roof area of same does not exceed 40% of the entire
area of the building. The standard to be used to determine a flat roof
§ 30-7.3 ENGLEWOOD § 30-7.7
AO:356
§ 30-7.8. Private Swimming Pools. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
shall be a slope of 3 1/2 inches per foot; anything less shall be
considered a flat roof.
d. In residential zones specified above no fences shall be constructed or
placed in front yards. No hedges, shrubs or evergreens, etc., shall be
greater than three feet in height within 10 feet of the front property
lines; nor shall any hedges, shrubs, evergreens, etc., which exceed
three feet in height, be placed on a corner lot within 10 feet of any
property lines which shall abut a street or highway.
e. In the zones specified above, none of the following shall be permitted:
poultry and rabbits; riding academies; private stables for housing
animals; cemeteries; mausoleums; crematories; veterinarians; housing
or boarding animals for profit.
f. No outdoor parking of commercial vehicles shall be permitted in these
zones.
g. Furnished rooms, lodging houses or boarding houses shall not be
permitted in any residential zones.
a. Definitions. As used in this subsection:
1. BOARD OF HEALTH – Shall mean and include the health officer or
other duly authorized representative thereof, except in such case
when the board is referred to in a manner that contemplates action
by it as a body.
2. BOROUGH OF ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS – Shall mean construction
official or other duly authorized representative thereof, except in
such case when the Borough is referred to in a manner that
contemplates action by it as a body.
3. CONSTRUCTION – Shall mean and include the building or
constructing or installation of a new swimming pool or enlarging an
existing swimming pool or any of the facilities.
4. PORTABLE POOL – Shall mean any above-surface type of
swimming, bathing or wading pool and all equipment and
appurtenances thereto, not designed or intended to be stationary
or permanently fixed, but designed and intended to be removed and
stored.
5. SWIMMING POOL – Shall mean any private pool whether
permanently constructed or of the portable type, having a depth of
more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land or any
above-surface pool having a depth of more than 30 inches,
designed, used and maintained for swimming or bathing purposes
by an individual for use of the members of the household and
guests and located on the applicant's land as an accessory use to a
§ 30-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.8
AO:357
residence, and shall include all buildings, equipment, structures
and appurtenances thereto.
6. WADING POOL – Shall mean and include any shallow pool not
included under the foregoing paragraph a5.
b. Scope and Application. Any permanent type swimming pool constructed
prior to May 11, 1967 shall not be subject to the requirements set forth
in this subsection pertaining to distance of pool from boundary lines,
etc. unless an enlargement of facilities is sought and the provisions of
this subsection shall not pertain to wading pools or portable pools
unless specific reference is made in any section herein to any such type
of pool.
c. Permit.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, construct, or install a
swimming pool in the Borough without first having complied with
the provisions of this section or obtained a permit therefor in the
manner hereinafter provided.
2. Applications for such permit shall be made to the Construction
Official and shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of the following:
(a) Plans and specifications or proper description brochures.
(b) Plot plans showing property lines of the premises upon which
the swimming pool is to be constructed or installed, all existing
houses and structures thereon abutting streets and properties
and the location and dimensions of the proposed pool and its
auxiliary structures including a description of the enclosure or
fence to be used.
3. A fee of $10 for the first $2,000 or fraction thereof, plus $2 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, of the estimated cost of
construction shall be charged by the Construction Official for such
permit and shall be tendered with the application to the
Construction Official.
4. The Construction Official shall, within 15 days after receiving an
application for a permit, act upon same relying on the standards set
forth in this Zoning Chapter and the Building Code of the Borough.
d. Location. All swimming pools and wading pools of permanent or
stationary type of construction, shall not be constructed, installed,
located, maintained or operated within five feet of any property
boundary line of any dwelling located on the premises, nor nearer to
any street line than 25 feet.
e. Regulations Concerning Health, Safety and Welfare.
1. Every swimming pool having a depth of 18 inches below the level of
the land surrounding the pool, and above-surface pools having a
§ 30-7.8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-7.8
AO:358
depth of 30 inches or more, and in the case of portable pools,
having a height of less than four feet, shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or wall of substantial construction, not less
than four feet in height, which shall be constructed so as not to
have openings, holes, or gaps larger than two inches to dimension,
except for doors and gates.
2. The fence or wall enclosures shall be so designed and constructed
as to reasonably prevent any person from gaining access beneath,
through or over the same and shall be provided with one or more
substantial gates or doors the same height as the fence or wall
enclosure, each gate or door to be equipped with a self-closing and
self-latching device capable of keeping said gate or door securely
closed.
3. It shall be deemed that there is sufficient compliance with this
subsection when the yard in which a pool is located is completely
enclosed by a fence and gate of the type above mentioned.
4. Any ordinance requiring the obtaining of a permit for the erection
of a fence shall not apply to fences erected pursuant to the
provisions of this subsection except in such case where a fence is
erected along a property line.
5. Any access ladder or steps used in connection with the abovesurface
type pool or portable pool shall be removed from the pool
when the same is not in use, unless the same is enclosed by a fence.
6. Lights used to illuminate any pool shall be so arranged and shaded
as to reflect light away from the adjoining premises.
7. Notwithstanding paragraph d of this subsection, no pool
(swimming, portable or wading) shall be located in the front yard of
homes or in the driveways thereof.
f. Review by Borough Engineer and Performance Bond. Every application
for construction of or renovation to a swimming pool, as hereinabove
defined, shall be reviewed by the Borough Engineer to insure
appropriate grading and drainage.
For this purpose, each application shall be accompanied (in addition to
all other fees stated within this chapter) by a deposit of $1,000 to be
held by the Borough as an escrow account from which engineering fees
and legal fees may be drawn.
In the event that further or more specific plans or details are required
by the Borough Engineer the Borough may require the posting of
additional fees by the applicant.
The Engineer shall certify, in writing, any and all findings regarding
the proposed construction and shall be authorized to issue conditional
approval of any application. The Borough Engineer shall, as part of his
§ 30-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.8
AO:359
§ 30-7.9. Porches, Decks and Raised Platforms. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
investigation, inspect the subject site and make engineering studies, if
necessary, regarding:
1. Soil erosion by water and wind as a result of proposed
construction;
2. Surface and subsurface water drainage as a result of proposed
construction;
3. Public health and safety;
4. The effect of flooding upon the premises and upon neighboring
premises;
5. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated
adjusted physical development of the Borough.
The Construction Code Official, shall, upon the granting of approval for
construction of a swimming pool as hereinbefore stated, require the
applicant and its contractor to post a joint performance bond in an amount
not less than $10,000 as a condition to obtainment of a building permit.
Said performance bond shall be in form approved by the Borough Attorney
and with surety acceptable to the Borough, in an amount to be determined
by the Borough Engineer in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53(c).
The performance bond shall be released after certification by the Borough
Engineer that the construction has been accomplished in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the approval.
a. Scope and Application. Any porch, deck or raised platform constructed
prior to April 6, 1976 shall not be subject to the requirements set forth
in this subsection pertaining to the distance of the porch, deck or raised
platform from the rear lot line unless an enlargement or alteration is
sought.
b. Permit.
1. It shall be unlawful to alter or construct a porch, deck or raised
platform in the Borough without first having complied with the
provisions of this subsection, and having obtained a permit therefor
in the manner hereinafter provided.
2. Application for such permit shall be considered to be contained
within the permit for the entire dwelling if the porch, deck or raised
platform is constructed or altered as a part of and at the same time
as the main body of the dwelling.
3. Separate application shall be made if the porch, deck or raised
platform is proposed to be erected after the original building
permit has been issued.
§ 30-7.8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-7.9
AO:360
§ 30-7.10. Buffer Requirements. [Ord. #9306, A VII; Ord. #2002-16,
S1; Ord. #2004-02; Ord. #2007-19; Ord. #2007-26; Ord. No.
2012-20, § 4]
4. Applications for such a permit shall be made to the Construction
Official and shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of the following:
(a) Plans and specifications setting forth the dimensions,
elevations and materials to be used.
(b) Plot plans showing property lines of the premises upon which
the porch, deck or raised platform is to be constructed or
altered, the main body of the dwelling from which the porch,
deck or raised platform is to extend.
5. A fee as has been previously established shall be charged by the
Construction Official for such permit and shall be tendered with the
application to the Construction Official.
6. The Construction Official shall, within 15 days after receiving an
application for a permit, act upon same, relying on the standards
set forth in this subsection and the Zoning Chapter and Building
Code of the Borough.
c. Construction, Location and Use.
1. It shall be the intent of this subsection to apply to a porch, deck or
raised platform used for residential purposes ancillary to normal
residential use.
2. The porch, deck or raised platform shall be enclosed with an open
railing, for the purposes of safety, which shall offer no major
impediment to the passage of air or view.
3. The porch, deck or raised platform shall be permitted to extend into
the rear yard open space as defined for zones R-A, R-B and R-B1, a
maximum distance of five feet. The furthest extension of steps or
sills shall be considered an integral part of the porch, deck or
raised platform and the maximum distance shall be measured
thereto.
4. The maximum elevation of the top of the horizontal surface forming
the porch, deck, or raised platform shall not exceed nine feet above
grade, measuring this elevation at the point at which the porch,
deck or raised platform joins the main body of the dwelling.
5. It shall be unlawful to enclose the railings or any other part of the
porch, deck or raised platform with walls, screens or jalousies, or
construct a roof whether permanent or temporary in nature.
a. Where a B-1 Zone adjoins a residential zone, a buffer area of 20 feet
shall be maintained on the B-1 Zone lot.
§ 30-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.10
AO:361
b. Residential lands which abut business zones are afforded buffers which
are to be located on the lots within the business zone. The size of the
buffer zone imposed upon the lands zoned for business uses is based
upon the location of residential land use.
Residential lots which abut lands which are zoned for business uses in
the B-1 Zone shall be afforded a buffer area of 20 feet which shall be
maintained on the B-1 Zone.
Residential lots south of Hollywood Avenue (or the former Hollywood
Avenue right-of-way) and north of Van Nostrand Avenue shall be
afforded a minimum fifty-foot buffer on any abutting lands zoned for
business uses (B-2) and a minimum 100-foot buffer on any abutting
lands zoned B-2A.
Residential lots north of Hollywood Avenue (or the former Hollywood
Avenue Right-of-Way) and south of Samford Drive shall be afforded a
120-foot buffer on any adjoining lands zoned for business uses (B).
Residential lots north of Samford Drive and south of the municipality
boundary with Tenafly shall be afforded a 120-foot buffer on any
adjoining lands zoned for business uses (B).
Residential lots which abut lands zoned for business uses in the B-3
Zone shall be afforded a buffer area of 20 feet which shall be
maintained on the B-3 Zone lot.
Residential lots which abut lands zoned for business uses in the B-3
Zone and are parallel to Fifth Street between the Fort Lee boundary
and Bayview Avenue, east of Sylvan Avenue shall be afforded a buffer
of 25 feet which shall be maintained on the lots zoned for business use.
Residential lots which abut lands zoned for business uses in the B-4
Zone shall be afforded a buffer area of 20 feet which shall be
maintained on the lots zoned for business use.
Residential lots utilized for recreational purposes shall not require
buffering on the lands zone for business uses.
c. Where a B-3 Zone adjoins a residential zone, a buffer area of 20 feet
shall be maintained on the B-3 Zone lot. Except parallel to Fifth Street
between the Fort Lee boundary and Bayview Avenue, east of Sylvan
Avenue, a buffer of 25 feet shall be maintained on "B" Zone lots.
d. Where a B-4 Zone adjoins a residential zone, a buffer area of 20 feet
shall be maintained on the B-4 Zone lot.
e. In the B-4 Zone there shall be no access roads leading into any
residential zones. All traffic shall flow onto New Jersey Highway 9-W,
Hudson Terrace or Palisade Avenue.
f. In all zones having buffer requirements, there shall be no pedestrian or
vehicular access through the buffer to nearby residential streets.
§ 30-7.10 ENGLEWOOD § 30-7.10
AO:362
g. Landscaping. In the buffer areas the following plant material shall be
placed: In areas where land is still in its natural state in the area to be
buffered, the area shall be left in its natural state, if possible. In
addition, evergreen trees between 10 feet and 14 feet in height shall be
planted so as to provide a year-round visual screen which shall be
placed in an area of the buffer zone in a manner architecturally suitable
to accomplish said screening.
h. The buffer zone may not be used for building or parking purposes but
same may be used for the purposes of installing underground utility
connections if the need arises.
i. The area encompassed in the buffer zone may be utilized for the
purpose of computing coverage, rear yard or other bulk limitations
referred to in the Zoning Ordinance.
j. Prohibited activities. No person shall undertake or cause to be
undertaken by others, any of the following acts:
1. Cut, destroy, remove, or substantially injure any tree with or
without cause.
2. Place or maintain upon the ground any substance which would
impede the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree.
3. Apply any substance to any part of a tree, including roots, with the
intention to injure or destroy the tree.
k. Permitted activities.
1. The removal of trees which are diseased or dead, or which
endanger public health or safety, or threaten to damage property.
2. The removal of fallen trees.
l. Maintenance of Buffer Zone.
1. All buffer zones shall be maintained to provide continuous
protection for residents from viewing commercial property.
2. It shall be kept free of debris, litter and unsightly overgrowth.
3. In the event that a tree is cut, destroyed, removed or substantially
injured, it must be replaced.
4. All fallen trees must be removed and replaced.
5. In the event that a tree is diseased or dead and is removed from the
buffer zone, the tree must be replaced. The enforcing authority or
his designee must be notified prior to the removal of the tree.
6. Within a buffer zone the enforcing officer for this subsection shall
be the Construction Official or his designee.
m. Tree Replacement Plan.
§ 30-7.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.10
AO:363
§ 30-7.11. (Reserved)27
§ 30-7.12. Deceleration Strip. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
In the B-2 Zone north of Sage Road and south from Sage Road to the
southerly lot line of Lot 9 in Block 1201, the applicant, if required, shall
enter into an agreement with the New Jersey Department of Transportation
for the construction of a deceleration strip, providing for ingress to and
egress from New Jersey State Highway 9-W and US Highway 1. A
deceleration strip shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set
forth by the New Jersey Department of Transportation and the standards
set forth in Section 30-9 of this chapter.
1. All replacement trees shall be twelve-foot to fourteen-foot
evergreens. They shall be planted during the earliest planting
season after either the removal of the tree, or after notification of a
violation.
2. Replacement trees shall be approved by the enforcing officer or his
designee prior to planting.
3. After the replacement tree is planted, the enforcing officer or his
designee must be notified so that it may be inspected to determine
that it was properly planted.
n. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $5,000 for each and every violation
and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90
days, at the discretion of the Magistrate of the Borough. Every tree
which has been removed in violation of any provision of this subsection
shall constitute a separate offense.
In the event that a person is found guilty of violating this subsection,
said person shall be required to replace the trees removed with trees
that meet the following guidelines.
o. Height. Replacement trees shall be planted during the first planting
season after the removal of the trees in order to maintain the buffer. All
replacement trees shall be twelve-foot to fourteen-foot evergreens.
After the replacement tree is planted, the enforcing officer or his
designee, must be notified so that it may be inspected to determine that
it was properly planted.
Replacement trees shall be approved by the approving authority, the
enforcing officer or his designee.
27.Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-7.11, Satellite Antennas, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 9306, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 9715. See Sections 30-8e2 and 30-20 for provisions for antennas.
§ 30-7.10 ENGLEWOOD § 30-7.13
AO:364
§ 30-7.13. Foundations in Business Zone. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
Foundations and walls for any buildings in a Business Zone shall be of
brick, stone, concrete or cinderblock or other fireproof material of a similar
nature. All masonry walls are to be faced with brick, stone or materials of a
similar nature.
§ 30-7.14. Stormwater Retention and Detention Systems. [Ord.
#9306, A VII]
Grading and paving of all new sites (business) and subdivisions shall meet
zero runoff requirements in accordance with Bergen County standards for
on-site retention/detention systems.
Regrading or repaving of all existing parking lots not equipped with such
systems shall provide for on-site retention systems in accordance with the
Borough Engineer's standards and shall be subject to site plan approval by
the Planning Board.
§ 30-7.15. Retaining Walls and Grading. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
All sites shall be graded in accordance with site plans and subdivisions
as approved by the Planning Board. Gravity (stone construction) retaining
walls shall not be greater than four feet in height. Walls constructed of
railroad ties shall not be greater than two feet in height. Retaining walls
greater than four feet in height shall be of reinforced concrete and shall
be designed by a professional engineer. Wall plans, elevations and design
computations shall be submitted to the Planning Board's Engineer for
approval. Shoulder areas behind roadway curbs shall have a maximum
slope of 5% from the top of curb. Any project which involves the disturbance
of more than 5,000 square feet of ground is subject to soil erosion and
sediment control plan certification from the Bergen County Soil
Conservation District. The applicant shall include such a plan in its
submission to the Planning Board.
§ 30-7.16. B-3, Special Retail Zone-Purpose. [Ord. #9306, A VII]
The purpose of the B-3 Special Retail Zone is the creation of small boutique
type retail establishments, specialty shops and limited scale "professional
offices" whose exterior resembles residential type construction. The
building exterior of the second floor shall not exceed the exterior building
limits of the first floor. Display windows shall be in keeping with the
residential style. Large storefront windows and displays are not in keeping
with the residential characteristics of this zone and are to be restricted.
§ 30-7.17. Recycling Requirements. [Ord. #9306, A VII; Ord. #9608,
§ 8]
The following requirements for mandatory recycling are based on
Englewood Cliffs Ordinance No. 8721 as amended, and the New Jersey
Recycling Program, L.1987, Ch. 102 and the Clean Communities and
§ 30-7.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.17
AO:365
Recycling Act, 13:1E-92, et seq. The following materials are designated as
recyclable under the Englewood Cliffs Mandatory Program:
§ 30-7.18. (Reserved)28
§ 30-8. CONDITIONAL USES. [Ord. #9306, A VIII; Ord. #9715, §§ 2,
5; Ord. #9801, § 1; Ord. #2006-26]
a. Leaves;
b. Newspapers;
c. Glass;
d. Aluminum;
e. Non-ferrous metal scrap;
f. Hi-grade office paper.
In connection with applications for subdivision or site plan approval, the
Planning Board of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall review and approve
a plan for the collection, disposition and recycling of designated recyclable
materials within any development proposal for construction of 25 or more units
of housing and any commercial or industrial development proposal for the
utilization of 1,000 square feet of land.
The subdivisions or site plans shall show adequate areas for the storage of
recyclable materials prior to pick-up. Storage areas shall be located so as to be
easily accessible to homeowners and employees and shall be screened with sixfoot
high solid fence with gate. The storage area for recyclable materials shall
be maintained in a clean and orderly condition. Suitable containers for the five
types of recyclable material shall be provided.
The Planning Board shall require a report on each application from the
Recycling Coordinator prior to approving the plans.
a. General Requirements. The regulations of this section set forth the
standards which shall be used by the Planning Board in reviewing
applications for conditional uses. The uses to be considered conditional
uses in each zoning district are set forth in Section 30-5. The standards
for the conditional uses in each zoning district are set forth below. The
procedures for review and approval of conditional uses by the Planning
Board are set forth in the Procedures Ordinance of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs and in the Municipal Land Use Law (40:55D-1 et seq.),
including requirements for public notice, notice to all property owners
within 200 feet of the subject property and public hearing by the
Planning Board.
28.Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-7.18, Supplemental Regulations for the R-C Zone,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 9608, was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 9910.
§ 30-7.17 ENGLEWOOD § 30-8
AO:366
All conditional uses shall require site plan approval by the Planning
Board according to the procedures and standards set forth in Section
30-9.
The general standards for review of all conditional uses shall be:
1. That the Planning Board shall first determine that the proposed use
shall not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
the community;
2. That the proposed use shall be reasonably necessary for the
convenience of the community;
3. That the proposed use shall not create a fire, traffic or safety
hazard;
4. That the proposed use or structure shall not have an adverse effect
on the neighborhood in which it is proposed;
5. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in
accordance with Section 30-10.
6. Where parking, loading or recreation areas adjoin a residential use
or residential zone, there shall be a ten-foot wide landscaped strip
adjoining the residential lot line, unless a wider buffer is
specifically required.
7. The use shall provide safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation with access and egress designed to eliminate any traffic
safety hazards entering and exiting the site; and so designed as not
to cause traffic congestion on abutting streets.
b. Conditional Uses Permitted in B-2 District.
1. Fraternal organizations.
Minimum lot size 20,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Minimum front yard 20% of lot depth
Minimum rear yard 20% of lot depth
Minimum side yard 20 feet each side
Maximum coverage 33 1/3%
Maximum building
height
2 stories, 35 feet
Off-street parking 1 space for each 50 square feet
available to patrons
§ 30-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-8
AO:367
In considering such uses, the Planning Board shall consider the
effect on adjacent uses in terms of vehicular and other activity,
that the proposed use shall be integrated with the surrounding
area and with the street pattern thereof.
2. Private clubs with social and recreational facilities which are
accessory to a permitted use.
(a) The use shall not have an adverse effect on surrounding
properties in terms of traffic congestion, noise and level of
activity.
(b) The use shall not be open to the public on a regular basis and
shall be strictly accessory to the permitted use.
3. Dwelling quarters for the use of a caretaker or watchman employed
on the premises in connection with the permitted use.
c. Conditional Uses Permitted in the B-3 and B-4 Districts.
1. Eating and drinking establishments.
Minimum lot size 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Rear yard 20% of lot depth
Side yard 15 feet
Maximum coverage 33 1/3%
Building height 2 stories, 30 feet
Off-street parking 1 space per 3 seats plus 1 space per each
employee on the peak shift
d. Conditional Uses Permitted in the B-4 District. Banks with drive-in
facilities subject to the following conditions:
1. Minimum lot area - 30,000 square feet.
2. The site shall support a minimum of four stacking or queuing of at
least 20 feet in length for each drive-through lane.
3. Each drive-through lane shall be a minimum width of 10 feet.
4. A single lane of at least 10 feet in width shall be provided adjacent
to the outermost stacking or queuing lane to allow vehicles not
entering the stacking lane to circumvent it.
5. The drive-through service window shall be provided no closer than
30 feet from the exiting street to provide sufficient sight lines.
§ 30-8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-8
AO:368
6. Drive-through lanes shall be set back no less than 20 feet from any
adjacent property used and/or zoned as a free-standing singlefamily
home.
7. The drive-through lanes shall be concealed from any adjacent
single-family residential property by fencing or landscaping. If
landscaped, the criteria of Code subsection 30-7.10 shall apply,
unless inconsistent herewith, in which event these provisions shall
apply.
e. Conditional Uses Permitted in All Districts.
1. Public utility installations - including but not limited to: electrical
power stations, telephone vaults, water towers and similar
installations.
(a) The proposed installations shall meet all the requirements of
the Board of Public Utilities.
(b) The proposed installations shall harmonize with the character
of the neighborhood in which it is proposed and shall have
adequate fencing, safety devices, screening, landscaping, and
front, rear and side setbacks to protect adjoining properties.
(c) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to serve all
employees and service personnel visiting the installation.
(d) Access and egress shall be designed so as not to produce a
traffic safety hazard and so as not to cause traffic congestion
on the abutting streets.
2. Mobile Cellular Communications Towers (Herein referred to as
Towers).
(a) Upon proper application and hearing, as herein provided,
mobile cellular communications towers shall be permitted as a
conditional use in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs provided
that the following criteria have been met:
(1) An applicant for a permit to erect a mobile cellular
communications antenna shall establish by competent
evidence that there exists a need for such facility within
the Borough and at the proposed location for which the
approval is sought. Such evidence shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
[a] An identification of the cellular network layout and
coverage areas to be serviced by the proposed tower
and an explanation as to why existing facilities are
inadequate to provide service.
[b] Why the proposed site is suitable for such use.
Evidence to be presented on this issue shall include a
§ 30-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-8
AO:369
§ 30-9. SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
§ 30-9.1. Approval Required. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
No building permit shall be issued for any construction except a single
family detached dwelling until site plan approval has been granted by the
Planning Board, or, in the same case of a use variance, by the Board of
Adjustment, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
radio frequency engineering analysis of the potential
suitability or nonsuitability of existing buildings or
structures for such commercial antenna, which
engineering analysis shall be subject to review by the
Borough Planner and Borough Engineer and any
consultant called upon by the Planning Board to make
such a determination.
(2) Provided that the above stated conditions have been met, a
mobile cellular communications antenna may be erected
or affixed to an existing building or structure as long as it
meets the following requirements:
[a] Any such tower or antenna attached or erected to an
existing building shall be considered a principal
structure unless directly related to the business of the
owner or tenants of said building.
[b] Any such tower or antenna shall not exceed above or
beyond the maximum allowable height of any such
building or structure as established in the borough
zoning ordinance by more than 10 feet or 10% of the
maximum building height whichever number is lower
in the district for a principal use or structure pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)(6).
[c] Any such antenna or tower shall be securely fixed to
the building or structure for which it proposed.
[d] Any such mobile cellular communications tower or
antenna shall be suitably finished or painted in a
manner so as to minimize any obtrusive
characteristics of their visual impact. When
practicable, the color of paint or finishing materials
shall be consistent and not contrasting with the color
of materials of the building upon which it is erected or
affixed.
[e] When one or more antennas are affixed to a roof on an
existing building, they shall not, in the aggregate
exceed 5% of the square footage of the roof top area.
§ 30-8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-9.1
AO:370
Repaving of parking lots shall not require site plan approval if there is no
change in the parking lot layout, number of spaces, parking space size or
landscaping. Drainage concerns must be addressed for area of a parking lot
which is disturbed by repaving.
§ 30-9.2. Issuance of Construction Permit or Certificate of
Occupancy. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
The construction official shall not issue a construction permit or a certificate
of occupancy, prior to Planning Board approval for an existing building,
at the time of adoption of this chapter, in which interior renovations will
affect net area parking requirements. The Planning Board may waive any
of the requirements of subsection 30-9.4 (Site Plan Data) of this section it
considers not necessary for review.
§ 30-9.3. Application. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
An application for site plan approval shall be filed with the Secretary of the
Planning Board not less than two weeks prior to the meeting of the Planning
Board at which said application is to be considered. The applications shall
be in triplicate and shall be accompanied by six copies of the proposed site
plan and one set of construction plans of the building or structure proposed
to be built on the lands for which site plan approval is sought and the
requisite fee.
The applicant for any such construction shall at least 10 days prior to the
meeting of the Planning Board submit to the Secretary of the Board the
site plans as hereinafter specified and shall notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least 10 days prior to the meeting of the Planning
Board all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the site as
their names appear on the municipal tax record. The notices shall state the
time and place of hearing, a brief description of the proposed construction,
reference to variances sought, if any, and that a copy of the site plan has
been filed with the Borough Clerk for public inspection. The applicant shall
also cause a notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper
or a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough at least 10 days prior
to the hearing.
In any application under this section where approval of either the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment is required for any site plan application, such
application shall contain as a prerequisite of such approval proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which any site plan application is made.
§ 30-9.4. Site Plan Data. [Ord. #9306 A IX]
The proposed site plan shall conform to the following requirements and
contain the following information:
a. The proposed site plan shall be drawn to a scale not less than one inch
equals 20 feet.
§ 30-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-9.4
AO:371
b. There shall be a key map showing the location of the subject property
with reference to surrounding areas and existing street intersections.
c. The proposed site plan shall show in scale the property lines of the
entire parcel of land for which site plan approval is sought and indicate
the dimensions of said property.
d. The proposed site plan shall include the name of the applicant, the date
the proposed site plan was prepared, a north arrow, the scale to which
the proposed site plan is drawn, the name of the person who prepared
the site plan, the block and lot number of the lands for which site plan
approval is sought as shown on the most current tax assessment maps
of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs and the names of all streets abutting
such lot and block.
e. The proposed site plan shall include the names of all owners of adjacent
property, together with block and lot numbers of such property.
f. The site plan shall show the zoning district in which the parcel is
located together with zone boundaries within 100 feet therefrom.
g. The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on
the lands for which site plan approval is sought together with the
distances of said buildings and structures from the property lines of
said lands and from each other.
h. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all public streets upon which
the lands for which the site plan approval is sought fronts to a distance
of 100 feet beyond such lands. State highway and County road
requirements shall be adhered to in all cases.
i. A statement by the owner of whether any property adjoining the lands
for which site plan approval is sought is or is not owned by said owner.
j. The locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed driveways,
curb cuts, private access roads, curbing, parking areas, parking stalls,
loading areas and loading bays, locations of all existing driveways
within 200 feet of the lot.
k. The proposed landscaping, screening and exterior lighting; including
the location, number, size and type of existing landscaping and trees to
remain; the location, number, size and type of trees, shrubs and
landscaping to be installed; the locations, type, height, intensity and
illumination area of any lighting to be installed.
l. Arrows which indicate the direction of traffic on all driveways, interior
drives and parking areas.
m. Existing and proposed drainage facilities.
n. Existing and proposed contour lines at two-foot intervals.
§ 30-9.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-9.4
AO:372
o. The proposed use or uses of land and buildings together with floor
space of all buildings and the estimated number of employees. If the
precise use of the building is unknown at the time of application, an
amended plan showing the proposed use shall be required prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
p. The site plan shall show the location and design of any off-street
parking areas or loading areas showing size and location of bays, aisles
and barriers.
q. The site plan shall show the location and type of garbage and refuse
disposal facilities, including maneuvering areas.
r. Where applicable, the site plan shall show the location and treatment of
open space.
s. Existing and proposed elevation of buildings and curbs.
t. The location of any dumpsters or any other garbage or trash
receptacles shall be clearly shown along with required fencing and
screening.
u. For proposals for the construction of 25 or more units of single-family
housing and any commercial or industrial development proposal of
1,000 square feet of land or more, the site plan shall show storage areas
for the required recyclable materials along with screening and
description of containers for recyclable material.
v. Where applicable, the following information shall be provided:
1. Number of employees;
2. Narrative describing nature of operation or activities to occur on
the site;
3. Narrative describing trucking on the site; number and size of
trucks used in applicant's operation; number, size and frequency of
trucks making deliveries; time of loading and unloading operations.
w. Such other data or information that reasonably may be necessary for
the Planning Board to meet the objectives of site plan and subdivision
approval in acting on a particular application.
x. Drawings submitted in support of an application for site plan approval
shall be signed and sealed by a licensed professional (architect,
engineer or planner).
When the application is approved and the drawings are signed by
the Chairman of the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit the
following for Planning Board use:
1. Three sets of full size signed drawings.
2. Three sets of reduced size drawings, 11 inches by 17 inches.
§ 30-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-9.4
AO:373
§ 30-9.5. Objectives of Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
In considering a site plan, the Planning Board shall take into consideration
the public health, safety and general welfare, the comfort and convenience
of the public in general and residents of the immediate neighborhood in
particular and prior to approving such site plan shall find that it meets all
the requirements of this chapter. The Planning Board shall also take into
consideration the general purposes of this chapter and the achievement of
the following specific objectives.
§ 30-9.6. Conditions and Safeguards. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
The Planning Board in approving a site plan, may impose appropriate
conditions and safeguards with respect to, but not limited to, the following:
3. One set of mylars, 11 inches by 17 inches.
All drawings to use graphic scales for reduction purposes.
y. At the completion of construction for all approved applications the
applicant shall submit to the Planning Board as-built drawings showing
all subsurface utilities and the layout of parking stalls; and the location
and elevation of all utilities. Locations shall be shown by means of offsets
to roadway centerlines or baselines.
Dimensions on as-built drawings shall be shown for all parking stalls
and aisles. The drawings shall be certified by the Board Engineer. Prior
to the time the Construction Official issues a certificate of occupancy,
the Construction Official shall obtain from the Planning Board Engineer
certification that all of the requirements of granting Planning Board
approval have been satisfied.
z. Such other data or information that reasonably may be necessary for
the Planning Board to meet the objectives of site plan approval in acting
on a particular application.
a. Maximum safety of traffic access and egress;
b. Maximum safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site;
c. The accomplishment of a site layout and overall appearance of all
buildings so that there will be no adverse effect upon the desirability of
adjacent zoning districts by impairing their established character.
a. Traffic Access. That all proposed accessways to and from a public street
are adequate, but not excessive in number, adequate in width, grade,
alignment and visibility, not located too near to street intersections,
schools or places of public assembly and other similar considerations;
b. Circulation and Parking. That the interior vehicular circulation system
is adequate and that adequate parking spaces are provided and are
easily accessible and that access and egress is designed to avoid
creating traffic or safety hazards on the abutting streets;
§ 30-9.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-9.6
AO:374
§ 30-9.7. Procedures Upon Approval of Site Plan. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
§ 30-9.8. Expiration of Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
The effect of preliminary and final site plan approval and the rights
conferred upon the applicant shall be the same as those specified in the
Municipal Land Use Law, C.40:55D-49 and C.40:55D-52.
The Planning Board may require the submission of preliminary architectural
floor plans and elevations sufficient to determine floor area, height,
entrances and exits.
c. Landscaping, Screening and Lighting. That parking, lighting and
service areas are reasonably screened from view of adjacent residential
districts and that buffer area requirements of this chapter are complied
with;
d. That adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities
and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants have been provided;
e. That the layout or arrangement of buildings and parking areas is
consistent with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
a. Approval of a proposed site plan by the Planning Board shall be noted
by the signing of the same by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board.
b. Two copies of an approved site plan shall be forwarded to the
Construction Official by the Secretary of the Planning Board. The
Construction Official shall enforce the requirements of the site plan and
shall not issue any certificate of occupancy until all of the requirements
of site plan approval have been met, except in accordance with the
procedure set forth below.
c. In the event the Construction Official determines that any of the
requirements of the site plan approval cannot be met for a temporary
period of time by reason of weather, act of God or other cause not
created by the applicant, the Construction Official, upon the applicant
posting a performance bond secured by a surety company authorized to
do business in the State of New Jersey in an amount reasonably
estimated by the Construction Official to be the cost of completing such
requirements shall issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a
period not to exceed one year. The said bond shall be conditioned upon
the applicant completing within a period of one year from the date of
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy all of the site plan
requirements then not complete. In the event that such requirements
are not completed within said one-year period of time, the Construction
Official shall revoke the temporary certificate of occupancy issued and
shall cause the said requirements to be completed at the sole cost and
expense of the applicant.
§ 30-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-9.8
AO:375
As a condition of issuing the certificate of occupancy under site plan
approval procedures, the certificate of occupancy shall be based on
continued maintenance and upkeep of landscaping and building grounds as
shown on the site plan.
§ 30-9.9. Off-Tract Improvements. [Ord. #9306, A IX]
Off-tract means not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application, nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. C40:55D-42 the Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment may require off-tract improvements from a developer. An offtract
improvement shall be one or more required improvements which are
necessary for the successful completion of a development in the interest of
furthering the public health, safety and general welfare.
An off-tract improvement shall be required where either the existing
facilities serving the area or sub-area are already operating at a deficient
level of service, or the inclusion of the new development will make such
present level of service deficient according to engineering standards
utilized in determining the level of service.
The proportional contribution of any such off-tract improvement to the
applicant shall be reasonably related to the benefit or use of the total area
to be served.
Under the conditions of this section, off-tract improvements shall be limited
to new or improved sanitary sewerage disposal system; storm water and
drainage system and facilities and all necessary appurtenances thereto;
all public utilities, including required easements; new or improved street
and right-of-way widths; traffic regulation and control devices; intersection
improvements; public utility relocation; and improvements required by
solutions to traffic, circulation, and safety factors which are related to the
property or properties being developed.
§ 30-10. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
§ 30-10.1. General Provisions. [Ord. #9306, A X]
a. The intent of these regulations is to insure that all uses and structures
have sufficient off-street parking and loading spaces to provide for all
vehicles attracted to those uses and structures in order to avoid
congestion of the public streets, to promote the safety and convenience
of motorists and pedestrians and to insure the continued efficient
operation of the uses established on the premises.
b. No building or premises shall be built or erected, nor shall any building
be altered so as to expand its floor area, nor shall the use of any
building or premises be expanded unless there is provided parking and
§ 30-9.8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-10.1
AO:376
loading space in accordance with the requirements of Schedule B
attached hereto.
c. If a use is not listed in Schedule B then the number of required offstreet
parking spaces becomes the number of spaces required for the
use which most nearly approximates the proposed use.
d. Off-street parking spaces required herein shall be used solely for the
parking of passenger automobiles of visitors, patrons, occupants or
employees of the use for which required. In addition to these parking
spaces, there shall be a space for each truck, ambulance, hearse,
company car or other commercial vehicle regularly stored on the lot.
e. All parking of motor vehicles shall be at grade level. Structural parking
garages, platforms and deck parking are prohibited. For the purpose of
this chapter, any combination of materials to form a construction or
uses so as to allow above grade parking shall be considered a structure,
and is prohibited.
Parking at ground level below office areas is permitted, and shall not
constitute a building story in determining number of stories permitted.
f. Parking areas under office areas shall be open on all sides where
practical at the discretion of the Planning Board.
g. For all developments, the site in question shall be of adequate size to
contain all required parking space. Any combination of on-site and offsite
parking shall not be permitted.
h. No property owner or lessee shall permit (by agreement in any form)
the premises to be used for off-street parking which is not directly
related to the building parking requirements of that site, without
Planning Board approval. If there are no buildings on a site or lot,
parking is prohibited unless there is approval by the Planning Board.
i. There shall be no parking in the required front yard.
SCHEDULE B
OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING
REQUIREMENTS
1. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required
Dwelling 2 spaces per unit
Home for the Aged 1 space per 3 beds
Business and Professional Office 1 space/200 square feet of floor
area
Medical and Dental Clinic 1 space/150 square feet of floor
area
§ 30-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-10.1
AO:377
SCHEDULE B
OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING
REQUIREMENTS
Bank and Savings Institution 1 space/200 square feet of floor
area
Retail Store 1 space/200 square feet of floor
area
Personal Service Establishment 1 space/300 square feet of floor
area
Filling Station 1 space/each employee plus 1 for
each service vehicle
Laboratory and Research 1 space/400 square feet of floor
area
Restaurant 1 space/3 seats, plus 1 space for
each employee
Veterinary Establishment 1 space/treatment room plus 1
space for each employee
Warehouse and Distribution 1 space/2 employees, but not less
than 1 space/1000 square feet of
warehouse area
Municipal Offices 1 space/200 square feet of floor
area
Exhibit Hall, Art Gallery and
Community Center (except those
serving Senior Citizens)
1 space/200 square feet of floor
area
Community Center Serving Senior
Citizens
1 space/300 square feet of floor
area
Club and Fraternal Organization 1 space/50 square feet available
to patrons
House of Worship 1 space for every 4 seats
Meeting Room and Other Place of
Public Assembly Without Fixed
Seating
1 space/50 square feet of
assembly area
Public Elementary School 1 space/staff member
Business School 1 space/staff member plus 1 space
for every 5 students
College and University 1 space/staff member plus 1 space
for every 5 students not residing
on campus plus 1 space for every
10 students residing on campus
§ 30-10.1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-10.1
AO:378
§ 30-10.2. Standards for Parking Spaces and Parking Areas. [Ord.
#9306, A X]
SCHEDULE B
OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING
REQUIREMENTS
Uses not listed above According to that category herein
listed which most nearly
approximates the proposed use
More than 1 use on premises The sum of the component
requirements listed in this section
2. Off-Street Loading Requirements.
General Requirement. Every building or structure, lot or land
hereafter put into use for business or commercial purposes and which
has an aggregate floor area of 7,500 square feet or more, devoted to
such use, shall be provided with off-street truck loading spaces in
accordance with the following schedule:
Square Feet of Floor Space Number of Loading Dock
Spaces
7,500 to 25,000 square feet 1
25,001 to 40,000 square feet 2
40,001 to 100,000 square feet 3
Each additional 60,000 square
feet
Add 1
a. Required parking spaces shall be computed on the basis of 171 square
feet per space. The dimensions of individual spaces shall be at least
nine feet by 19 feet. When the number of required spaces results in a
fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
b. For 90° angle parking, a sixty-three-foot module (length of parking stall
- 19 feet; aisle width - 25 feet) shall be required for visitor parking. A
sixty-foot module (length of parking stall - 19 feet; aisle width - 22 feet
shall be required for 90° angle parking for long-term and employee
parking.
c. Off-street parking areas for more than five automobiles shall be paved
and lighted according to the specifications established for this purpose
by the Borough Engineer.
d. All off-street parking spaces within any parking areas shall be clearly
marked to show the parking arrangement within said parking area.
e. All lighting for off-street parking areas shall be so arranged and
shielded as to reflect the light downward and prevent any light from
§ 30-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-10.2
AO:379
shining directly on adjoining streets and residential zones and
buildings.
f. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in side and rear
yards only but not be located in any required front yard or in any
required buffer area.
g. Off-street parking or loading spaces shall not be located within five feet
of any lot line. On corner lots, parking or loading shall not be located
within 10 feet of the property line or street right-of way.
h. In nonresidential zones, no parking shall be permitted in the 10 feet of
depth next adjacent to any residential zone.
i. The requirements as to parking and loading areas shall include
adequate means of ingress and egress.
j. No access to a parking or loading area in a nonresidential district shall
be located within a residential district. No off-street parking shall be
permitted in any zone where the use which it serves is prohibited.
k. There shall be no access leading from "B" Zone properties into
residential zones. All traffic from "B" Zone properties shall lead to U.S.
9-W, Hudson Terrace or Palisade Avenue.
l. Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to several welldefined
locations. Each of said curb cuts shall not exceed 20 feet in
width in a residential district. In a nonresidential district, driveways
shall not exceed 30 feet with a sixty-foot curb cut maximum for any
permitted use. In no case shall there be permitted unrestricted access
along the length of the street or streets upon which the parking area
abuts.
m. It shall be unlawful to park or to permit to remain on any residential
property in any zone, outside the garage or any other accessory
building on such residential property, for a period in excess of 24 hours,
any commercial vehicle, boat, trailer, boat trailer, snow plow or
motorized recreation vehicle.
n. Where the nature of the building and establishment is of a kind where
attendant parking is appropriate and the owner or operator has
established that such facility is likely to continue and exist substantially
unchanged as it affects attendant parking for a period of 10 years, and
the owner or operator of the premises has made and will continue to
make provision for attendant parking during hours when 50% or more
of the spaces are in use, then attendant parking shall be permitted;
provided, that there shall be submitted at the time of site plan approval
a workable plan which includes sufficient number of stalls of standard
size to meet the parking standards contained herein, and in addition,
sufficient aisles and turnaround areas to enable attendants to maneuver
vehicles in and out of the area containing the necessary number of
stalls, without requiring the attendant to utilize streets, public areas or
§ 30-10.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-10.2
AO:380
§ 30-10.3. Standards for Loading Spaces and Loading Areas. [Ord.
#9306, A X]
§ 30-11. NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS.
sidewalks for maneuvering of vehicles, and so that the use of the
parking area will not be hazardous to the pedestrian utilizing the
adjoining walkways.
a. Required loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide and 30 feet long
or longer depending on the length of trucks or trailers to be
accommodated. They shall have a clearance height of at least 15 feet.
b. No loading areas shall be located in the front yard.
c. No loading areas shall be located within five feet of any lot line.
d. All loading areas shall be paved and lighted according to the
specifications established for the purpose by the Borough Engineer.
§ 30-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-11.1
AO:381
§ 30-11.1. Existing Nonconforming Buildings; Repairs. [Ord. #9306,
A XI]
Any nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the building so occupied,
and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the event of partial
destruction thereof.
Any existing building in Englewood Cliffs is permitted to be rebuilt if the
building is destroyed, demolished or damaged utilizing the same portion of
the premises, with the same square footage and without the necessity of
obtaining any variances.
§ 30-11.2. Restoring Unsafe Buildings. [Ord. #9306, A XI]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe or lawful condition any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe or unlawful by the Construction Official or other duly authorized
State or Borough Official.
§ 30-11.3. Conformance to Regulations Required for Future
Construction. [Ord. #9306, A XI]
No lot hereafter may be used and no building or part thereof, hereafter may
be erected, constructed, moved, extended, converted, altered, maintained,
or used except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 30-11.4. Discontinuance or Change of a Nonconforming Use.
[Ord. #9306, A XI]
If any nonconforming use (a) ceases for a continuous period of one year or
more, or (b) is changed to or replaced by a conforming use, or (c) is moved
for any distance for any reason, the land and building theretofore devoted
to such non-conforming use shall thereupon be subject to all the regulations
as to use for the district in which such land and building are located, as if
such nonconforming use had never existed and shall be considered to have
been abandoned.
§ 30-11.5. Enlargement of Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. #9306, A XI]
If a nonconforming use is to be enlarged or extended, a "d" variance must
be obtained. This grant of enlargement is by no means an automatic right.
To quote the courts, "Where there is doubt as to whether the enlargement
is substantial, rather than insubstantial, it is to be resolved against
enlargement." General rules which should be considered in judging on
nonconforming uses:
a. No enlargement or substantial change of a nonconforming use may be
made simply because the new use would be no more harmful than the
old use to the adjacent land owners.
§ 30-11.1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-11.5
AO:382
§ 30-11.6. Motor Vehicle Sales Establishments. [Ord. #9306, A XI]
Motor vehicle sales establishments, including sale or leasing of new or used
vehicles, is a prohibited use in every zone. Those presently existing motor
vehicle dealerships are nonconforming, and shall be regulated as follows:
§ 30-12. ADMINISTRATION.
b. If the proposed modifications of the nonconforming use would tend to
minimize its discordant effect, be less harmful to the adjacent
properties, and tend to bring the use into closer conformity with the
Zoning Ordinance, it offers a "special reason" which favors granting a
variance.
a. There shall be no display of new or used vehicles in the front yard of the
premises in question.
b. There shall be no storage, either by day or by night, in the front yard of
the premises of new vehicles, used vehicles, or vehicles in the custody
or possession of the occupant of the premises for the purpose of
servicing the same.
c. No parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted in the front 60 feet of
any such premises, and the 60 feet shall be landscaped in a suitable
manner approved by the Shade Tree Commission of the Borough, and
shall be used for no purpose other than ingress and egress driveways,
the sole exception being vehicles parked where the owners or drivers
thereof are actually engaged in business at the premises at the time.
d. Any property used for parking or storage of motor vehicles, where not
prohibited as aforesaid, is to be enclosed with a six-foot cedar fence (or
such type of fence as may be approved by the Planning Board) on two
sides, with an approved fence or wall at front setback line or at any
other point as may be approved by the Planning Board of the Borough
pursuant to Section 16-12, to the end that all area utilized for parking
or storage is completely enclosed within a compound composed of
fence and building. It is the purpose of this prohibition to have no
vehicles stored or parked in an area exposed to view from any street,
except as specifically permitted herein.
e. The fence shall contain a proper gate for overnight security, to the end
that all vehicles on the premises in question shall, at night, be enclosed
within the fenced area, the sole exception being vehicles parked where
the owners or drivers thereof are actually engaged in business at the
premises at the time.
f. The public auctioning of new or used automobiles, including, but not
limited to wholesalers' auctioning of new or used automobiles, both
with or without reserve, is prohibited within the confines of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
§ 30-11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-12.1
AO:383
§ 30-12.1. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. #9306, A XII]
This chapter shall be administered and enforced in accordance with the
terms of this section.
§ 30-12.1A. Zoning Officer. [Ord. #2006-02]
a. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and interpreted by the
Administrative Officer. It shall be his duty to keep a record of all
applications for building permits and a record of all such permits
issued, with a notation of any complications for building permits and a
record of all such permits issued, with a notation of any conditions that
may have been imposed by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
under the provisions of this chapter. He shall file and safely keep copies
of all plans submitted. He also shall keep a record of every identifiable
complaint of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and of
the action taken consequent on each such complaint. All such records
and plans shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be
available for the use of the Mayor and Council and of other official
agencies and officials of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
b. No board, agency, officer, or employee of the Borough shall issue, grant
or approve any permit, license, or certificate or other authorization
(excluding conditional uses, variances, and other lawful authorization
by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment), for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration, enlargement or moving of any building or for
the use of any land or building that would not be in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, license, certificate, or
other authorization issued, granted, or approved in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be null and void and of no effect without
the necessity of any proceedings for revocation or nullification thereof,
and any work undertaken or use established pursuant to any such
permit, license, certificate or other authorization shall be unlawful.
a. There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, the
position of Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer's term of office shall be
for one year, beginning on January 1st of that year and shall continue to
serve until such time as his successor is qualified for said position.
b. The Zoning Officer shall be compensated pursuant to the Englewood
Cliffs Salary Ordinance adopted by the Borough.
c. The Zoning Officer shall be charged with the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinances of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as set forth in the
provisions of Chapter 291, Public Law 1975.
d. The Zoning Officer's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the
enforcement and interpretation of the Zoning Ordinances and the
inspection of properties within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs for the
existence of violations and shall be empowered to issue summonses to
the owners or occupants of the property to cease and desist for such
§ 30-12.1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-12.1A
AO:384
§ 30-12.2. Building Permit. [Ord. #9306, A XII]
Every application for a building permit shall be made in writing by the
owner or his authorized agent and shall include a statement of the use or
intended use of the structure or vacant land and shall be accompanied by
a certified survey drawn to scale, showing the proposed structure or use
in its exact relation to lot and street lines and by a written statement from
the Borough Engineer, or other satisfactory evidence, that the line of the
bounding street or streets have been accurately located and staked on the
ground. The Administrative Officer shall grant or reissue a building permit
within 10 days after receipt of application. If the Administrative Officer
refuses to issue a permit hereunder, he shall state in writing the grounds of
his refusal.
violations of the Zoning Ordinances which may be found and if those
actions shall fail, may file a complaint in Municipal Court for violation
of the ordinances pursuant to the Zoning Ordinances of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
e. The Zoning Officer shall further consult with the Municipal Attorney
and the Governing Body as to whether further action should be taken
for an injunction or extraordinary relief for violation of said ordinances.
f. The Zoning Officer shall further issue a permit prior to the Construction
Official issuing any construction permit, including a demolition permit.
Said application for a zoning permit shall be available at the office of
the Zoning Officer.
g. The charge for said zoning permit shall be $500.
h. Penalties for Violation of the Zoning Ordinances. The Zoning Officer
shall be charged with the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinances and
any summonses which may be issued and subject to the penalties as set
forth in Chapter 30, Section 30-13.
a. A building permit shall be obtained from the Administrative Officer for
any of the following:
1. The construction, erection, alteration or addition to any building or
part of a building or for any sign. No excavation for any building
shall be commenced until application has been made for a building
permit for such building.
2. Occupancy and use of vacant land.
3. Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected, structurally
altered or moved.
4. Change in the use of land.
5. Change in the use of an existing conforming building.
6. Any change involving a nonconforming use.
§ 30-12.1A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-12.2
AO:385
§ 30-13. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #9306, A XIII]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any part
of this chapter or of any amendment thereof shall upon conviction thereof
forfeit and pay a penalty of not more than $500 or shall be confined to
the Municipal Jail or the County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days or
both. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and each day that prohibited
conditions continue shall constitute a separate offense.
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
7. Any change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use.
8. Change of any use within a building or of land from that permitted
by any variance or special authorization by the Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board. No such construction, erection,
alteration, occupancy or use or change of use shall take place until
a permit therefor has been issued by the Administrative Officer.
b. Unless a building permit or a certificate of occupancy authorizing
construction or the use or occupancy of any premises in accordance
with the terms and conditions of any variance, conditional use or site
plan approval granted by the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board
has been issued within six months after the date of the adoption of such
resolution or within six months after the effective date of this chapter,
whichever period shall last expire, any such variance, conditional use,
or site plan approval shall expire, and before the use or occupancy
permitted thereby may be commenced, a new variance, conditional use
or site plan approval shall be obtained.
c. Upon timely application and for good cause shown, the Board granting
any such variance, conditional use or site plan approval may extend the
term thereof as hereinabove provided by an additional period not to
exceed 90 days.
d. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize, and is required
for, both initial and continued occupancy and use of the building or land
to which it applies and shall continue in effect so long, and only so long,
as such building and the use thereof or the use of such land is in full
conformity with the certificate of occupancy and the provisions of this
chapter and any requirements made pursuant thereto.
e. Upon written request by the owner, the Administrative Officer, shall
after inspection and approval issue a certificate of occupancy for any
building or use thereof or land existing at the time of the adoption of the
chapter certifying such use and whether or not the same conforms to
the provisions of this chapter.
f. Fees for the filing of applications for variances, conditional uses and
site plan approval shall be established by the Mayor and Council.
§ 30-12.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-14
AO:386
§ 30-14. AMENDMENTS. [Ord. #9306, A XIV]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs may from time to
time, on its own motion, on recommendation from the Planning Board, or on
petition or other application, after public notice and hearing in accordance
with law, amend, supplement or change the regulations and districts herein
established and adopt rules and regulations for the purpose of interpreting
and carrying the chapter into effect.
Prior to the hearing on adoption of the Zoning Ordinance or any
amendments thereto, the Borough Council shall refer any such proposed
ordinance or amendment thereto to the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall transmit a report on the proposed ordinance or amendment to the
Borough Council within 35 days after referral The Borough Council shall
review the report of the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any
recommendation by a vote of the majority of its full authorized membership
and shall record in its minutes the reasons for not allowing such
recommendations. Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its report
within the thirty-five-day period shall relieve the Borough Council from the
requirement to review the Planning Board's recommendations.
A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of the Zoning
Ordinance may be filed with the Borough Clerk, signed by the owners of
20% or more of either of the area of the lots or land included in such
proposed change, or the lots or land extending 200 feet in all directions
therefrom inclusive of street space, whether within or without the
municipality. Such amendment or revision shall not become effective
following the filing of such protest except by a favorable vote of 2/3 of all
the members of the Borough Council.
§ 30-15. VALIDITY. [Ord. #9306, A XV]
If any section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this chapter. The Mayor and Council hereby declare
that it would have passed the chapter and each section and subsection
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 30-16. REFERENCED ORDINANCES. [Ord. #9306, A XVI]
a. For design standards and other subdivision requirements see
Ordinance No. 7R (Chapter 15 of General Ordinances).
b. For subdivision regulations see separate document entitled, Planning
and Zoning Commission Regulations of New Subdivisions effective May
1, 1967. Also Ordinance 152R.
§ 30-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-17
AO:387
§ 30-17. REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES AND
ORDINANCES CONTINUED.29 [Ord. #9306, A XVII]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed and this chapter shall take effect 10 days after passage and
publication in the manner provided by law; provided however, that the
passage and taking effect of this chapter shall not abate or prevent the
continuance of any proceedings instituted under the chapter hereby revised
and amended, nor abate or prevent any proceedings or prosecutions for
violations of the said chapter which is hereby revised and amended.
Upon passage and publication provided by law, this chapter shall supersede
Ordinance No. 100R passed November 1, 1960 as amended and
supplemented.
All other substantive and procedural zoning site plan and land subdivision
ordinances not inconsistent herewith and not inconsistent with the
Municipal Land Use Law (Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975) and/or
parts thereof not inconsistent herewith, be and they are hereby continued
in full force and effect as though re-enacted hereby.
Borough Clerk
Mayor
§ 30-18. AFFORDABLE HOUSING. [Ord. #9608, § 11]
30.18.1 Requirements Pertaining to Low and Moderate Income Housing
Units Within Affordable Housing Zones.
a. Affordability Standards for Low and Moderate Income Units; Resale
and Re-Rental Standards.
1. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall be
applicable:
LOW INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean affordable housing
according to Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development or COAH standards for home ownership and rental
costs, occupied or reserved for occupancy for households with
a gross household income equal to 50% or less of the median
gross household income for households of the same size within
the housing region in which the housing is located, and which is
subject to affordability controls promulgated by COAH.
29.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances include portions of Ordinance Nos. 4F, 12F, 100R, 138R,
140R, 142R, 180R, 183R, 6804, 6906, 7105, 7201, 7432, 7601, 7801, 7901, 7905, 8102,
8504, 8724, 8803, 8816, 8922, 8923, 8929, 8933, 9101, 9104, 9110.
§ 30-17 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18
AO:388
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean housing affordable
according to Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development or COAH standards for home ownership and rental
costs, occupied or reserved for occupancy in excess of 50% but less
than 80% of the median gross household income for households of
the same size within the housing region in which the housing is
located, and which is subject to controls promulgated by COAH.
b. Within affordable housing zones, the distribution of low and moderate
income housing units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.2,
noted as follows:
1. At least 1/2 of all units within all inclusionary developments shall be
affordable to low income households.
2. At least 1/2 of all rental units within all inclusionary development
shall be affordable to low income households.
3. At least 1/3 of all units in each bedroom distribution shall be
affordable to low income households.
c. Bedroom distributions for inclusionary housing developments that are
not restricted to senior citizens shall be structured in conjunction with
realistic market demands in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 so that:
1. The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low and moderate income
units;
2. At least 30% of all low and moderate income units are two bedroom
units; and
3. At least 20% of all low and moderate income units are three
bedroom units.
d. Establishing Rents and Sales Prices of Housing Units. Within affordable
housing zones, the following criteria, in conjunction with realistic
market information, shall be used in determining maximum rents and
sales prices for low and moderate income housing units:
1. Efficiency units shall be affordable for one person households;
2. One-half of all one bedroom units shall be affordable for one person
households; and 1/2 of all one bedroom units shall be affordable for
two person households.
3. One-half of all two bedroom units shall be affordable for two person
households; and 1/2 of all two bedroom units shall be affordable for
three person households.
4. One-half of all three bedroom units shall be affordable to four
person households and 1/2 of all three bedroom units shall be
affordable to five person households.
§ 30-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18
AO:389
e. Median income by household size shall be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by
HUD. To compute this regional income limit, the HUD determination of
median County income for a family of four is multiplied by the
households within the County. The resulting product for each County
within the housing region is summed. The sum is divided by the
estimated total households in each housing region. This quotient
represents the weighted average of the median income for a household
of four. This regional weighted average is adjusted by household size
based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by
household size. The maximum average rent and price of low and
moderate income units within each inclusionary development shall be
affordable to households earning 57.5% of median income. The
municipal ordinance shall require moderate income sales units to be
available for at least three different prices and low income sales units to
be available for at least two different prices.
1. In averaging 57.5% under paragraph e above, developers and/or
municipal sponsors of rental units may establish one rent for each
bedroom distribution.
Ordinances regulating owner-occupied and rental units shall
require that low and moderate income units utilize the same
heating source as market rate units within the inclusionary
development.
2. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs will require that the initial price
of a low and moderate income owner-occupied single family
housing unit be established so that after a down payment of 5%, the
monthly principal, interest, insurance, property taxes (property
taxes shall be based on the restricted value of low and moderate
income units) and the condominium or homeowner fees do not
exceed 28% of the eligible gross monthly income. The Borough
shall, by ordinance, require that master deeds of inclusionary
developments regulate condominium or homeowner association
fees or special assessments of low and moderate income
purchasers at a specific percentage of those paid by market
purchasers. The percentage that shall be paid by low and moderate
income purchasers shall be at least 1/3 of the condominium or
homeowner association fees paid by market purchasers. Once
established within the master deed, the percentage shall not be
amended without prior approval from COAH.
3. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall require that gross rents,
including an allowance for utilities, be established so as not to
exceed 30% of the gross monthly income of the appropriate
household size referenced in paragraph e2 above. The allowance
for utilities shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for use in New Jersey.
§ 30-18 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18
AO:390
§ 30-18.2. Controls on Affordability. [Ord. #9608, § 12]
4. Low income housing units shall be reserved for households with a
gross median income less than or equal to 50% of the median
income approved by COAH. Moderate income housing units shall
be reserved for households with a gross household income less
than 80% of the median income approved by COAH. For example, a
household earning 48% of median income may be placed in any low
income unit; however, a household earning 53% may not qualify for
a low income unit. A household earning 67% of median may be
placed in any moderate income housing unit. A household earning
less than 50% of the median may be placed in a moderate income
housing unit. Low and moderate income households shall not be
offered to households that are not income eligible without COAH
approval pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.16.
a. This subsection of the Englewood Cliffs Zoning Ordinance is designed
to provide assurances that low and moderate income units are created
with controls on affordability over time and that low and moderate
income people occupy these units. To that end, the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs designates the Englewood Cliffs Affordable Housing
Agency with the responsibility of ensuring affordability of sales and
rental units over time. The Englewood Cliffs Affordable Housing Agency
shall be responsible for: affirmative marketing; income qualification of
low and moderate income households; placing income eligible
households in low and moderate income units as they become available
during the period of affordability controls; and enforcing the terms of
the deed restriction and mortgage loan.
b. In placing households in low and moderate income units, the Borough
of Englewood Cliffs shall utilize the following verification and
certification procedures:
1. Every household member 18 years of age or over who will live in
the affordable unit and receives income shall be required to provide
income documentation as applicable and determined by the
reviewer for the authority. This includes income received by adults
on behalf of children for their benefit. Household members 18
years of age or over not receiving income must produce
documentation of current status.
2. Verification may include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Four consecutive pay stubs including overtime, bonuses, or
tips dated within 120 days of the interview date or a letter from
the employer stating present annual income figures as
projected annually;
(b) A copy of regular IRS form 1040 (Tax Computation form)
1040A, or 1040EZ as applicable and State income tax returns
§ 30-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.2
AO:391
filed for each of the three years prior to the date of the
interview.
(c) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying benefits such
as Social Security, Unemployment, Welfare, Disability or
Pension income (monthly or annually);
(d) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying any other
sources of income claimed by the applicant such as alimony
and child support;
(e) Reports that verify income from assets to be submitted by
banks or other financial institutions managing trust funds,
money market accounts, certificates of deposit, stocks or
bonds;
(f) Evidence or reports of income from assets such as real estate
or businesses that are directly held by any household member;
(g) Evidence or reports that verify assets that do not earn regular
income such as non-income producing real estate or savings
that do not earn interest; and
(h) A notarized statement of explanation in such form as to be
satisfactory to the reviewer.
3. Generally, sources of annual income shall be based on regular
income reported to the IRS and which can be utilized for mortgage
approval. Household annual gross income shall be calculated by
projecting current gross income over a twelve-month period.
4. Income includes but is not limited to wages, salaries, tips,
commissions, alimony, regularly scheduled overtime, pensions,
social security, unemployment compensation, AFDC, verified
regular child support, disability, net income from business or real
estate, and income from assets such as savings, CDs, money
market, mutual funds, stocks and bonds and imputed income from
non-income producing assets such as equity in real estate.
5. Assets not earning a verifiable income shall have an imputed
interest income using a current average annual savings interest
rate. Assets not earning income includes present real estate equity.
Applicants owning real estate must produce documentation of a
market value appraisal and outstanding mortgage debt. The
difference will be treated as the monetary value of the asset and the
imputed interest added to the income.
6. Income from assets that have delayed earnings, such as IRAs or
annuity programs shall not be included in current income until
such payments are being received. However, these assets must be
reported and verified.
§ 30-18.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18.2
AO:392
7. Net rent from real estate is considered income after the monthly
mortgage payment including real estate taxes and insurance is
deducted. Other expenses are not deductible. In addition, the
equity in the rented real estate is considered an asset and will have
the imputed interest income in the calculated value of equity added
to income.
8. Income does not include payments, rebates or credits received
under Federal or State low income home energy assistance
programs. Food stamps, payments received for care of foster
children, relocation assistance benefits, income of live-in
attendants, scholarships, student loans, personal property such as
automobiles, lump-sum additions to family assets such as
inheritances, one-time lottery winnings, and insurance settlements
except for additional income earned from these additions, and
casual, sporadic or irregular gifts and bonuses.
9. Standard credit information services that provide conventional
credit and tenant reports may be utilized when certifying a
household with required written permission from the household.
An unsatisfactory credit history or credit information that
demonstrates a disproportionate debt to income ratio may result in
a denial of certification. Court-ordered payments for alimony or
child support to another household shall be considered a regular
monthly debt whether or not it is being paid regularly.
10. Households whose total gross annual income is measured above
50% or below 50% of the authorized median income guideline shall
be certified as low income households and referred to units for low
income households. Households whose total gross annual income is
measured above 50% but below 80% of the authorized median
income shall be certified as moderate income households and
referred to units designated for moderate income households.
11. Households whose total gross income is measured above 50% but
below 80% of the authorized median income shall be certified as
moderate income households and referred to units designated for
moderate income households.
12. Generally, households will be referred to units where
predetermined total monthly housing costs correspond to the
household's calculated ability to pay using 28% of gross monthly
income as a standard for home ownership and 30% of gross
monthly income as a standard for rental units.
13. At the discretion of the Authority, households may also be required
to produce documentation of household composition for
determining the correct unit size and the applicable median income
guide.
14. Generally, households will be referred to available units using the
following standards for occupancy;
§ 30-18.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.2
AO:393
§ 30-18.3. Length of Controls. [Ord. #9608, § 13]
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall provide assurances through deed
restrictions and the mortgage lien, as approved by COAH, that newly
constructed low and moderate income sales units will remain affordable to
low and moderate income households for an appropriate period of not less
than 20 years. The Authority shall do so by requiring all conveyances of
newly constructed low and moderate income sales units to contain the deed
restriction and mortgage lien approval as adopted by COAH.
(a) A maximum of two persons per bedroom;
(b) Children of the same sex in same bedroom;
(c) Unrelated adults or persons of the opposite sex other than
husband and wife in separate bedrooms; and
(d) Children not in same bedroom with parents.
15. Households may be considered for units other than as above, but in
no case shall a household be referred to a unit that provides for
more than one additional bedroom per household occupancy
standards as stated in paragraph b14 above.
16. A form for certification shall be prepared and signed by the
Authority. Only households receiving certification shall be referred
to affordable housing units.
17. Certified households who reject an opportunity for affordable
housing may be replaced on the referral list at their request and
may be reinterviewed for certification when their name appears on
a listing for a subsequent unit.
18. Certification shall be valid for no more than 120 days unless a valid
sales contract or lease has been executed within that time period.
In this event, certifications shall be valid until such time as the
sales contract or lease is ruled invalid and no occupancy has
occurred. Certifications may be renewed in writing at the request
of a certified household for no more than an additional period of
120 days at the discretion of the Authority.
19. Households who are denied certification may make a written
request for redetermination. Households shall be required to
produce additional documentation to support their claim.
Households who are denied certification a second time may request
a hearing by forwarding a written request to the Authority within
30 days following the household's receipt of a denial notification. If
a written request has not been received within the thirty-day time
period, the ineligible determination will be final. The hearing
decision shall be final.
§ 30-18.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18.3
AO:394
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall provide assurances through deed
restrictions that newly constructed low and moderate income rental units
remain affordable to low and moderate income households for a period of
no less than 30 years.
§ 30-18.4. General Provisions Concerning Uniform Deed Restriction
Liens and Enforcement through Certificates of Occupancy or
Reoccupancy on Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 14]
§ 30-18.5. Option to Buy Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 15]
a. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall not issue a certificate of
occupancy for initial occupancy of a low and moderate income sales
unit unless there is a written determination by the authority that the
unit is to be controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as
adopted by COAH. The authority shall make such determination within
10 days of receipt of a proposed deed restriction and mortgage lien.
Amendments to the deed restriction and lien shall be permitted only if
they have been approved by COAH. A request for an amendment to the
deed restriction and lien may be made by the authority, Englewood
Cliffs or a developer.
b. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall not permit the initial occupancy
of a low or moderate income sales unit prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy in accordance with paragraph a above.
c. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs requires a certificate of reoccupancy
for any occupancy of a low or moderate income sales unit resulting from
a resale and shall not issue such certificate unless there is a written
determination by the authority that the unit is to be controlled by the
deed restriction and mortgage lien prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, regardless of whether the sellers had executed the deed
restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH upon acquisition of the
property. The authority shall make such determination within 10 days of
receipt of a proposed deed restriction and mortgage lien.
d. The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required in sales for which
controls are allowed to expire or in which the repayment option is being
exercised pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4.
e. The mortgage lien and deed restriction shall be filed with the records
office of Bergen County. The lien and deed restriction shall be in the
form adopted by COAH.
f. The deed restriction, including the repayment clause, and the mortgage
lien shall have priority over all mortgages on the property except for a
first mortgage placed on the property by the mortgagee prior to the
expiration of resale controls.
a. The deed restriction governing the deeds of low and moderate income
units shall include an option permitting purchase of the affordable
§ 30-18.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.5
AO:395
§ 30-18.6. Borough Option; Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 16]
housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales price at the
time of the first nonexempt sale after controls on affordability have
been in effect on the unit for the period, specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
The option to buy shall be available to the Borough, the Department
of Community Affairs, the Agency, or a qualified nonprofit agency as
defined by COAH.
b. All deed restrictions governing low and moderate income units shall
require the owner to notify the Authority and COAH by certified mail of
any intent to sell the unit 90 days prior to entering into an agreement
for the first nonexempt sale after controls have been in effect on the
housing unit for the period specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
c. Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit at the maximum
allowable restricted sales price or any mutually agreeable sales price
that does not exceed the maximum allowable restricted sales price shall
be available for 90 days. The Authority shall notify the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs, the Department of Community Affairs, the Agency
and COAH that the unit is for sale. If the Borough exercises this option,
it may enter into a contract of sale. If the Borough fails to exercise this
option within 90 days, the first of the other entities giving notice to the
seller of its intent to purchase during the ninety-day period, shall be
entitled to purchase the unit. If the option to purchase the unit at the
maximum allowable restricted sales prices is not exercised by a written
offer to purchase the housing unit within 90 days of the receipt of the
intent to sell, the owner may proceed to sell the housing unit (pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8). If the owner does not sell the unit within one year
of the date of the delivery of notice to sell, the option to buy the unit
shall be restored and the owner shall be required to submit a new
notice of intent to sell 90 days prior to any future proposed date of sale.
d. Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted
sales price shall be exercised by certified mail and shall be deemed
exercised upon mailing.
a. If the Borough of Englewood Cliffs elects to purchase a low or moderate
income unit pursuant to N.J.A.C., 5:93-9.4, it may:
1. Convey or rent the housing unit to a low or moderate income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the maximum
allowable restricted sales price or rent provided the unit is
controlled by a deed restriction in accordance with COAH
regulations; or
2. Convey the unit at fair market value subject to the provisions of
paragraph c below.
b. If the Borough purchases the low income housing units, it shall
maintain them as low income units.
§ 30-18.5 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18.6
AO:396
§ 30-18.7. State Options; Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 17]
§ 30-18.8. Nonprofit Option; Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 18]
§ 30-18.9. Seller Option; Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 19]
c. If the Borough elects to purchase the low or moderate income housing
unit and convey it at a fair market value it shall:
1. Notify COAH of any proposed sale and sales price 90 days before
closing;
2. Notify COAH of the price differential as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3;
and
3. Deposit the price differential in an interest bearing trust fund
devoted solely to the creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low
and moderate income housing.
d. Money deposited in housing trust funds may not be expended until the
Borough submits and COAH approves a spending plan in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c). Money deposited in the housing trust funds
shall be subject to restrictions, monitoring requirements and penalties
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.15 through 17.
a. When the Department of Community Affairs or Agency elects to
purchase a low or moderate income unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, it
may:
1. Convey or rent the housing unit to a low or moderate income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable
restricted sales price or rental; or
2. Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low and moderate income housing within the
appropriate housing region.
a. Nonprofit agencies may apply to COAH at any time for the right to
purchase low or moderate income units subsequent to the period of
controls on affordability provided the unit remains controlled by a deed
restriction in accordance with COAH regulations.
b. Nonprofit agencies that have been designated by COAH shall be eligible
to purchase low or moderate income units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4
for the sole purpose of conveying or renting the housing unit to a low or
moderate income purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed
the allowable restricted sales price or rental. Low income units shall be
made available to low income purchasers or tenants and the housing
unit shall be regulated by the deed restriction and lien adopted by
COAH. The term of the controls on affordability shall be the same as
those required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
§ 30-18.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.9
AO:397
§ 30-18.10. Municipal Rejection of Repayment Option; Sales Units.
[Ord. #9608, § 20]
a. An eligible seller of a low or moderate income unit which has been
controlled for the period established in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, who has
provided notice of an intent to sell, may proceed with the sale if no
eligible entity as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4(c) and 9.7 exercises its
option to purchase within 90 days.
b. Subject to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9, the seller may elect to:
1. Sell to a qualified low and moderate income household at a price
not to exceed the maximum permitted sales price in accordance
with existing COAH rules, provided the unit is regulated by deed
restriction and lien adopted by COAH, for a period of at least 20
years, or
2. Exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at market
price, providing that 95% of the price differential is paid to the
Authority, as an instrument of the Borough, at closing.
c. If the sale is to a qualified low and moderate income household, the
Authority shall certify the income qualifications of the purchaser and
shall ensure the housing unit is regulated by the deed restriction and
lien required by COAH.
d. The authority shall examine any contract of sale containing a
repayment option to determine if the proposed sales price bears a
reasonable relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. In
making this determination, the Authority may rely on comparable sales
data or an appraisal. The Authority shall not approve any contract of
sale where there is determination that the sales price does not bear a
reasonable relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. The
Authority shall make a determination within 20 days of receipt of the
contract of sale and shall calculate the repayment option payment.
e. The authority shall adopt an appeal procedure by which a seller may
submit written documentation requesting the Authority to recompute
the repayment obligation if the seller believes an error has been made,
or to reconsider a determination made as a result of an owner's appeal
shall be a final administrative determination of the Authority.
f. The repayment shall occur at the date of closing and transfer of title for
the first nonexempt transaction after the expiration of controls on
affordability.
g. Repayment proceeds shall be deposited in a housing trust fund (see
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.14) and may be used as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.15. Money
deposited in housing trust funds may not be expended until the
Borough submits and COAH approves a spending plan. (See N.J.A.C.
5:93-51(c).)
§ 30-18.9 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18.10
AO:398
§ 30-18.11. Continued Application of Options to Create,
Rehabilitate or Maintain Low and Moderate Income Units; Sales
Units. [Ord. #9608, § 21]
When a housing unit has been maintained as a low or moderate income
unit after controls have been in effect for the period specified by N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.2, the deed restriction governing the housing units shall allow the
Borough, the State, nonprofit agencies and sellers of low and moderate
income units to again exercise all the same options as provided herein.
§ 30-18.12. Eligible Capital Improvements Prior to the Expiration of
Controls; Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 22]
a. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall have the right to determine that
the most desirable means of promoting an adequate supply of low and
moderate income housing is to prohibit the exercise of the repayment
option and maintain controls on lower income housing units sold within
the Borough beyond the period required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2. Such
determination shall be made by resolution of the governing body and
shall be effective upon filing with COAH and the Authority. The
resolution shall specify the time period for which the repayment option
shall not be applicable. During such period, no seller in the Borough
may utilize the repayment option permitted by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8.
b. If the Borough exercises the option outlined in paragraph a above, the
Borough shall:
1. Provide public notice in a newspaper of general circulation; and
2. Notify the Authority and COAH of its governing body's action.
c. The Authority shall ensure that the deed restriction on all affected
housing units reflects the extended period of controls.
a. Property owners of single family owner-occupied housing may apply to
the Authority for permission to increase the maximum price for eligible
capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that
render the unit suitable for a larger household. In no event shall the
maximum price of an improved housing unit exceed the limits of
affordability for the larger household. Property owners shall apply to
the Authority if an increase in the maximum sales price is sought.
b. At resale, all items of property which are permanently affixed to the
units and/or were included when the unit was initially restricted (for
example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall
carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable resale price.
Other items of property may be sold to the purchaser at a reasonable
price that has been approved by the Authority at the time of the signing
of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of central air conditioning
installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not included in
the base price may be made a condition of the unit resale provided the
§ 30-18.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.12
AO:399
§ 30-18.13. Subsidy to Ensure Affordability Prior to the Expiration
of Controls; Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 23]
§ 30-18.14. Impact of Foreclosure on Resale While Controls Are in
Place; Sales Units. [Ord. #9608, § 24]
§ 30-18.15. Excess Proceeds Upon Foreclosures: Sales Units. [Ord.
#9608, § 25]
price has been approved by the Authority. Unless otherwise permitted
by COAH, the purchase of any property other than central air
conditioning shall not be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner
and the purchaser must personally certify at the time of the closing that
no unapproved transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving
property has taken place at resale.
a. If the use of median income data adopted by COAH to index the cost of
housing renders a unit unaffordable to a low or moderate income
household at the time of resale, the Borough shall not lose credit for the
housing unit, provided that adequate controls on affordability remain in
place, but the Borough may subsidize the housing unit to maintain
affordability.
a. A judgment of foreclosure or a deed in lieu of foreclosure to a financial
institution regulated by State and/or Federal law or to a lender on the
secondary mortgage market (including, but not limited to, the Federal
National Mortgage Association, the Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
the Government National Mortgage Association or an entity acting on
their behalf) shall extinguish controls on affordable housing units
provided there is compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.14.
b. Notice of foreclosure shall allow the Authority, the Borough, the
Department of Community Affairs, the Agency or a nonprofit entity to
purchase the affordable housing unit at the maximum permitted sales
price and maintain it as an affordable unit for the balance of the
intended period of controls. Failure to purchase the affordable housing
unit shall result in COAH adding that unit to the Borough's present and
prospective fair share obligation. Failure of the financial institution to
provide notice of a foreclosure action to the Authority shall not impair
any of the financial institution's rights to recoup loan proceeds; shall
not negate the extinguishment of controls or the validity of foreclosure;
and shall create no cause of action against the financial institution.
a. In the event of a foreclosure sale, the owner of the affordable housing
unit shall be personally obligated to pay the Authority responsible for
assuring affordability, any surplus funds, but only to the extent that
such surplus funds exceed the difference between the maximum price
permitted at the time of foreclosure and the amount necessary to
redeem the debt to the financial institution, including costs of
foreclosure.
§ 30-18.12 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18.16
AO:400
§ 30-18.16. Annual Index Increased While Controls Are in Place;
Sales and Rents. [Ord. #9608, § 26]
§ 30-18.17. Procedures for Initial Sales, Resale Prior to the
Expiration of Controls, and Rentals. [Ord. #2608, § 27]
a. The price of an owner-occupied housing unit and the rents of affordable
housing units may increase annually based on the percentage increase
in the regional median income limit for each housing region. In no event
shall the maximum resale price established by the Authority be lower
than the last recorded purchase price.
b. With the exception of rentals constructed pursuant to low income tax
credit regulations, the rent of a moderate income housing unit may be
increased annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not
exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to low
income tax credits regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the
regulations governing low income tax credits.
a. Low and moderate income sale units shall not be offered to non-income
eligible households at initial sale without COAH approval. Parties that
petition COAH for such approval shall document efforts to sell housing
units to income eligible households and shall adhere to the procedures
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:91-12.
b. Persons wishing to sell affordable units shall notify the Authority
responsible for assuring affordability of the intent to sell. If no eligible
buyer enters a contract of sale for the unit within 90 days of
notification, the Authority shall have the option to purchase the unit for
a negotiated price that shall not exceed the maximum price permitted
based on the regional increase in the median income as defined by HUD
or other recognized standard adopted by COAH. If the Authority does
not purchase the unit, the seller may apply for permission to offer the
unit to a non-income eligible household at the maximum price
permitted. The seller shall document efforts to sell the unit to an income
eligible household as part of this application. In reviewing the request,
the Authority shall have the option to purchase the unit for a negotiated
price that shall not exceed the maximum price permitted based on the
regional increase in the median income as defined by HUD or other
recognized standard adopted by COAH. If the Authority does not
purchase the unit, the seller may apply for permission to offer the unit
to a non-income eligible household at the maximum price permitted.
The seller shall document efforts to sell the unit to an income eligible
household as part of this application. In receiving the request, the
Authority shall consider the specific reasons for any delay in selling the
housing unit and the hardship to the seller in continuing to offer the
affordable unit to an income eligible applicant. The inability to sell a
unit for the maximum permitted resale price shall not, in itself, be
considered an appropriate reason for allowing a housing unit to be sold
to a non-income eligible household. If the request is granted, the seller
§ 30-18.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.17
AO:401
§ 30-18.18. Affirmative Marketing Plan; Definition and Contents.
[Ord. 9608, § 28]
§ 30-18.19. Training and General Responsibilities. [Ord. 9608, § 29]
may offer a low income housing unit to a moderate income household
and a moderate income housing unit to a household earning in excess
of 80% of the median. In no case shall the seller be permitted to
receive more than the maximum price permitted. In no case shall
a sale pursuant to this section eliminate the resale controls on the
unit or permit any subsequent seller to convey the unit except in full
compliance with the terms of this section.
c. Owners of low and moderate income rental units shall not offer rental
units to non-income eligible households without prior approval of
COAH. Parties that petition for such approval shall document all efforts
to rent to income eligible households and demonstrate to the
satisfaction of COAH that alternatives, such as a reduction in rent, is
not feasible. Parties that petition COAH shall adhere to the procedures
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:91-12.
a. An affirmative marketing plan is a requirement of this section. The
affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to
attract buyers and/or renters of all groups, regardless of sex, age or
number of children, to housing units which are being marketed by a
developer or sponsor of affordable housing. It is a continuing program
and covers the period of deed restriction.
b. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide the following information:
1. The name and address of the project;
2. The number of units, including the number of sales and rental
units;
3. The price of sales and/or rentals;
4. The name of the rental manager and/or sales agent;
5. A description of outreach efforts to groups that are not readily
reached by commercial media efforts (See N.J.A.C. 5:92-11.3) for
advertising campaign details); and
6. A description of the random selection method that will be used to
select occupants of low and moderate income housing.
c. The affirmative marketing plan shall be a part of the fair share plan and
shall be referenced by ordinance.
a. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs will provide an affirmative marketing
program for low and moderate income units. The Borough shall
designate a municipal authority to be responsible for implementing the
affirmative marketing plan. A representative of the municipal authority
§ 30-18.17 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18.19
AO:402
§ 30-18.20. Marketing Program. [Ord. 9608, § 30]
shall attend an affirmative marketing training program approved by
COAH. The Borough may contract with other agencies to administer the
affirmative marketing program and the actual sales and rentals of the
units. If the Borough contracts with another agency to administer the
affirmative marketing program, the Borough shall appoint a Housing
Officer that shall act as a liaison to the contracting agency. In addition,
where the contracting agency is not responsible for the entire
affirmative marketing program, the Borough shall outline who or what
municipal agency is responsible for the remaining portion of the
affirmative marketing program.
b. In implementing the affirmative marketing program, the Borough may
delegate specific tasks to a developer of an inclusionary development
provided that all applicant and sales records of low and moderate
income units are returned to the Borough for reporting purposes and to
aid with future resales.
c. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the Authority shall be
responsible for providing counseling services to low and moderate
income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualifications, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
a. The advertising program shall be designed to reach all segments of the
eligible population within the housing region.
b. The plan shall describe the media to be used in advertising and
publicizing the availability of housing. In developing the plan the
Borough shall consider the use of language translations. The plan shall
include the following:
1. The names of specific newspapers with circulation throughout the
housing region;
2. The names of specific radio and television stations broadcasting
throughout the housing region;
3. The names of other publications circulated within the housing
region that are likely to be read by low and moderate income
households, such as neighborhood oriented weekly newspapers
religious publications and organizational newsletters;
4. The names of employers throughout the housing region that will be
contacted to post advertisements and distribute flyers regarding
available low and moderate income housing;
5. The names of specific community and regional organizations that
will aid in soliciting low and moderate income applicants. Such
organizations may include nonprofit, religious, governmental,
fraternal, civic and other organizations.
§ 30-18.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.20
AO:403
§ 30-18.21. Marketing for Initial Sales and/or Rent Up: Composition
of Marketing Pool. [Ord. #9608, § 31]
c. The marketing process for available low and moderate income units
shall begin at least four months prior to the expected occupancy. In
implementing the marketing program, there shall be at least one paid
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the housing
region during the first week of the marketing program. Such
advertisements shall include at least the following:
1. The location of the units;
2. Directions to the housing units;
3. A range of prices for the housing units;
4. The size, as measured in bedrooms, of the housing units;
5. The maximum income permitted to qualify for the housing units;
6. The location of applications for the housing units; and
7. The business hours when interested households may obtain an
application for a housing unit.
d. Applications for low and moderate income housing shall be available in
several different convenient locations, including, at a minimum, the
Borough Hall and at the developer's sales office. Applications shall be
mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
e. If the cost of advertising low and moderate income units are to be a
developer's responsibility, the requirement shall be a condition of the
Borough planning board's approval.
a. Households that apply for low and moderate income housing shall be
screened for preliminary income eligibility by comparing their total
income to the low and moderate income limits adopted by COAH.
Applicants shall be notified as to their eligibility status.
b. Having screened applicant for preliminary income eligibility, the
Authority may analyze the income and household size of applicants to
determine which applicants have the assets and/or income necessary to
purchase or rent each available low and moderate income unit.
c. The Authority shall interview each applicant and utilize the procedures
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1 to: verify the applicant's income and
household size; determine the applicant's asset availability; and review
the applicant's credit history. Applicants shall be required to submit
income verification for each household member 18 years or older. This
process shall be utilized in establishing the final certified applicant
group.
§ 30-18.20 ENGLEWOOD § 30-18.21
AO:404
§ 30-18.22. Continuing Marketing Activities. [Ord. #9608, § 32]
§ 30-18.23. Monitoring and Reporting Requirements. [Ord. #9608,
§ 33]
d. The process described in paragraphs a through c may begin no sooner
than one month after the advertising program outlined in N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.3 begins. Households shall be selected to proceed throughout
the process described in paragraphs a through c above through method
of random selection. Households shall be certified for low and moderate
income units using the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C., 5:93-9.1. The
process described in paragraph a through c shall be continued until all
the low and moderate income units are occupied.
a. The types of activities to be undertaken after the completion of initial
occupancy of sales and rental units in order to fill vacancies resulting
from normal turnover shall include:
1. Insuring a sufficient supply of income eligible applicants by
continuing to implement the marketing plan throughout the
housing region, as outlined herein. At a minimum, the Borough
shall maintain a current pool of at least five income eligible
applicants for each low and moderate income unit.
2. Contacting each income eligible applicant annually to request
updated information regarding income and family size.
b. As units become available, the Authority shall select eligible applicants
for the units, as described in N.J.A.C. 5:92-11.4(b) through (d) until the
units are occupied by low and moderate income households.
a. The Borough shall collect information on each applicant for low and
moderate income housing on forms approved by COAH.
b. The Borough shall evaluate the results of their affirmative marketing
activities and file a report with COAH by August 30 of each year. Such
report shall include:
1. Monitoring forms approved by COAH;
2. An evaluation of the income and demographic characteristics of
each applicant of low and moderate income housing, as well as the
occupants of the units; and
3. An evaluation of any necessary adjustments in the affirmative
marketing program as a result of the evaluation in paragraph a
above.
c. COAH shall review and assess the effectiveness of the Borough's
affirmative marketing program. If it is deemed that the affirmative
marketing program is not effective, the Borough shall be required to
amend the program.
§ 30-18.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.24
AO:405
§ 30-18.24. Residency Preference. [Ord. #9608, § 34]
§ 30-19. AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FEE.30
§ 30-19.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2009-08]
§ 30-19.2. Basic Requirements. [Ord. #2009-08]
§ 30-19.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2009-08]
a. The Borough may provide an occupancy preference for low and
moderate income units created within Englewood Cliffs that responds
to the municipal rehabilitation component, if any.
b. The Borough may provide an occupancy preference to low and
moderate income households that reside or work in the housing region.
Such a preference may apply to all low and moderate income units
created within Englewood Cliffs.
a. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
b. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
c. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c.46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing. This section shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
a. This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
b. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall not spend development fees until
COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
30.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 9707, 2006-25
and 2009-03.
§ 30-18.24 ENGLEWOOD § 30-19.3
AO:406
§ 30-19.4. Residential Development Fees. [Ord. #2009-08]
a. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a
development included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable development.
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning consideration in the State.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a
lot or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Shall mean money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the assessed value of a
property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value
for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined
in accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a
through C.54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Shall mean those strategies that
minimize the impact of development on the environment and enhance
the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable,
low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making optimum use
of existing infrastructure and community services.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs' district(s), residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development provided no increased
density is permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
§ 30-19.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19.4
AO:407
§ 30-19.5. Nonresidential Development Fees. [Ord. #2009-08]
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2% of the
equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified
higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Residential
Development.
1. Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure. Owner-occupied residential
structures demolished and replaced as a result of a fire, flood or
natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2 1/2% of the equalized assessed value of the
land and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on
an unimproved low or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
§ 30-19.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-19.5
AO:408
§ 30-19.6. Collection Procedures. [Ord. #2009-08]
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvement and the
equalized value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land and
improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If
the calculation required under this section results in a negative
number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
1. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
2. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
3. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as a lien against the real
property of the owner.
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official.
b. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
§ 30-19.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19.6
AO:409
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property, which is
subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should the Borough of Englewood Cliffs fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L.2008, c.46
(C.40:55D-8.6).
h. 50% of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
building permit and that determined at issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs. Appeals from a determination of the Board may
be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90
§ 30-19.6 ENGLEWOOD § 30-19.6
AO:410
§ 30-19.7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. [Ord. #2009-08]
days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing account by
Borough of Englewood Cliffs. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law. R.S. 54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with Englewood Cliffs'
affordable housing program.
c. Within seven days from the opening of the Trust Fund account, the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall provide COAH with written
authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between
the municipality, TD Bank and COAH to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
d. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
§ 30-19.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19.8
AO:411
§ 30-19.8. Use of Funds. [Ord. #2009-08]
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs' fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving
loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to:
preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or
implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of
affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment,
market to affordable, or regional housing partnership programs,
conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable
units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in
accordance with accepted national or State standards, purchase of land
for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the
approved spending plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs for past housing activities.
c. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
d. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
§ 30-19.8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-19.8
AO:412
§ 30-19.9. Monitoring. [Ord. #2009-08]
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and
any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs' housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall
be completed on forms designed by COAH.
§ 30-19.10. Ongoing Collection of Fees. [Ord. #2009-08]
The ability for the Borough of Englewood Cliffs to impose, collect and
expend development fees shall expire with its substantive certification
unless the Borough of Englewood Cliffs has filed an adopted Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification, and has received COAH's approval of its development fee
ordinance. If the Borough of Englewood Cliffs fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of substantive
certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited
into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant
to section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-320). The Borough of Englewood
Cliffs shall not impose a residential development fee on a development
that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration
of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs retroactively impose a development fee on
such a development. The Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance.
§ 30-19A. MANDATORY INCLUSION OF AND SET-ASIDE FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
e. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 30-19.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19A.1
AO:413
§ 30-19A.1. Set-Aside Percentages. [Ord. No. 2018-14]
If the Borough and/or the Planning Board permits the construction of multifamily
or single-family attached residential development, the developer
shall be required to set aside an appropriate percentage of the residential
units for low and moderate income households. The appropriate
percentages are as follows:
§ 30-19A.2. Applicability and Non-Applicability. [Ord. No. 2018-14]
a. For projects in which the low and moderate units are to be offered for
sale, the set-aside percentage shall be no less than 20%.
b. For projects in which the low and moderate income units are to be
offered for rent, the set-aside percentage shall be no less than 15%.
c. As set forth in Section 30-18 of the Borough Code and as amended by
State laws and regulations, all affordable housing units shall comply
with the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls and all applicable
affordable housing laws and regulations, including but not limited to,
requirements regarding bedroom distribution and income distribution.
a. The provisions for a required percentage of units to be set aside for low
and/or moderate income households shall not apply to developments
containing four or less dwelling units.
b. The set aside percentage requirements shall apply to any multi-family
or single-family attached residential development, including the
residential portion of a mixed-use project, that consists of five or more
new residential units, whether permitted by zoning, a zoning
amendment, a variance granted by the Borough's Planning Board or
Zoning Board, or adoption of a Redevelopment Plan or amended
Redevelopment Plan in areas in need of redevelopment or
rehabilitation.
c. For any such development for which the Borough's land use ordinances
(for example, a zoning ordinance or an adopted Redevelopment Plan)
already permitted residential development as of the effective date of
this Chapter, the set-aside percentage requirements shall apply if the
Borough permits an increase in approvable and developable gross
residential density.
d. Nothing in this paragraph precludes the Borough and/or its Planning
Board or Zoning Board from imposing an affordable housing set-aside
percentage in a development not required to have a set-aside,
consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311(h) and other applicable law.
e. This requirement does not create any entitlement for a property owner
or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption of a
Redevelopment Plan or amended Redevelopment Plan in areas in need
of redevelopment or rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular
proposed project.
§ 30-19A.1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-19A.2
AO:414
§ 30-20. MOBILE CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS.31
§ 30-20.1. Applicability. [Ord. #9715, § 3]
§ 30-20.2. General Requirements. [Ord. #9715, § 4]
f. Where a project proposes demolition of existing dwelling units and
construction of new dwelling units on the same site, or a project
proposes to expand an existing building with residential units, the
provisions of this section shall apply only if the net number of newly
created dwelling units is five or more.
g. All subdivision and site plan approvals of qualifying residential
developments shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions
of this section.
a. New Towers and Antennas. All new towers and/or antennas in the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall be subject to these regulations,
except as provided in subsections 30-20.1b through d inclusive.
b. Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas. This section
shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is
owned and operated by a Federally-licensed amateur radio operator or
is used exclusively for receive only antennas.
c. Preexisting Towers or Antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas are not required to meet the requirements of this ordinance
other than the requirements of subsection 30-20.2d, absent any
enlargement or structural modification of the addition of any
structures.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
1. Public law enforcement and public safety apparatus.
2. Property under the jurisdiction of the Palisade Interstate Park
Commission.
a. Mobile cellular communications towers shall be considered a principal
use on the subject property. Mobile cellular communications antennas
shall be considered an accessory use on the subject property unless the
principal use that the satellite antenna serves is not located on the
subject property.
b. Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback and other bulk requirements, the
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antenna or
tower may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
31.Editor's Note: See also Section 30-8e2, pertaining to conditional uses for mobile cellular
communications towers.
§ 30-19A.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.2
AO:415
c. Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for a mobile cellular
communication tower shall provide an inventory of its existing towers,
or sites approved for towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs or within three miles of the border thereof,
including specific information about the location, height, and design of
each tower. Such information may be shared with other applicants
applying for administrative approvals or permits under this section or
other organizations seeking to locate towers within the jurisdiction of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs, provided, however, that the Borough
is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
d. State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate towers.
If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the
towers governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a
different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling State or
Federal agency. Failure to bring towers into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower at the owner's expense.
e. Not Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
f. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communication system in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
g. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
h. Structural Integrity.
1. On or before the 1st of January next following the issuance of a
conditional use permit for a mobile cellular communications tower,
and on or before each and every January 1st next ensuing, the
owner or operator of such tower shall file in the office of the
Construction Code Official, with a copy to be filed with the Borough
Engineer, a written report from a licensed professional engineer
certifying to the structural integrity of the tower and that all
antennas mounted thereon are secure and that they meet
applicable minimum safety requirements.
2. The written report required in paragraph h1 hereinabove shall also
be filed within 20 days of the date that there is any modification or
repair of an existing tower or that there is any notification of the
placement of antennas on the tower.
§ 30-20.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-20.2
AO:416
§ 30-20.3. Conditional Use Standards for Mobile Cellular
Communications Towers. [Ord. #9715, § 6]
A mobile cellular communications tower may be erected or constructed on
property within the I and B-2 zones of the borough as long as it meets the
following conditional use standards:
3. If such owner or operator shall fail to file the written report when
due as required hereunder, the conditional use permit issued for
the tower shall automatically be revoked and the construction code
office shall notify the owner or operator, in writing of such
revocation. Any continued use of the tower following notice of
revocation shall constitute a separate violation.
4. Any mobile cellular communications tower which has not been used
for mobile communications purposes for a period of one year shall
be considered abandoned, upon which the Construction Code
Official shall, in writing, notify the owner or operator of such
abandonment. Upon receipt of such notice of abandonment, the
owner shall, within 30 days of such notification, at its sole cost and
expense, remove the tower and any other structures on the site and
restore the site to the condition it was in before the conditional use
permit was issued. If the owner or operator shall fail to remove the
tower and restore the site as herein required, such failure shall
constitute a violation of this section. For each date beyond the
thirty-day removal and restoration period that said owner or
operator has failed to remove the tower and restore the site, same
shall constitute a separate violation.
a. Any mobile cellular communications tower shall be located a minimum
distance of 500 feet from any residential parcel or lot and 500 feet from
any of the following structures or uses: public and private schools,
libraries, senior citizen housing, or from any historic district or historic
site, as designated on the National and/or State Register of Historic
Places or as promulgated in the Englewood Cliffs Master Plan.
b. No more than one mobile cellular communications tower may be
erected or constructed on any one lot, site or tract of land. There shall
not be more than one such tower located within a three mile radius of
another tower within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
c. Minimum setback of the tower from any property line shall be equal to
the height of the tower plus 10 feet. This standard shall serve as the
minimum setback based upon the so-called "fall down" provision in the
event of a catastrophe.
d. Minimum Lot Area or Lease Area. The minimum lot area or lease area
shall be computed as follows: π (r + 10)2 where π = 3.1416 and r is
equal to the maximum height of the tower.
§ 30-20.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.3
AO:417
§ 30-20.4. Plat Details for Mobile Cellular Communications Towers.
[Ord. #9715, § 7]
e. Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width of the tower site or leased
area shall be equal to the square root of the minimum lot area.
f. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be limited to
10% of the lot area or lease area.
g. Maximum Height of Tower. (Measured from ground level to highest
vertical point on any part of the structure.) - 100 feet.
h. The site on which the tower and any accessory buildings or structures
are situated shall be completely enclosed with a fence at least six feet
high, of composition meeting the approval of the Planning Board, which
shall include a locking security gate.
i. An area of 25 linear feet in all directions at the base of the
communications tower shall be free and clear of all buildings and
structures.
j. Said mobile cellular communications antenna or tower shall have direct
access to an improved and approved public street.
a. Information Required. In addition to any information required for
applications for conditional use for a conditional use permit for a mobile
communication tower shall submit the following information:
1. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land
uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities),
Master Plan classification of the site and separation distances from
adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any
other structures, topography, parking, and other information
deemed to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance.
2. Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
3. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit.
4. The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsections
30-20.2b and 30-20.4c shall be shown on the site plan map. The
applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing
tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
5. All existing and proposed landscaping including the amount and
specific landscape materials.
§ 30-20.3 ENGLEWOOD § 30-20.4
AO:418
§ 30-20.5. Procedure for a Mobile Cellular Communication Tower
Application. [Ord. #9715, § 8]
6. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
7. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether the
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
8. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
9. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers
or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use
of the proposed new tower.
10. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs based upon
existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
11. A visual study depicting where, within a three mile radius, any
portion of the proposed tower will be seen.
a. No building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or
installation of a mobile cellular communications tower unless
conditional use approval and site plan approval have been granted by
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, where applicable.
b. For a conditional use approval for a mobile cellular communications
tower, the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set
forth in Section 30-8 of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance.
c. Upon filing of a completed application for a mobile cellular
communications antenna or tower as a conditional use, the Planning
Board shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the Municipal
Land Use Law.
d. The applicant shall give notice of such hearing as provided by law.
e. A list of property owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice shall be furnished to the applicant in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 30-9.3. The Planning Board's decision on such
application shall be in accordance with the provisions of subsection
30-9.3. Publication of such decisions shall be in accordance with
subsection 30-9.3.
f. In granting a conditional use permit, the approving authority may
impose conditions to the extent the approving authority concludes such
§ 30-20.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.5
AO:419
§ 30-20.6. Mobile Cellular Communications Tower Conditional Use
Procedures. [Ord. #9715, § 9]
§ 30-20.7. Procedure for Satellite Antenna. [Ord. #9715, § 10]
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties.
g. An applicant conditional use permit shall submit the information
described required by this section and a nonrefundable application fee
and an escrow deposit as required by the Borough for conditional use
applications as herein established.
a. All information and documentation required for a site plan and/or a
subdivision application shall be submitted in accordance with Section
30-9 and/or Chapter 15 of the Borough's Land Use Ordinances as well
as procedures and standards outlined herein.
b. An environmental impact statement, prepared by a licensed engineer, a
licensed planner and other related professionals shall be submitted to
the approving authority.
c. A report from a professional engineer or other qualified expert witness
shall be provided which shall include:
1. A description of the tower and the technical and other reasons for
the tower's design and height.
2. Information and documentation to establish that the tower has
sufficient structural integrity for the proposed uses at the proposed
location, and meets or exceeds minimum safety requirements and
margins established by the Federal Communications Commission
and the Borough's Building Code.
3. Information and documentation describing the general capacity of
the tower in terms of the number and type of antennas it is
designed to accommodate, including the extent to which additional
equipment can be mounted on the tower and the types of
equipment which can be accommodated.
4. Information and documentation describing the elevation of the
proposed tower and accessory building or structure, if any, and
describing all proposed antennas, platforms, finish materials and
other accessory equipment.
a. Any property owner shall, prior to the placement of a satellite antenna
on the subject property, submit to the Construction Code Official, a plan
showing the size of the satellite antenna, the proposed location of same
on the subject premises, and such other information as may be required
herein.
§ 30-20.5 ENGLEWOOD § 30-20.7
AO:420
§ 30-20.8. Plat Details for Satellite Antenna. [Ord. #9715, § 11]
The plat plan shall be drawn on a map to scale not smaller than one inch
equals 40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include
the following information:
b. The Construction Code Official shall review said plan and render a
decision within 21 days of the submission of said plan or within such
further time as may be consented to by the property owner.
c. If the satellite antenna requires action by the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment, the Construction Code Official shall advise the
applicant within a twenty-one-day period.
d. Waiver. The provisions of this section shall not apply if the satellite base
station antenna is constructed in a residential zone and is one meter or
less in diameter or if the satellite base station antenna is constructed in
a commercial zone and is two meters or less in diameter.
a. The name and address of the applicant and owner and the name,
address and title of the person preparing the plan and accompanying
date, the date of preparation, and the date of each revision where
applicable.
b. An appropriate place for the signature of the Construction Official,
Borough Engineer and approving authority chairperson, where
applicable.
c. The lot and block number(s) of the subject property from the Borough
tax maps and the length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed lot
or parcel.
d. The location, pavement and right-of-way widths, and names of all
existing and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question, the
property lines of all streets abutting properties together with the names
and addresses as disclosed on the Borough tax map and tax rolls as of
the date of the application, and the location of existing buildings within
200 feet of the site in question.
e. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings or
structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing the present
finished grade elevations at all corners.
f. All existing and proposed setback dimensions, landscape areas, trees of
six inch caliper or greater on the site affected by the proposed
apparatus.
g. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening to prevent noise,
glare and improve aesthetic considerations.
h. Location of wetlands and wetland buffers, if any, as determined by an
LOI prepared by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
§ 30-20.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.8
AO:421
§ 30-20.9. Design Standards for Satellite Antenna. [Ord. #9715,
§ 12]
§ 30-20.10. Enforcement Officer. [Ord. #9715, § 13]
The Construction Code Official of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs is hereby
designated as the public officer charged with the enforcement of the terms
Protection or a qualified wetlands expert licensed by the State of New
Jersey.
i. Any and all other information necessary to meet the requirements as
listed herein.
a. A mobile cellular communications satellite or a satellite antenna that is
one meter or less in diameter is permitted in any area or zone within the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs as a matter of right regardless of land use
or zoning category.
b. A satellite antenna that is two meters or less in diameter and is located
or proposed to be located in any nonresidentially zoned area shall also
be permitted in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
c. All satellite antennas which exceed two meters in diameter shall be
established as conditional uses and subject to site plan review by the
Englewood Cliffs Planning Board. Mobile cellular communications
antenna exceeding two meters but less than 11 meters shall be
permitted as conditional uses only in the B-2, B-3, B4 and I zones only.
d. Satellite antennas which exceed 11 feet in diameter shall be permitted
as conditional uses only in the I zone.
e. All satellite antennas in a residential zone of more than one meter will
require a "c" or bulk variance. Said antenna must be mounted only in a
pit or berm and provided with suitable screening. Said application shall
also be subject to site plan approval and shall be required to be
reviewed by the Borough Engineer and Borough Planner.
Said satellite antennas shall be restricted to the following:
1. May be located only in the rear yard area and must meet the
minimum setback requirements for accessory buildings within the
particular zone. Said antenna shall not be located in a mandatory
buffer zone or area.
2. The bottom of the satellite dish shall not be higher than 24 inches
above the ground, where located.
3. Antenna shall be designed and be used only by occupants, tenants
and residents of the principal building on the subject premises. Any
connection, electrical or otherwise, to adjacent properties shall be
deemed a violation of the setback provisions thereof.
§ 30-20.8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-20.10
AO:422
for satellite antennas. All complaints for alleged violation of any of the terms
of this section shall be submitted in writing to said Construction Official.
§ 30-20.11. Penalties. [Ord. #9715, § 14]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, for each and
every violation thereof, and for each and every day that said violation
continues to be in existence, be subject to a fine of not more than $100 per
violation at the discretion of the magistrate of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs.
§ 30-20.12. Fees for Satellite Antenna Applications. [Ord. #9715,
§ 15]
An application for a satellite antenna in a residential zone exceeding one
meter shall be filed with an application fee of $500 for a permit to install
same. An application for a satellite antenna in a commercial zone exceeding
two meters shall be filed with an application fee of $500 for a permit to
install same.
Any application for a satellite tower or a mobile cellular communication
tower shall require a filing fee of $2,500.
§ 30-20.13. Escrow Fees for Site Plan Review. [Ord. #9715, § 16]
Where an application is made to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
the following escrow fees shall be filed consistent with the terms and
conditions of this section.
a. Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
1. Legal Escrow. $200 for each 2,000 square feet or part thereof of the
lot area to be developed, together with $250 for every 500 square
feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and parts
thereof.
2. Engineering Escrow. $500 for each 12,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $250 for
every 500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
3. Planning Escrow. $500 for each 2,000 square feet or part thereof of
the lot area to be developed, together with $250 for every 500
square feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and
structures or part thereof.
b. Final Site Plan Approval.
1. Engineering and Planning Escrow. $250 for each 2,000 square feet
or part thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $200
for every 500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
§ 30-20.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.13
AO:423
§ 30-20.14. Escrow Fees for Conditional Use Approval. [Ord. #9715,
§ 17]
The following escrow fees shall be filed in conjunction with the review of a
conditional use mobile cellular communications tower as required herein.
Engineering $1,000
Planning $1,500
Legal $1,500
§ 30-21. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.32
§ 30-21.1. Purposes and Goals. [Ord. #9909, § 2]
The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting
of wireless communication towers and antennas. The goals of this section
are to: (1) protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas; (2) encourage the location of towers in
nonresidential areas; (3) minimize the total number of towers throughout
the community; (4) strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing
tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers; (5) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate
them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal; (6) encourage users of towers and antennas to
configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the
towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening,
and innovative camouflaging techniques; (7) enhance the ability of the
providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the
community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; (8) consider the public health
and safety with communications towers; and (9) avoid potential damage
to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful
siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs shall give due consideration to the Borough of Englewood
Cliff's Master Plan, Zoning Map, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the locations of towers and antennas.
§ 30-21.2. Applicability. [Ord. #9909, § 3]
buildings and structures or part thereof for each of the engineering
and professional planning reviews.
2. Legal Escrow. $500 for each 2,000 square feet or part thereof of the
lot area to be developed, together with $300 for every 500 square
feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and structures
or part thereof.
32.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2000-02, adopted April 12, 2000, readopted Ordinance No.
9909 which established Section 30-21, Wireless Communication Towers and Antennas.
§ 30-20.13 ENGLEWOOD § 30-21.2
AO:424
§ 30-21.3. General Requirements. [Ord. #9909, § 4]
a. New Towers and Antennas. All new towers and/or antennas in the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs shall be subject to these regulations,
except as provided in subsections 30-21.2b through d inclusive.
b. Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas. This section
shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is
owned and operated by a Federally-licensed amateur radio operator or
is used exclusively for receive only antennas.
c. Preexisting Towers or Antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas are not required to meet the requirements of this ordinance
other than the requirements of subsection 30-21.4d, absent any
enlargement or structural modification of the addition of any
structures.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
1. Public law enforcement and public safety apparatus.
2. Property under the jurisdiction of the Palisade Interstate Park
Commission.
a. Wireless communication towers shall be considered a principal use on
the subject property if there are no other principal uses on the site.
Wireless communication towers shall be considered an accessory use
on the subject property where the tower is accessory, in any way, if it is
used with any municipal use on the site.
b. Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
wireless communication tower antenna complies with zone
development regulations, including but not limited to setback and other
bulk requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the tower may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
c. Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for a wireless
communication tower shall provide an inventory of its existing towers,
or sites approved for towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs or within three miles of the proposed site
within the State of New Jersey, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. Such information may be
shared with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or
permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate
towers within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs,
provided, however, that the Borough is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
d. State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
§ 30-21.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.3
AO:425
the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate towers.
If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of
the towers governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless
a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling State
or Federal agency. Failure to bring towers into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower at the owner's expense.
e. Not Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this ordinance and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
f. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communication system in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
g. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
h. Structural Integrity. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
construction of a wireless communication tower or for the installation
of an antenna by collocators on said tower, the applicant for such permit
shall file in the office of the Construction Code Official, with a copy to be
filed with the Borough Engineer, a written report confirming that the
structural integrity of the tower meets the applicable safety standards
of the latest Building Official's and Code Administrator's International,
Incorporated (BOCA) design specifications as well as those of the
Telecommunications Industry Association/Electronic Industry's
Association (TIA/EIA).
i. Any wireless communications tower which has not been used for mobile
communications purposes for a continuous period of one year shall be
considered abandoned, upon which the Construction Code Official
shall, in writing, notify the owner or operator of such abandonment.
Upon receipt of such notice of abandonment, the owner shall, within 30
days of such notification, at its sole cost and expense, remove the tower
and any other structures on the site and restore the site to the condition
it was in before the permit was issued. If the owner or operator shall fail
to remove the tower and restore the site as herein required, such
failure shall constitute a violation of this section. For each date beyond
the thirty-day removal and restoration period that said owner or
operator has failed to remove the tower and restore the site, same shall
constitute a separate violation.
If there are two or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not
become effective until all users cease using the tower.
j. Cable Microcell Networks. If a cable microcell network is proposed, all
cables, wires, and equipment shall be located so that they do not
§ 30-21.3 ENGLEWOOD § 30-21.3
AO:426
§ 30-21.4. Standards for Wireless Communications Towers Where
Permitted. [Ord. #9909, § 5; Ord. #2002-04, §§ I, II]
interfere with the municipal fire alarm equipment and cable system.
Applications for cable microcell network systems must be reviewed
and approved by the Fire Department and Construction Department of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs as prior approvals before issuance of
required construction permits.
a. General. Wireless communication towers, antennas, and related
equipment shall be located in the following areas:
1. Antennas Located on Towers. Antennas for the reception and/or
transmission of signals, located on towers, the tower structures
and equipment cabinets and buildings shall only be permitted uses
on Tax Lots 4 and 5 in Block 513 and Lot 3 in Block 412 and within
the I-Institutional zone (Block 1302, Lot 5), of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
2. Legal Description of a portion of Tax Lot 4 in Block 513. Beginning
at a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Kahn Terrace (50
feet wide), said point being N 53° 27' 17" W, 100 feet from its
intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of Hudson Terrace
(60 feet wide). Said point further being described as the
intersection of the division line of Lots 4 & 5, Block 513 with the
southerly right-of-way line of Kahn Terrace and running thence;
(a) S 36° 32' 43" W, 98 feet along the division line of Lots 4 & 5,
Block 513 to a point thence;
(b) N 53° 27' 17" W, 4.62 feet to a point, thence;
(c) N 36° 32' 43" E, 98 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way
line of Kahn Terrace, thence;
(d) S 53° 27' 17" E, 4.62 feet along the southerly right-of-way line
of Kahn Terrace to the point or place of BEGINNING.
Containing 453 square feet.
3. Legal Description of a portion of Tax Lot 5 in Block 513. Beginning
at a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Kahn Terrace (50
feet wide), said point being N 53° 27' 17" W, 100 feet from its
intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of Hudson Terrace
(60 feet wide). Said point being further described as the
intersection of the division line of lots 4 & 5, Block 513 with the
southerly right-of-way line of Kahn Terrace and running, thence;
(a) S 36° 32' 43" W, 98 feet along the division line of Lots 4 & 5,
Block 513 to a point, thence;
(b) S 53° 27' 17" E, 9.55 feet to a point, thence;
§ 30-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.4
AO:427
§ 30-21.5. Plat Details for Wireless Communication Towers. [Ord.
#9909, § 6]
(c) N 36° 32' 43" E, 98 feet to a point on the southerly line of Kahn
Terrace, thence;
(d) N 53° 27' 17" W, 9.55 feet along the southerly line of Kahn
Terrace to the point or place of BEGINNING.
Containing 938 square feet.
b. Prohibited Locations. No antennas for the reception and/or
transmission of signals, tower structures and equipment cabinets may
be located within any site other than portions of Lots 4 and 5 in Block
513 as described in subsection 30-21.4a2 and 3 herein and Lot 3 in
Block 412 and within the I-Institutional zone, Lot 5 in Block 1302 of the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
c. Additional Locational Requirements. Any wireless communications
tower shall be located at a minimum distance of 500 feet from any
residential parcel or lot and 500 feet from any of the following
structures or uses: public and private schools, libraries, senior citizen
housing, or from any historic district or historic site, as designated on
the National and/or State registry of historic places or as promulgated
in the Englewood Cliffs Master Plan.
No more than one wireless communication tower may be erected or
constructed on any one lot, site or tract of land. There shall not be more
than one such tower located within a three mile radius of another tower
within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
These standards shall not apply where the proposed tower is located
on municipally owned land except parklands, lands utilized for
preservation and historic sites as noted on the State or National
Registry of Historic Sites.
a. Information Required. In addition to any information required for
applications for site plan approval, applications for a wireless
communication tower shall submit the following information:
1. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land
uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities),
Master Plan classification of the site and separation distances from
adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any
other structures, topography, parking, and other information
deemed to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance.
2. Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
§ 30-21.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-21.5
AO:428
§ 30-21.6. Dimensional and Bulk Requirements. [Ord. #9909, § 7;
Ord. #2002-04, §§ III, IV]
3. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit.
4. The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsections
30-21.3c and 30-21.4 shall be shown on the site plan map. The
applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing
tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
5. All existing and proposed landscaping including the amount and
specific landscape materials.
6. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
7. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether the
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
8. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
9. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers
or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use
of the proposed new tower.
10. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough of Englewood Cliffs based upon
existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
11. A visual study if requested by the Planning Board at distances from
the site not to exceed 1/4, 1/2 and one mile, shall be provided.
a. Height. The maximum height of any tower erected within the P-1 zone
and I-Institutional zone shall be 130 feet.
b. Setbacks.
1. The minimum setback of the tower from any property line within
the P-1 zone shall be equal to or greater than 10 feet from a
property line and shall be equal to or greater than 25 feet from a
street right-of-way line.
2. The minimum setback of the tower from any property line within
the I-Institutional zone shall be equal to 30 feet plus the height of
the tower.
§ 30-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.6
AO:429
c. Maximum Lot Coverage.
1. P-1 Zone. The maximum lot coverage of any wireless
communication tower and equipment cabinets and/or structures
within the P-1 zone shall be limited to 10% of the lot area.
2. I-Institutional Zone. The maximum lot coverage of any wireless
communication tower and equipment cabinets and/or structures
within the I-Institutional zone shall be limited to 8% of the lot area.
d. The site on which the tower and any accessory buildings or structures
are situated shall be completely enclosed with a fence at least six feet
high, of composition meeting the approval of the Planning Board, which
shall include a locking security gate and an appropriate anticlimbing
device, provided that the municipal board having jurisdiction may
waive or modify such requirement as it deems appropriate.
e. Said wireless communications antenna or tower shall have direct
access to an improved and approved street.
f. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern landscaping
surrounding towers.
1. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
2. A landscape buffer shall be provided around a tower facility located
on a lot. This requirement may be waived by the approving
authority where deemed appropriate.
g. Buildings or Other Equipment Storage.
1. Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with towers shall comply
with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 400
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 12 feet in
height. The maximum requirement of 400 square feet of gross
floor area shall be limited to the equipment cabinet of one
wireless communication user. In addition, the cabinet or
structure shall not exceed the maximum allowable height for
the buildings in the zone district in which the antenna is
located.
(b) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures, whether associated with the antennas or for other
purposes, shall not occupy more than 50% of the roof top area.
(c) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable construction codes.
§ 30-21.6 ENGLEWOOD § 30-21.6
AO:430
(d) All building mounted antennas, used for the transmission of
signals, shall be installed with a safety interruption device,
capable of stopping antenna transmissions if any object comes
within the signal path for more than 0.20 seconds.
(e) Access to all building mounted antennas and supporting
equipment shall be secured from the general public. The
applicant shall install alarms on access hatches and doors or
install protective fencing, as directed by the Construction
Official.
2. Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles or Light Poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following:
(a) The equipment cabinet or structure shall not be located within
any right-of-way under the control of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
(b) The structure or cabinet shall not be located in any required
front yard setback.
(c) The equipment cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate minimum height of eight feet and a
planted height of at least five feet.
h. Minimum Lot Area. Minimum lot area and lot width for wireless
communication towers in the I-Institutional zone is added to the
ordinance as follows:
Minimum lot area and lot width for wireless communication towers in
the I-Institutional zone shall be a minimum of 26,000 square feet for the
minimum lot area and a minimum lot width of 200 feet.
i. Aesthetics. Towers and antenna shall meet the following requirements:
1. Towers shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual
obtrusiveness, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
4. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
§ 30-21.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.6
AO:431
§ 30-21.7. Procedure for a Wireless Communication Tower
Application. [Ord. #9909, § 8]
§ 30-21.8. Rezoning Property Identified as Lots 4 and 5 in Block
513 and Lot 3 in Block 412. [Ord. #9909, § 9]
Lots 4 and 5 in Block 513 and Lot 3 in Block 412 are hereby rezoned from
the B-4 and B-2 zone districts respectively to a newly created public zone,
designated as the P-1 zone.
§ 30-21.9. Zoning. [Ord. #9909, § 10; Ord. 2002-04, § V]
Lands zoned I-Institutional shall be amended to permit wireless
communication towers and antennas.
§ 30-21.10. Plat Details for Satellite Antenna. [Ord. #9909, § 11]
The plat plan shall be drawn on a map to scale not smaller than one inch
equals 40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include
the following information:
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
a. No building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or
installation of a wireless communications tower unless site plan
approval has been granted by the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment, where applicable.
b. Upon filing of a completed application for a wireless communications
antenna or tower, the Approving Authority shall conduct a public
hearing in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law.
c. The applicant shall give notice of such hearing as provided by law.
d. A list of property owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice shall be furnished to the applicant in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 30-9.3. The Approving Authority's decision on
such application shall be in accordance with provisions of subsection
30-9.3. Publication of such decisions shall be in accordance with
subsection 30-9.3.
e. In granting approval for such application, the Approving Authority may
impose such conditions to the extent the Approving Authority concludes
such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
f. An applicant for approval shall submit the information required by this
section and a nonrefundable application fee and an escrow deposit as
required by the Borough for such applications as herein established.
§ 30-21.6 ENGLEWOOD § 30-21.10
AO:432
§ 30-21.11. Design Standards for Satellite Antenna. [Ord. #9909,
§ 12]
a. The name and address of the applicant and owner and the name,
address and title of the person preparing the plan and accompanying
date, the date of preparation, and the date of each revision where
applicable.
b. An appropriate place for the signature of the Construction Official,
Borough Engineer and approving authority chairperson, where
applicable.
c. The lot and block number(s) of the subject property from the borough
tax maps and the length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed lot
or parcel.
d. The location, pavement and right-of-way widths, and names of all
existing and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question, the
property lines of all streets abutting properties together with the names
and addresses as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map and tax rolls as of
the date of the application, and the location of existing buildings within
200 feet of the site in question.
e. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings or
structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing the present
finished grade elevations at all corners.
f. All existing and proposed setback dimensions, landscape areas, trees of
six inch caliper or greater on the site affected by the proposed
apparatus.
g. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening to prevent noise,
glare and improve aesthetic considerations.
h. Location of wetlands and wetland buffers, if any, as determined by an
LOI prepared by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection or a qualified wetlands expert licensed by the State of New
Jersey.
i. Any and all other information necessary to meet the requirements as
listed herein.
a. A mobile cellular communications satellite or a satellite antenna that is
one meter or less in diameter is permitted in any area or zone within the
Borough of Englewood Cliffs as a matter of right regardless of land use
or zoning category.
b. A satellite antenna that is two meters or less in diameter and is located
or proposed to be located in any nonresidentially zoned area shall also
be permitted in the Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
c. All satellite antennas which exceed two meters in diameter shall be
established as conditional uses and subject to site plan review by the
§ 30-21.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.11
AO:433
§ 30-21.12. Enforcement Officer. [Ord. #9909, § 13]
The Construction Code Official of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs is hereby
designated as the public officer charged with the enforcement of the terms
for satellite antennas. All complaints for alleged violation of any of the terms
of this section shall be submitted in writing to said Construction Official.
§ 30-21.13. Penalties. [Ord. #9909, § 14]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, for each and
every violation thereof, and for each and every day that said violation
continues to be in existence, be subject to a fine of not more than $100
per violation at the discretion of the Municipal Judge of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ 30-21.14. Fees for Satellite Antenna and Wireless Communication
Tower Applications. [Ord. #9909, § 15]
The application fee for a permit to install a satellite antenna of one meter
or less in diameter shall be $50 plus if the Construction Code Official deems
it necessary to retain any experts such as the Borough Engineer, Borough
Planner or other persons, the applicant shall post a cash deposit which shall
be determined by the Construction Code Official to cover such costs. The
filing fee for a satellite antenna between one and two meters in diameter
Englewood Cliffs Planning Board. Mobile cellular communications
antenna exceeding two meters but less than 11 meters shall be
permitted as conditional uses only in the B-2, B-3, B-4 and I zones only.
d. Satellite antennas which exceed 11 feet in diameter shall be permitted
as conditional uses only in the I zone.
e. All satellite antennas in a residential zone of more than one meter will
require a "c" or bulk variance. Said antennas must be mounted only in a
pit or berm and provided with suitable screening. Said application shall
also be subject to site plan approval and shall be required to be
reviewed by the Borough Engineer and Borough Planner.
f. Said satellite antenna shall be restricted to the following:
1. May be located only in the rear yard area and must meet the
minimum setback requirements for accessory buildings within the
particular zone. Said antenna shall not be located in a mandatory
buffer zone or area.
2. The bottom of the satellite dish shall not be higher than 24 inches
above the ground, where located.
3. Antenna shall be designed and be used only by occupants, tenants
and residents of the principal building on the subject premises. Any
connection, electrical or otherwise, to adjacent properties shall be
deemed a violation of the setback provisions thereof.
§ 30-21.11 ENGLEWOOD § 30-21.14
AO:434
shall be $200. Any satellite antenna exceeding two meters in diameter shall
require a fee of $500. In the event the applicant is required to present a site
plan before the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, applicable filing
fees and escrow fees shall be posted with the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
as provided herein.
Any application for a wireless communications tower shall require a filing
fee of $2,500.
§ 30-21.15. Escrow Fees for Site Plan Review. [Ord. #9909, § 16]
Where an application is made to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
the following escrow fees shall be filed consistent with the terms and
conditions of this section.
§ 30-22. TREE PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL FOR RESIDENTIAL
LOTS.
§ 30-22.1. Title. [Ord. #2000-4; Ord. #2005-11]
a. Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
1. Legal Escrow. $200 for each 2,000 square feet or part thereof of the
lot area to be developed, together with $250 for every 500 square
feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and parts
thereof.
2. Engineering Escrow. $500 for each 12,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $250 for
every 500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
3. Planning Escrow. $500 for each 2,000 square feet or part thereof of
the lot area to be developed, together with $250 for every 500
square feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and
structures or part thereof.
b. Final Site Plan Approval.
1. Engineering and Planning Escrow. $250 for each 2,000 square feet
or part thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $200
for every 500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof for each of the engineering
and professional planning reviews.
2. Legal Escrow. $500 for each 2,000 square feet or part thereof of the
lot area to be developed, together with $300 for every 500 square
feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and structures
or part thereof.
§ 30-21.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.1
AO:435
§ 30-22.2. Purpose of Section. [Ord. #2000-04, § 2]
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs finds that the development of unimproved
land and the development or redevelopment of improved land has resulted
in the indiscriminate and excessive destruction of trees; that preservation
of same stabilizes the soil by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation;
aids in the removal of pollutants from the air and assists in the conversion of
carbon dioxide into oxygen; filters dust, pollen and impurities from the air;
helps to decrease the amount and rate of stormwater runoff and to replenish
ground water supplies; acts to moderate extremes of temperature and to
provide shade; aids in the control of drainage and restoration of denuded
soil subsequent to construction or grading; provides a buffer and screen
against noise and pollution; provides a haven for birds and other wildlife;
and otherwise enhances the environment and aesthetically adds beauty
and spirituality to people's lives; protects and increases property values;
conserves and enhances the borough's physical and aesthetic appearance;
and protects the public health, safety and general welfare. Furthermore,
regulation of the indiscriminate removal of trees is found to be within the
police power of the borough as a means of implementing the Borough
Master Plan.
§ 30-22.3. Legislative Intent/Prior Notification. [Ord. #2000-04, § 3]
The spirit and intent of the section is to balance and preserve the property
owner's right to autonomous enjoyment of their property, and the right of
the community to protect its environmental needs, aesthetic values and the
quality of life of its residents.
To accomplish this, it is essential that the borough receive prior notification
before trees are removed, so that the parties can attempt, in good faith, to
reach a mutually satisfactory arrangement wherever possible.
The approving authority shall endeavor to protect the rights of all parties,
and is encouraged to seek and present reasonable alternatives when a tree
is determined to be of significant aesthetic or environmental value.
§ 30-22.4. Definitions. [Ord. #2000-4, § 4; Ord. #2005-11]
Approval and Enforcement.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The environmental commission shall have
authority to review applications and to grant or withhold tree removal
permits; to determine appropriate tree replacement requirements; and to
a. This section shall be entitled "Tree Preservation and Removal
Ordinance for Residential Lots in the RA, RB, and RB-1 Zone Districts,
including Residential Minor and Major Subdivisions."
b. This section does not apply to nonresidentially zoned properties.
c. This section does not apply to shade trees.
§ 30-22.1 ENGLEWOOD § 30-22.4
AO:436
monitor compliance with this section and with the permits granted
hereunder.
BORDER AREA — Shall mean a distance of 10 feet in from the side and rear
property lines of a residential lot.
BUFFER AREA — Shall mean a distance of 10 feet in from the side and rear
property lines of a residential lot.
CLEAR-CUTTING — Shall mean the removal of substantially all standing
trees from a lot or portion of a lot.
DRIP LINE — Shall mean a line projected from the furthest limits of the
outermost branches of a tree vertically projected to the ground.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the environmental chairman or
the environmental commission's designated agent.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or other legal entity.
REMOVE; REMOVAL OF TREE — Shall mean and include all of the
prohibited activities specified in subsection 30-22.5.
SHADE TREE — Shall mean any tree to which the Englewood Cliffs Shade
Tree Commission Ordinance applies.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any combination of materials forming a
construction for occupancy, use, or ornamentation, whether installed on,
above, or below the surface of a parcel of land. An accessory structure is a
structure, the use of which is incident to that of the principal building on
the parcel of land (including but not limited to driveways, walkways, patios
and pools).
TREE — Shall mean any live woody perennial plant (deciduous or conifer)
and its roots which:
TREE EXPERT — Shall mean a specialist in trees and tree care.
§ 30-22.5. Prohibited Activities/Permit Required. [Ord. #2000-04,
§ 5]
Has a trunk caliper with a diameter of at least six inches measured at a
point four feet above the natural grade; or
a.
Has been planted pursuant to this section for the purpose of replacing
a tree that has been removed.
b.
a. No person shall undertake or cause to be undertaken by others, any of
the following acts without first obtaining a permit as provided herein,
and in compliance with all the provisions of this section.
1. Cut, destroy, remove, or substantially injure any tree.
2. Place or maintain upon the ground any substance which would
impede the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree.
§ 30-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.5
AO:437
§ 30-22.6. Permitted Activities. [Ord. #2000-04, § 6; Ord. #2005-11]
Exempted from the permit requirement are the following:
§ 30-22.7. Criteria for Tree Removal. [Ord. #2000-04, § 7; Ord.
#2005-11]
3. Apply any substance to any part of a tree, including roots, with the
intention to injure or destroy the tree.
b. Clear-cutting of land is absolutely prohibited; except in necessary and
extraordinary circumstances and then only upon application to and
approval by the Mayor and Council.
a. The cutting, pruning or trimming of trees in a manner which is not
harmful to the health of the tree.
b. Trees directed to be removed by any governmental authority, or by a
public utility authority of the State of New Jersey.
c. Trees which are diseased or dead, or which endanger public health or
safety, or threaten damage to property. Except in case of an emergency
requiring immediate action for the safety of life or property, written
approval must first be obtained from the enforcing officer before such
trees are removed. In case of emergency, the owner shall notify the
Englewood Cliffs Police Department. An officer is to witness and record
the situation, and send a report to the commission.
d. Any tree removed in compliance with the farmland assessment law.
e. Any tree which is part of a nursery, garden center, Christmas tree
plantation, orchard or cemetery.
a. The following criteria for tree removal shall be considered by the
approving authority:
1. The necessity of the removal of the tree in the context of the
specific lot.
2. The condition of the tree.
3. The effect of the tree removal on the ecological systems.
4. The aesthetic and environmental character existing at the site of
the tree removal with respect to existing vegetation on the
property, the immediate vicinity and the general area.
b. Subject to the foregoing:
1. Interior Trees. Where (1) the applicant is an individual owner
currently residing on the lot; and (2) represents by affidavit (a) the
intent to continue residing thereon and (b) that neither the transfer
of title nor demolition of the principal building is being
contemplated within 12 months following the date of the
§ 30-22.5 ENGLEWOOD § 30-22.7
AO:438
§ 30-22.8. Application for Permit: Procedure. [Ord. #2000-04, § 8;
Ord. #2005-11]
application; and (3) there has been no demolition, construction
or removal of trees on the lot within 12 months precedent to
the date of application; then: as respect to any trees on the lot
other than those referred to in paragraphs b2 through b6 below,
the approving authority shall consider the applicant's request in
its most favorable light and shall have the right to waive the
replacement trees as provided in subsection 30-22.9 herein unless
it determines the tree or trees to be of overriding environmental or
aesthetic value.
2. Building Footprint. The applicant may remove trees (except shade
trees) located in, or within 15 feet of, the principal building
footprint.
3. Impervious Areas and Structures. The applicant may remove trees
(except shade trees) located within an area to be utilized for a
driveway, walkway, utility line or accessory structure, unless the
approving authority determines the tree or trees to be of overriding
environmental or aesthetic value.
4. Border Areas. No tree shall be removed from border areas except
upon proof of overriding necessity. Trees in buffer areas should be
preserved even if located within 15 feet of the principal building
footprint, or within an area sought to be utilized for a driveway,
walkway, utility line or accessory structure.
5. Frontage Areas. Trees in the area between the street line and the
front and side setback lines of the principal building shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
Where trees have been removed from a border area, or from the
area between the street and the setback lines, the highest priority
should be given to tree replacement in the same area.
a. An application for a tree removal permit, as required pursuant to
subsection 30-22.5 of this section, shall be filed with the approving
authority, and shall contain the following:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, and of the
owner of the subject property (if different).
2. Date of the application.
3. Address or location and description of the property.
4. The purpose or reason for the proposed tree removal.
5. A site plan specifically indicating the location of the tree or trees
proposed for removal and of the remaining tree(s) to be preserved
that are six inches and over in diameter, including a graphic
§ 30-22.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.8
AO:439
depiction thereof drawn to scale and showing the location of all
structures on the property in relation to such tree or trees.
6. The tree species, size, quantity, and diameter at point of
measurement four feet above the natural grade.
7. The proposed date or dates for commencement and completion of
the tree removal project.
8. The name, address, telephone number, and borough license
number of the person having express charge, supervision and/or
control of the proposed removal of trees.
9. A grant of express, written permission to the approving authority
and enforcing officers and other borough officials, employees and
consultants, to enter upon the property to inspect the trees to be
removed and to inspect the tree removal project as the work is in
progress.
b. The approving authority shall determine which trees may be removed
and the permit for such removal shall be issued after a final decision is
reached. The approving authority may choose to utilize professional
experts in its determination as necessary. All fees and expenses
incurred for this service shall be paid by the applicant prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
c. The approving authority at its discretion may propose, or may require
the applicant to provide, alternative sketch plan layouts demonstrating
that the layout adequately considers and makes provision for the
preservation of existing trees. It is the intent of this section that all
applications be submitted with the preservation of trees as an
important consideration.
d. No demolition or building permit shall be issued unless the applicant
has first obtained a tree removal permit or where no tree permit is
involved, approval by the enforcing officer or the Environmental
Commission.
e. Where replacement of trees is required as hereinafter provided, for
sites not involving a certificate of occupancy (CO), the applicant shall
post a cash deposit or performance guaranty bond equal to the
estimated cost of complying with that requirement, at the time a permit
is issued.
f. Where replacement of trees is required as hereinafter provided, for
sites involving a certificate of occupancy, a Letter of Agreement shall
substitute for a bond to guaranty replacement of trees. If the
replacement trees are not planted in accordance with the requirements
of the agreement, no CO will be granted until a cash bond to guaranty
replacement is posted.
§ 30-22.8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-22.8
AO:440
§ 30-22.9. Tree Replacement Plan. [Ord. #2000-04, § 9; Ord.
#2005-11; Ord. #2006-08]
As part of its review and approval process, the approving authority may
require the applicant to replace trees where removal has been permitted
or where removal has been undertaken in violation of this section.
Replacement shall be at the applicant's sole cost and expense. The
approving authority shall in all cases give due consideration to the
character of the subject property and the ability of the land to accommodate
replacement trees, and may vary or waive the replacement guidelines if the
literal enforcement is impractical or will exact undue hardship because of
conditions peculiar to the property in question. Subject to the above, the
following guidelines shall apply:
g. Where a bond is involved, failure to plant a replacement tree will result
in the release of the bond money to the Shade Tree Trust Fund of
Englewood Cliffs. This replacement tree will be planted on the Borough
right-of-way or any other borough property.
h. All trees to be removed shall be flagged on the lot for identification and
shall be identified with a red ribbon encircling the trees four feet above
the ground.
a. Height. Replacement trees shall have a height of at least 10 feet or 50%
of the height of the removed tree, whichever is greater, at the time of
planting. A replacement tree need not exceed 12 feet in height.
b. Diameter. Caliper measured at a point four feet above the natural
grade. Replacement trees shall have a diameter of at least 33.3% of the
removed trees. A replacement tree need not exceed 10 inches in
diameter.
c. Species. A deciduous or coniferous tree shall be replaced by one or
more trees of the same species unless determined otherwise by the
approving authority.
If the applicant asserts that planting replacement trees on the property in
question would be inappropriate and the approving authority agrees, the
applicant in lieu of planting trees may be permitted to pay the Borough for each
such tree, the sum of $500 or $1,000 as specified in the following paragraph,
dependent upon the circumstances. These funds shall be used for the purposes
of planting shade trees or other trees on Borough-owned property or other
trees in the Borough. The enforcing officer may waive these costs dependent
upon the circumstances pursuant to this section, particularly in regard to the
initial impracticability or hardship because of the conditions peculiar to the
property in question.
For all trees of up to 18 inches in diameter, a replacement tree which is not
to be replanted on site shall require a payment of $500. If the tree exceeds 18
inches in diameter, the fee shall be increased to $1,000.
§ 30-22.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.9
AO:441
§ 30-22.10. Protection of Existing Trees. [Ord. #2000-04, § 10; Ord.
#2005-11; Ord. #2006-08; Ord. #2006-21; Ord. #2006-24]
Replacement in any instance is not to be considered a penalty, but rather an
implementation of the purpose of this section. It shall not be a substitute but
shall be in addition to any penalty imposed for violation of the provisions of this
section.
a. In connection with any construction, but prior to the issuance of
demolition permits or building permits or start of construction,
whichever is first applicable, heavy duty plastic fencing or other
protective barriers acceptable to the municipal official charged with the
administration and enforcement of this section, shall be placed around
trees that are six inches and over in diameter and that are not to be
removed. The protective barriers shall be placed at least five feet from
the trunk of any tree and shall remain in place until all construction
activity is terminated. This area shall be mulched with a minimum of
four inch wood chips. No equipment, chemicals, soil deposit or
construction materials shall be placed within any area so protected by
barriers. Any landscaping activities subsequent to the removal of the
barriers shall be accomplished with light machinery or hand labor.
b. In the event that any tree to be saved, planted or replaced in connection
with the construction as set forth above shall die or be in serious
decline during construction or within one year after completion of
construction, it shall be removed and replaced by the applicant or the
property owners within six months or during the "first planting period"
after notification.
c. For sites involving a certificate of occupancy (CO), all existing trees six
inches and over in diameter within 40 feet of the new footprint shall be
deep-root fertilized with a bio-stimulant by a licensed arborist during
the final landscaping. No CO shall be granted without written proof that
fertilization, as required herein has been completed.
d. Where deep-root fertilization is required and cannot be done because of
weather conditions, no CO will be granted until a cash guaranty bond is
posted according to the following schedule:
1-4 trees: $500;
5-9: $1,000;
10 or more: $2,000.
e. Where a bond is involved, failure to deep-root fertilize as required
herein, will result in the release of the bond money to the Shade Tree
Trust Fund of Englewood Cliffs and a summons shall be issued.
f. The roots of any tree protected under this section may not be cut within
five feet of its trunk.
§ 30-22.9 ENGLEWOOD § 30-22.10
AO:442
§ 30-22.11. Stop Work Orders; Suspension of Activity. [Ord.
#2000-04, § 11; Ord. #2005-11; Ord. #2007-18]
If the approving authority or the enforcing officer has reasonable cause to
believe that there may have been a violation of this section:
§ 30-22.12. Penalties. [Ord. #2000-04, § 12; Ord. No. 2005-11]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $5,000 for each and every violation and/or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, at the
discretion of the Magistrate of the Borough. Every tree which has been
removed in violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
If the Magistrate determines that the person is knowingly violating this
section:
g. A bond shall be required for existing trees six inches and over in
diameter as a condition for receiving either a tree removal permit or
demolition approval. Trees under 18 inches in diameter shall require a
$500 bond and trees 18 inches and over in diameter shall require a
$1,000 bond. The bond shall be returned if upon inspection the tree is in
good condition one year after the completion of construction which
shall be the date of the final certificate of occupancy. If the applicant or
owner does not comply, the bond money will go to the Shade Tree Trust
Fund for planting trees on the Borough right-of-way or other Borough
property. The maximum amount which the applicant shall post shall be
$2,000.
h. The approving authority shall have the right to enter construction sites
and inspect for compliance to this section as work is in progress. This
right shall accrue not only to the approving authority, but to its
enforcing officers and other Borough Officials.
a. The alleged violation shall be brought to the attention of the Borough
Prosecutor.
b. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
alleged violation has been disposed of in the Municipal Court.
c. The enforcing officer shall issue a stop work order requiring any
activity on the site to be stopped until the alleged violation is disposed
of in the Municipal Court or until the violation is corrected to the
satisfaction and approval of the enforcing officer. However, work
necessary to remedy the violation may continue.
d. Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the chairperson of the
approving authority or their designee, or the Construction Code Officer
or his designee, or the Ordinance Compliance Officer or his designee.
§ 30-22.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.12
AO:443
§ 30-22.13. Fees. [Ord. #2000-04, § 13]
In addition to fees specified elsewhere in this section, the following are the
fees for a tree removal permit:
§ 30-22.14. Lien on Property. [Ord. #2000-04, § 14]
All penalties, fees, tree replacement obligations and other charges imposed
under this section shall attach as a lien upon the subject real estate, and
shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner thereof, and be
collected in the same manner as other taxes against that property.
§ 30-22.15. Appeals. [Ord. #2000-04, § 15]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the municipal official charged with
the administration and enforcement of this section shall have the right
within 10 days of the issuance of any decision by such official to appeal to
the Mayor and Borough Council, which shall take such action as it deems
appropriate in the matter.
§ 30-22.16. Conflict with Other Laws. [Ord. #2000-04, § 16]
Except as provided in subsection 30-22.7b6 hereof, this section shall
supplement but not supplant other provisions of the General Ordinances of
the Borough of Englewood Cliffs relating to the preservation of trees and
property maintenance. No tree removal shall be permitted where prohibited
by any other municipal, county, State or Federal statute, ordinance or
regulation.
§ 30-23. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
§ 30-23.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. #2006-5, § 1]
a. Any building permit or certificate of occupancy pertaining to the
subject property shall be revoked and a new application required.
b. If the violator is in possession of a Borough license for tree removal or
landscaping, such license shall be immediately revoked.
c. The Borough Clerk, upon enactment, shall send notice of the provisions
of this section to every person in possession of a license for tree
removal or landscaping; and shall inform all future such licensees, and
all applicants for a building or demolition permit, of its provisions.
a. In situations involving construction, enlargement or demolition of any
building or part thereof, and/or where a building or demolition permit
or certificate of occupancy is required: $300.
b. In situations involving construction, enlargement or demolition of any
accessory structure or part thereof, other than a building: $100.
c. In all other situations: $20.
§ 30-22.12 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.1
AO:444
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural Best Management Practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in subsection 30-23.2.
c. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Borough of Englewood Cliffs.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this section are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
§ 30-23.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.2
AO:445
§ 30-23.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 2; Ord. No. 2010-02]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such
uses do not include the development of land for the processing or sale of
food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
A County planning agency; or
A County water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development shall mean: any activity that requires a State permit;
any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
§ 30-23.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.2
AO:446
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any "development" that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or increased impervious
surface of 1/4 acre or more. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, Borough of Englewood Cliffs, or political subdivision of
this State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
§ 30-23.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.2
AO:447
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated to review municipal
stormwater management plans such as the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
Planning Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Shall mean any material(s) or machinery, located
at an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the State's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
§ 30-23.2 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.2
AO:448
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to State resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — Shall mean a zone designated by the
New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 30-23.3. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 3]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
a.
b. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
c. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
d.
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in subsection 30-23.4. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
§ 30-23.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.3
AO:449
§ 30-23.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 4; Ord. No. 2010-02]
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this section apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with subsection 30-23.10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of subsections 30-23.4f and 30-23.4g.
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsections 30-23.4f and 30-23-4g may be obtained for
the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
§ 30-23.3 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.4
AO:450
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternative analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of subsections 30-23.4f and
30-23.4g to the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of subsections 30-23.4f and 30-23.4g, existing structures currently
in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned;
and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under D.3 above within the
upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would provide
additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
subsections 30-23.4f and 30-23.4g that were not achievable on-site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsections
30-23.4f and 30-24.4g shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at subsection
30-24.4e into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project.
If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph e2
below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the
contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
§ 30-23.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.4
AO:451
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy subsection 30-23.4e3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under subsection 30-23.4e2(1)(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
exemptions to this standard see subsection 30-23.4e3(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
§ 30-23.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.4
AO:452
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection 30-23.4g1 are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in subsection 30-23.4g1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in subsections
30-23.4f and 30-23.4g shall meet one of the following
requirements:
(a) Be dedicated to a government agency as approved by the
appropriate reviewing agency; or
(b) Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the Bergen
County Clerk's office; or
§ 30-23.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.4
AO:453
(c) Subjected to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 30-23.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This paragraph contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at subsection 30-23.5 either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to paragraph (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
§ 30-23.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.4
AO:454
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at subsection 30-23.5, complete
one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
§ 30-23.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.4
AO:455
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the ten-, ten-, and
100-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (3)
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at subsection 30-23.2 shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. Additional
information and examples of stormwater quality Best Management
Practices are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 30-23-7.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
§ 30-23.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.4
AO:456
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 30-23.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in subsection
30-23.7. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AxB)/100
§ 30-23.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.4
AO:457
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 6C
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on-site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in subsections 30-23.4f and
30-23.4g.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in subsection 30-23.7.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
§ 30-23.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.4
AO:458
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
§ 30-23.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.4
AO:459
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to subsection 30-23.4g8 has been approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
30-23.4g8 shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in subsection 30-23.4g8(a)(1) above.
In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to
less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
(e) Paragraph g8 does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
§ 30-23.4 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.4
AO:460
§ 30-23.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 5; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 9]
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
or superseding document; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at subsection 30-23.5a1(a) and the Rational
and Modified Rational Methods at subsection 30-23.5a1(b). A
runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an
existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the
design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed
on the site or portion of the site for at least five years without
interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land
cover has existed on the site during the five years immediately
prior to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest
runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic
condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good
cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
§ 30-23.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.5
AO:461
§ 30-23.6A. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 6A; Ord. No. 2010-02 § 10]
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of subsection 30-23.8d.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
§ 30-23.5 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.6A
AO:462
§ 30-23.6B. Nonstructural Stormwater Strategies. [Ord. No. 2006-5,
§ 6B; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 11]
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
subsection 30-23.8, where tailwater will affect the hydraulic
performance of a stormwater measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
subsection 30-23.4 of this section.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of subsection 30-23.4 of this section, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Buffers. Buffer areas (refer to subsections 30-7.10 and 30-20.8) are
required along all lot and street lines separating residential uses from
arterial and collector streets, separating a nonresidential use from
either a residential use or residential zoning district line, and along all
street lines where loading and storage areas can be seen from the
street. The buffer area shall use native vegetation, which requires less
fertilization and watering than non-native species. Buffer areas may be
used for stormwater management by disconnecting impervious
surfaces and treating runoff from these impervious surfaces.
Preservation of natural wood tracts and limiting land disturbance for
new construction shall be incorporated where practical.
b. Curbs and Gutters. Curb cuts or flush curbs with curb stops are
encouraged where practical to allow vegetated swales to be used for
stormwater conveyance and to allow for the disconnection of
impervious areas where practical.
c. Drainage Systems. An existing ordinance may require that all streets be
provided with inlets and pipes where the same are necessary for proper
drainage. The use of natural vegetated swales in lieu of inlets and pipes
is encouraged where practical. Refer to subsection 30-7.14.
§ 30-23.6A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.6B
AO:463
d. Driveways and Access Ways. The use of pervious paving materials to
minimize stormwater runoff and promote groundwater recharge should
be considered for driveways and access ways where practical.
Consideration should be given for subsurface soil conditions. The use of
crowned driveways is also encouraged to promote disconnectivity
between impervious surfaces and allow grass areas to promote
groundwater recharge.
e. Natural Features. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, swamps,
hilltops, and views, are to be preserved whenever possible, and that
care be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and
landscape treatment of the area. In addition, forested areas shall be
maintained to ensure that leaf litter and other beneficial aspects of the
forest are maintained in addition to the trees.
f. Nonconforming Uses, Structures or Lots. The existing ordinance may
allow an applicant/owner of an existing use to propose additions or
alterations that exceed the permitted building and/or lot coverage
percentages. The applicant should mitigate the impact of the additional
impervious surfaces unless the stormwater management plan for the
development provided for these increases in impervious surfaces. This
mitigation effort must address water quality, flooding and groundwater
recharge.
g. Off-Site and Off-Tract Improvements. Any off-site and off-tract
stormwater management and drainage improvements shall conform to
the "Design and Performance Standards" described here-in and in the
Borough Code.
h. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Where practical, parking lots with
more than 10 spaces and all loading areas should allow for flush curb
with curb stop, or curbing with curb cuts to encourage developers to
allow for the discharge of impervious areas into landscaped areas for
stormwater management. The use of natural vegetated swales for the
water quality design storm, with overflow for larger storm events into
storm sewers should be utilized where practical. A developer may
demonstrate that fewer spaces would be required, provided that area is
set aside for additional spaces if necessary. Pervious paving could be
provided for overflow parking areas.
i. Performance Standards. Pollution source control must be evaluated in
order to prohibit materials or wastes from being deposited upon a lot in
such form or manner that they can be transferred off the lot, directly or
indirectly, by natural forces such as precipitation, evaporation or wind.
Materials and wastes that might create a pollutant or a hazard shall be
enclosed with appropriate measures/devices.
j. Shade Trees. The existing ordinance requires shade trees to be planted
along the street on which the building fronts. In addition to this section,
the Borough may have a Tree Preservation Ordinance that restricts and
otherwise controls the removal of mature trees throughout the
§ 30-23.6B ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.6B
AO:464
§ 30-23.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 7;
Ord. No. 2010-02, § 12]
Borough. This section should recognize that the preservation of mature
trees and forested areas must be considered in the management of
environmental resources, particularly watershed management, air
quality, and ambient heating and cooling. A "critical disturbance area"
that extends beyond the driveway and building footprint where clearing
of trees cannot occur shall be depicted on the plan minimizing land
disturbance. Identification of forested areas and the percentage of
wooded areas be protected from disturbance shall also be provided.
k. Sidewalks. Sidewalks should be designed to discharge stormwater to
neighboring lawns where feasible to disconnect these impervious
surfaces or use permeable paving materials where appropriate.
l. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. The applicant shall comply with the
New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and/or the
Borough's Soil Movement Ordinance as applicable and should
incorporate procedures to retain and protect natural vegetation;
minimize and retain water runoff to facilitate groundwater recharge;
and install diversions, sediment basins, and similar required structures
prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
Further guidance on the implementation of these strategies can be
found in the NJDEP Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
April 2004, as amended.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from
Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
§ 30-23.6B ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.7
AO:465
§ 30-23.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. No. 2006-5, § 8]
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. Guidance can be obtained from the Bergen County Soil
Conservation District, 700 Kinderkamack Road, Suite 106, Oradell,
New Jersey 07649; telephone (201) 261-4407, Fax (201) 261-7537;
e-mail info@bergenscde.org.
a. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
The provisions of this subsection do not preempt more stringent
municipal or County safety requirements for new or existing
stormwater management basins. Municipal and County stormwater
management plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority,
require existing stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to
meet one or more of the safety standards in subsection 30-23.8b1, 2
and 3 for trash racks, overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet
structures.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
§ 30-23.7 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.8
AO:466
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
subsection 30-23.8c, a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See subsection 30-23.8d for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, County or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
§ 30-23.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.8
AO:467
§ 30-23.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. No. 2006-5, § 9; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 13]
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at subsection 30-23.9c below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit four copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
subsection 30-23.9c of this section.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this section.
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information supplements
subsection 30-9.4 of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs Code and shall be
required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
§ 30-23.8 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.9
AO:468
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200
feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of subsections
30-23.3 through 30-23.6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall
be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective
of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
§ 30-23.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.9
AO:469
§ 30-23.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 10]
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in subsection 30-23.4 of this
section.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of subsection 30-23.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in subsections 30-23.9c1 through subsection
30-23.9c6 of this section when it can be demonstrated that the
information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a
hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in subsection 30-23.1c of this section
shall comply with the requirements of subsection 30-23.10b and c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall include the following:
(a) Contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and
schedules; and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventative and
corrective maintenance (including replacement).
§ 30-23.9 ENGLEWOOD § 30-23.10
AO:470
(b) Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a
public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-23.10b2 above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on subsection
30-23.10b7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-23.10b2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-23.10b2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year. Any adjustments to the
management plan or deed shall require notification and approval
from the applicable board prior to the filing of a revised deed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-23.10b2 above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by subsection 30-23.10.b6
and 7 above.
§ 30-23.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.10
AO:471
§ 30-23.11. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 12]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the following penalties: A fine not to exceed $500 per day for the
first offense and a fine not to exceed $1,000 per day for the second offense
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or to community
service for a period of 90 days for each and every day of violation.
§ 30-23.12. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 12]
This section shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the section by the County
review agency if the County review agency should fail to act.
§ 30-23.13. Severability. [Ord. No. 2006-5, § 13]
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this section.
§ 30-24. EMINENT DOMAIN.
§ 30-24.1. Findings of the Mayor and Council. [Ord. #2006-10 § 1]
On June 23, 2005, the Supreme Court of the United States decided the case
of Kalo v. City of New London, in which a majority of the Court determined,
9. The requirements of subsections 30-23.10b3 and 4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance for good cause.
If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
c. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 30-23.10 ENGLEWOOD § 30-24.1
AO:472
among other things, that the "public use" provision of the United States
Constitution should be broadly interpreted to effectuate legislative
judgments as to what particular needs justify the use of the power of
eminent domain.
The result in Kalo as a plurality decision, reflecting the Court's deep division
on the question presented, namely, whether private residential real
property may be the subject of eminent domain in order to satisfy a public
purpose such as a planned development.
The result of the Kalo decision was that, where there existed a
comprehensive plan of development that is deemed to satisfy the public
purpose provision of the Constitution, even though the "motivation" for the
plan might be economic development, municipalities could use the eminent
domain power to achieve the desired end as long as all parties' legal rights
were established in the process.
The Kalo majority opinion specifically emphasized that nothing in the
decision should preclude a state from placing further restrictions on the
takings power.
One of the issues faced by the Court was the appropriate line between
public and private property use. Under the settled law of the State of New
Jersey, the limitless sovereign power of the State may be employed to take
real property as may be required for public safety, necessity, convenience
or welfare so long as just compensation is paid the owner, but it is for the
legislative branch of government to determine what constitutes a public
use to limit that broad power, with the result that the power is to be used
in a reasonable, non-arbitrary manner, and not greater than necessary to
effectuate the public use.
The Borough of Englewood Cliffs believes that one of the primary purposes
of government is to protect the rights of owners or occupants of residential
real properties and commercial properties within the Borough against
governmental takings that do not have, as their goal, either (a) the transfer
of private property to public ownership for the creation of, for example,
a road, hospital, military base or public housing or (b) the transfer of
private property to private owners for the specific purpose of making the
same available for public use (e.g., railroad, public utility, stadium or public
housing).
§ 30-24.2. Use of Eminent Domain. [Ord. #2006-10 § 2; Ord. No.
2012-20, § 3]
The Borough shall not employ the power of eminent domain so as to deprive
owner-occupiers of residential real properties and commercial properties of
such ownership rights in the absence of a specified purpose (a) to transfer
the property to public ownership for the creation of a public use, including
but not limited to a road, hospital, military base, public housing, sewer,
water line, sidewalk, right-of-way, flood control, park, open space, erosion
control mechanism and the like; or (b) to transfer the property to private
§ 30-24.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-24.2
AO:473
owners for the specific purpose of making the same available for the public
use.
Regulations for Planting, Control, Protection and
Improvement of Trees and Shrubbery
Chapter ST1
REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING, CONTROL, PROTECTION
AND IMPROVEMENT OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY
[Editor's Note: See Section 2-8 of the Revised General Ordinances
for establishment of the Shade Tree Commission.]
§ ST1-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #ST-1, S1; Ord. #2005-12]
For the purposes of this chapter, the words hereinafter set forth shall be
defined and deemed to have the following meanings:
COMMISSION — Shall mean the Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs, including any of its duly appointed members acting under
the authority of the commission and any of its duly authorized agents or
employees.
PERMITS — Shall mean written permission of the commission. Whenever,
pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter, the commission shall
have occasion to review and decide upon an application for a permit,
it shall, in determining whether or not to issue such permit, take into
consideration the nature, species, size, age and condition of each and every
tree involved; the location thereof in the street or park; the planting, care,
protection, maintenance, or removal procedures involved; the public safety
and welfare; and the improvement and advancement of the shade tree plan,
program or policy of the commission.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, association of individuals,
partnership or corporation, or any combination thereof.
SHADE TREE — Shall mean any deciduous tree with an erect perennial
trunk at least three inches in diameter at breast height 4 1/2 feet or 1.3
meters, definitely formed crown of foliage, and a height of at least 15 feet
at maturity within the borough's right-of-way and/or within 10 feet of the
curbline.
STREET — Shall mean any road, roadway, alley, avenue, street, or public
highway dedicated to the public use for street purposes, regardless of
whether or not it has been formally accepted by the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs. A street shall be deemed to include all portions lying between the
dedicated or established right-of-way lines thereof, said lines being identical
with the front property lines of lands abutting the street. Areas defined
herein shall not include county or state parks, parkways and highways.
TREE — Shall mean any tree, shrub or plant, or any root, branch, flower or
other part thereof, that is or may be located in or upon any street or park
§ 30-24.2 ENGLEWOOD § ST1-1
AO:474
and in any public highways, except those located or planted on county or
State parks, parkways and highways.
Any term or provision of this chapter that contemplates, directs, regulates
or prohibits the doing of any act, may in applicable cases and where
the context so requires, be construed to include the causing, allowing,
permitting or suffering of such act to be done by others under the direction,
control or supervision of the person charged therewith. Every such act
shall be deemed to be within the scope of this chapter regardless of
whether it is a deliberate, intentional or purposeful act, or a careless,
negligent or unintentional act. Where in the proper context it is so
required, the words herein mentioned may be construed to designate the
plural as well as the singular.
§ ST1-2. PERMITS. [Ord. #ST-1, S2; Ord. #9206, SI; Ord. #2005-12]
No person shall, without a permit, do or cause to be done, any of the
following acts:
a. Cut, prune, break, injure, remove, disturb, destroy or interfere
harmfully in any manner with any tree;
b. Spray with any chemical any tree;
c. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device to a tree or to any guard
about such tree;
d. Remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect any tree;
e. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree to
permit the access of air, water and fertilizer to the roots of such tree;
f. Nothing herein shall prevent any governmental agency from tying a
public notice upon a tree in connection with administering
governmental affairs.
Where a permit is required by the provisions of this chapter, application
herefor shall be made to the Shade Tree Commission c/o the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs, 10 Kahn Terrace, Englewood Cliffs, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, and the charge for said permit shall be $50.
g. Whenever a property owner seeks to remove or reduce the size of a
living shade tree for purposes of improvement of the property owner's
premises, the property owner shall apply to the commission. The
commission may allow the removal of a living shade tree, only at the
owner's sole cost and expense, and shall require a replacement shade
tree at a different location of the property, which replacement shall also
be at the owner's sole cost and expense.
h. In the event that a shade tree is either defacing the owner's property
(e.g. causing cracks in a driveway or sidewalk), or a shade tree is
declared to be dead by the commission, the property owner shall apply
to the commission for relief. The commission may order the removal or
§ ST1-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § ST1-2
AO:475
§ ST1-3. PLANTING. [Ord. #ST-1, S3; Ord. #9206, SI]
No person shall plant any tree in any park or street without a permit, or
written direction of the commission.
Any property owner who has been granted permission to plant his own tree,
at his own expense, shall also be responsible for any and all maintenance
thereof, including but not limited to, pruning and removal if the tree
thereafter is determined by the commission to be dead.
After the demise of two trees in approximately the same location, the
commission, in its discretion, may refuse to make, further replacements.
Various evergreens have been planted by property owners in the borough's
right-of-way. Where such evergreens extend over portions of the street
and require pruning, the property owner shall be advised of his sole
responsibility in this regard. If the property owner fails to undertake such
pruning, after notification from the commission, the commission shall have
the right to remove such evergreen from the borough's right-of-way.
In the event that any shrub, planting or tree harbors disease or dangerous
insect infestation, as confirmed by a certified New Jersey Tree Expert,
reduction in size of the tree, at the borough's expense. However, the
owner shall be fully responsible for any curative measures undertaken
with regard to any damage caused by the shade tree.
The commission may order the removal of all or part of a shade tree;
may order the removal of the tree to ground level only; or may order
the removal of some part or all of the roots of a shade tree. However,
the property owner shall be fully responsible for the restoration of his
lawn and/or other portions of the property affected by the shade tree.
i. The property owner may provide stakes for the reinforcement of a
shade tree without permission from the commission, but only when the
tree's health appears to be endangered by storm or other like
emergency.
j. Whenever a shade tree will interfere with proposed new construction,
the owner shall apply to the commission for permission to have the tree
removed and replaced pursuant to Section ST1-4.
k. No weeping willow trees shall be permitted to be planted in the
borough's right-of-way, because of the damage to drainage systems,
curbs and roads.
l. No contractor or owner shall post any sign or other notice on any shade
tree.
m. All trees in the borough's right of way, including those planted prior to
the establishment of the commission, shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ ST1-2 ENGLEWOOD § ST1-3
AO:476
the commission may require the removal of such planting at the owner's
expense.
The property owner shall be responsible for reporting to the department
of public works any dangerous situation of a shade tree being uprooted by
storm, wind or otherwise.
§ ST1-4. COST OF TREES AND IMPROVEMENTS. [Ord. #ST-1, S4;
Ord. #9206, SI; Ord. 2005-12; Ord. #2008-08; Ord. No. 2012-21]
The abutting property owner or owners shall be charged, if the commission
shall so determine, for the planting and removal of street trees, in
accordance with and in the manner as prescribed by law.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
a. A planting to replace a tree or trees theretofore planted by the
commission.
b. A planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other educational
demonstrations.
c. Where the planting or removal of one or more trees is done by and at
the cost and expense of any person pursuant to a permit issued by the
commission, said planting or removal shall be accomplished in
compliance with the specifications as set forth in the permit.
d. Where the planting or removal of any one or more trees is done by any
person in and along any street or park, at his own cost and expense,
pursuant to the written direction of the commission, which planting or
removal is accomplished in compliance with the specifications and
directions of the commission.
The commission shall determine the species, quantity, quality and
manner of planting and removal, and whether it is in the best interest
of the public to require the commission or owner of the real estate in
front of which any such tree or trees shall be planted or removed, to
perform or otherwise be responsible for the performance of the actual
planting or removal.
e. The owner or developer of a property, including new construction,
whether residential or commercial, except on county or State roads,
shall plant new shade trees at intervals of 35 feet or at such intervals
which are reasonable pursuant to the direction of the shade tree
commission. In the event that the property shall be a corner property,
then this chapter shall be enforced on all sides of the property fronting
streets. Measurements shall be taken by the commission and the
commission will disregard existing trees in the event that they die from
excavation trauma. The specifications of such trees shall be determined
by the commission, and the sum of up to $700 per tree will be deposited
in escrow with the borough by either cash or bond. All shade trees shall
be planted pursuant to the approval of the commission. All trees are to
§ ST1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § ST1-4
AO:477
§ ST1-5. OBSTRUCTIONS. [Ord. #ST-1, S5; Ord. #9206, SI; Ord.
#2005-12]
§ ST1-6. INJURY. [Ord. #ST-1, S6; Ord. #2005-12]
be planted according to the ANSI 300 Transplanting Standards. In the
event that within two years of the certificate of occupancy or planting,
the shade tree shall demise or go into serious decline, then in that
event the shade tree commission shall replace the subject tree using
the escrow monies set forth herein. At the end of the escrow period, the
balance of monies available shall be returned to the person who posted
the escrow.
f. (Reserved)
g. The owner or developer of a property for demolition or new
construction, whether residential or commercial, except on county or
State roads, shall deposit in escrow with the borough by either cash or
bond, the sum of up to $1,500 for each shade tree already existing on
the property before demolition or construction, whichever is applicable.
This money will be held for a period of four years from the date of
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The owner/developer shall
protect these trees according to section ST1-7. All shade trees which
die or go into serious decline within four years after the date certificate
of occupancy being issued, shall be removed by the shade tree
commission and replaced using the escrow monies set forth in
paragraph g. All trees are to be planted according to the ANSI 300
Transplanting Standards. At the end of the escrow period, the balance
of monies available shall be returned to the person who posted the
escrow.
a. No person shall, without a permit, place or maintain in any street or
park, any stone, cement, asphalt or other sidewalk; or any stone,
cement, asphalt or other substance which shall impede the free access
of air and water to the roots of any tree.
b. Where any trees are surrounded by pavement of stone, cement, asphalt
or any other substance tending to impede the free access of air and
water to the roots of the tree, no portion of such pavement shall be
nearer to any portion of the base of the trunk than five feet. In the
course of demolition or construction or repairs to the property, no
person shall pile any debris against any shade tree. For purposes of the
provision, debris shall include soil, rocks, tools, construction materials
or the like.
a. No person shall place salt, brine, oil, rinse-water from cleaning out
concrete mixing vessels and tools, or any other substance injurious to
plant growth, in any street, park or right-of-way in such a manner as to
injure any tree.
§ ST1-4 ENGLEWOOD § ST1-6
AO:478
§ ST1-7. PROTECTION. [Ord. #ST-1, S7; Ord. #2005-12]
§ ST1-8. WIRES. [Ord. #ST-1, S8; Ord. #9206, SI]
b. No person shall build any fire or station any tar kettle, road roller, fuel
oil dispensing truck or other engine in any street or other place in such
a manner that the heat, vapors, fuel or fumes therefrom may injure any
tree.
c. Every person having or maintaining any gas lines in any street or park
shall maintain such lines in such a manner as will safeguard the trees
against any damage therefrom and shall make periodical adjustments
whenever necessary to prevent damage to trees.
a. In the erection, alteration or repair of any structure or building, the
owner, contractor or other person in charge thereof shall place such
guards around all nearby trees as will effectually prevent injury to such
trees.
b. No person shall do any excavating within five feet of any tree without a
permit. To prevent the accumulation of debris against any shade tree in
the course of construction or demolition, a barrier of orange, plastic
snow fencing shall encircle the tree maintaining a radius of five feet.
c. No person shall use or operate any power shovel, bulldozer or any other
implement, machine or tools in such a manner as to damage or destroy
any tree.
d. In the course of demolition or construction, to protect those trees
deserving of preservation, the upper six inches to eight inches of soil
surrounding the tree to a distance of five feet from the trunk or out to
drip-line should be kept moist.
a. No person shall string any wire in or through a public park without a
permit.
b. Every person having or maintaining any electric, telephone, telegraph
or other wires running in or through a street or park, shall securely
fasten and maintain such wires in such a manner as will safeguard all
trees against any damage therefrom and shall make periodical
adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to all trees.
c. No person shall, without a permit, attach or fasten any wire, insulator
or other device for holding any wire to any tree.
d. Whenever the commission shall deem it necessary to prune or remove
any tree, any person having a wire running in or through any street or
park shall temporarily remove such wire within 24 hours after service
upon the owner of said wire, or his agent, of a written notice to do so.
e. Any utility company or its agents may, with prior permission from the
commission, prune and remove trees for line clearance of utility wires.
§ ST1-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § ST1-8
AO:479
§ ST1-9. PARKS. [Ord. #ST-1, S9]
In order to preserve, protect and encourage plant life and/or arboriculture
in and upon public parks, the following restrictions shall be observed:
§ ST1-10. HINDRANCE. [Ord. #ST-1, S10]
No person shall prevent, delay or in manner interfere with the commission
or its authorized agents in the performance of their lawful duties.
§ ST1-11. PENALTIES AND REPLACEMENT. [Ord. #ST-1, S11; Ord.
#9206, SI; Ord. #2005-12; Ord. #2008-08]
Any person, whether interested directly or indirectly as owner, lessee,
tenant or otherwise, shall, upon being found in violation of any provisions
thereof, be subject to a minimum fine of $100 per day for each such violation
and up to a maximum of $1,000 per day for each such violation. Each tree
involved shall constitute a separate violation.
The commission may require a person who removes or otherwise destroys a
tree in violation of a municipal ordinance, to pay a replacement assessment
to the municipality. The replacement cost shall be the value of the tree as
determined by the appraisal of a trained forester or certified tree expert
retained by the commission for that purpose. In lieu of an appraisal, the
commission may adopt a formula and schedule based upon the number of
square inches contained in a cross section of the trunk of the tree multiplied
by a predetermined value per square inch, not to exceed $27 per square
f. Where street trees are growing into utility wires, the property owner
shall be responsible for making direct requests for relief from the utility
company maintaining such wires. The commission is not entitled to
prune trees in such situations, but rather, the utility company may
prune the tree without prior permission from the commission.
a. No person shall enter upon any portion of the lawn or ground within a
public park or other public place when notified by a sign placed in such
a park or public place, or by a guardian of such park or public place, or
by a police officer, not to enter upon such lawn or ground.
b. No person shall leave or deposit any paper or other waste material in
any public park, except in such receptacles as may be provided therein
for that purpose.
c. No person shall, except at such time and under such regulations as may
be designated by the commission, play at any game in a public park.
d. No person shall, without a permit, place any booth, stand or other
structure, or station wagon, car or other vehicle in any public park,
except in the area prescribed.
e. No person shall offer any article for sale, display any advertising device
or distribute any commercial circulars or cards in a public park.
§ ST1-8 ENGLEWOOD § ST1-11
AO:480
inch. The square inch cross section shall be calculated from the diameter at
breast height and if there is a multiple stem tree, then each trunk shall be
measured and an average shall be determined for the tree. For the purposes
of the chapter, "diameter at breast height" shall mean the diameter of
the tree taken at a point 4 1/2 feet above ground level. The commission
shall modify the value of the tree based upon its species variety, location,
and its condition at the time of removal or destruction. The replacement
assessment for any one tree shall not exceed $5,000.
§ ST1-12. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. [Ord. #ST-1 S12; Ord. #9206,
SII]
Should any section, part or provision of this chapter be held
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so held
unconstitutional or invalid.
§ ST1-13. MANNER OF COMPLIANCE. [Ord. #ST-1, S13]
For the purposes of this chapter, any planting or removal as herein
mentioned shall be accomplished in such manner as is reasonable
calculated to create the least possible obstruction or interference with the
public right-of-way.
Table of Source Sections
Chapter TSS
TABLE OF SOURCE SECTIONS
§ TSS-1. TABLE OF SOURCE SECTIONS.
1-1 New
1-2 New
1-3 New
1-4 New
2-1 New
2-2
2-2.1 New
2-2.2 New
2-2.3 New
2-2.4 New
2-3 New
2-4 New
§ ST1-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:481
2-5 New
2-6
2-6.1 Ord. #76, SI
2-6.2 Ord. #76, S2
2-6.3 Ord. #76, S3, 4&5
2-6.4 Ord. #76, S6
2-6.5 New
2-6.6 New
2-7
2-7.1 See text
2-7.2 Ord. #2, S2
2-7.3 Ord. #2, S3
2-7.4 Ord. #2, S4
2-8
2-8.1 Ord. #49R, S1
2-8.2 Ord. #97R, S2; Ord. #9206, SI
2-8.3 Ord. #97R, S3
2-8.4 Ord. #97R, S4
2-8.5 Ord. #97R, S5
2-8.6 Ord. #49R, S6
2-8.7 Ord. #49R, S7
2-9
2-9.1 Ord. #7304, S1
2-9.2 Ord. #7304, S2
2-9.3 Ord. #7304, S2
2-9.4 Ord. #7304, S2
2-9.5 Ord. #7304, S2
2-9.6 Ord. #7304, S3
2-9.7 Ord. #7304, S4
2-9.8 Ord. #7304, S5
2-9.9 Ord. #7304, S6
2-10
2-10.1 Ord. #87R, SI
2-10.2 Ord. #87R, S1b
2-10.3 Ord. #87R, S1c
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:482
2-10.4 Ord. #87R, S1j
2-10.5 Ord. #87R, S1,2&3; Ord. #156R
2-10.6 Ord. #87R, S1r
2-10.7 Ord. #87R, S1k
2-10.8 Ord. #87R, S1l
2-10.9 Ord. #87R, S1f
2-10.10 Ord. #87R, S1g
2-10.11 Ord. #87R, S1h
2-10.12 See text
2-10.12A Ord. #9501; reserved by Ord. #2004-01
2-10.13 See text
2-10.14 See text
2-10.15 See text
2-10.16 See text
2-10.17 See text
2-10.18 See text
2-10.19 New
2-10.20 Ord. #87R, S3
2-10.21 New
2-10.22 Ord. #9502
2-10.23 Ord. #9504; Ord. #9804; Ord. #2000-13
2-11
2-11.1 Ord. #6807, S1&2; Ord. #8703, SSI-IV
2-12 Ord. #7518
2-13
2-13.1 Ord. #55, S1; New; Ord. #2004-19; Ord.
#2007-01; Ord. #2007-27; Ord. #12-11
2-13.2 Ord. #55, S2; New; Ord. #2004-19; Ord.
#2007-01
2-13.3 4/5/37; New; Ord. #9003, SI; Ord.
#2004-19; Ord. #2007-09
2-13.4 Ord. #55, SS5&6; New; Ord. #2004-19;
Ord. #2006-17; Ord. #2007-01
2-13.4.1 See text
2-13.5 See text
2-13.6 See text
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:483
2-13.7 See text
2-13.8 See text
2-13.9 See text
2-13.10 See text
2-13.11 Ord. #13R; New
2-13.11A Ord. #2009-06
2-13.12 Ord. #11F; New; Ord. #2004-19; Ord.
#2007-01
2-13.13 Ord. #7616, S14; New
2-13.14 Ord. #8909, SI
2-13.15 Ord. #2004-19; Ord. #2007-01
2-13.16 See text
2-13A
2-13A.1 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.2 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.3 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.4 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.5 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.6 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.7 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.8 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.9 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.10 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11; Ord.
#2007-22
2-13A.11 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.12 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.13 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.14 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.15 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.16 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.17 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.18 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.19 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.20 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-13A.21 Ord. #9812; Ord. #2007-11
2-14
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:484
2-14.1 Ord. #7219
2-14.2 Ord. #8105, SI
2-14.3 Ord. #8105, SII; Ord. #8524, SI
2-14.4 Ord. #8412, SSI-V
2-14.5 Ord. #8523, SSI-V
2-14.6 Ord. #8934, SI; Ord. #9020, SI; Ord.
#2007-23
2-14A
2-14A.1 Ord. #2000-08
2-14A.2 Ord. #2000-08
2-14A.3 Ord. #2000-08
2-14A.4 Ord. #2000-08
2-14A.5 Ord. #2000-08
2-15
2-15.1 Ord. #21F
2-15.2 Ord. #21F, SI
2-15.3 Ord. #6816, S2
2-15.4 Ord. #6816, S3
2-15.5 Ord. #6816, S4
2-15.6 Ord. #6816, S5
2-15.7 Ord. #6816, S6
2-15.8 Ord. #6816, S7
2-15.9 Ord. #6816, S8
2-15.10 Ord. #6816, S9
2-15.11 Ord. #6816, S10
2-15.12 Ord. #6816, S11
2-15.13 Ord. #6816, S12
2-15.14 Ord. #6816, S13
2-15.15 Ord. #6816, S14
2-15.16 Ord. #6816, S15
2-16
2-16.1 Ord. #7714
2-16.2 Ord. #7714, SI
2-16.3 Ord. #7714, SII
2-16.4 Ord. #7714, SIII
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:485
2-16.5 Ord. #7714, SIV
2-16.6 Ord. #7714, SV
2-17 Ord. #8201, SSI-VI; Ord. #2003-06; Ord.
#2004-04, SSI-6
2-18 See text
2-19
2-19.1 See text
2-19.2 See text
2-19.3 See text
2-19.4 See text
2-19.5 See text
2-19.6 Ord. #8901, SVI
2-20
2-20.1 Ord. #8902, SI; Ord. #2011-05; Ord.
#2011-12
2-20.2 Ord. #8902, SII; Ord. #2011-05; Ord.
#2011-12
2-20.3 Ord. #8902, SIII; Ord. #2011-05; Ord.
#2011-12
2-20.4 Ord. #8902, SIV; Ord. #2011-05; Ord.
#2011-12
2-20.5 Ord. #8902, SV; Ord. #2011-05; Ord.
#2011-12
2-21 Ord. #9304, SI
2-22
2-22.1 Ord. #9609
2-22.2 Ord. #9609
2-22.3 Ord. #9609
2-22.4 Ord. #9609
2-22.5 Ord. #9609
2-22.6 Ord. #9609
2-22.7 Ord. #9609
2-22.8 Ord. #9609
2-22.9 Ord. #9609
2-22.10 Ord. #9610
2-22.11 Ord. #9611
2-23
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:486
2-23.1 Ord. #2000-12
2-24
2-24.1 Ord. #2002-05, S2
2-24.2 Ord. #2002-05, S3
2-24.3 Ord. #2002-05, S4
2-25 Ord. #2002-14, S1; Ord. #2008-02, § 1-8
2-26
2-26.1 Ord. #2004-03, S1
2-26.2 Ord. #2004-03, S2
2-26.3 Ord. #2004-03, S3
2-27
2-27.1 Ord. #2004-12, S1
2-27.2 Ord. #2004-12, S2
2-27.3 Ord. #2004-17
2-28
2-28.1 Ord. #2007-17, S1
2-28.2 Ord. #2007-17, S2
2-28.3 Ord. #2007-17, S3
2-28.4 Ord. #2007-17, S4
2-29
2-29.1 Ord. #2011-14, S1; Ord. #12-10, S1
2-29.2 Ord. #2011-14, S2; Ord. #12-10, S2
2-29.3 Ord. #2011-14, S3; Ord. #12-10, S3
2-29.4 Ord. #2011-14, S4; Ord. #12-10, S4
2-29.5 See text
2-29.6 See text
2-29.7 See text
3-1
3-1.1 New
3-1.2 New
3-1.3 New
3-2 Repealed by Ord. #8925
3-3
3-3.1 Ord. #82R, S1
3-3.2 Ord. #82R, Sla-f; Ord. #9902
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:487
3-3.3 Ord. #82R, S2g & S3
3-4
3-4.1 Ord. #7430
3-4.2 Ord. #7430, S1
3-5
3-5.1 Ord. #7517, S1; Ord. #2002-08; Ord.
#2008-03; Ord. #13-02
3-5.2 Ord. #7517, S2
3-6
3-6.1 Ord. #7706
3-6.2 Ord. #7706, S1
3-6.3 Ord. #7706, S2
3-6.4 Ord. #7706, S3
3-6.5 Ord. #7706, S4
3-6.6 Ord. #7706, SSI-III
3-7 Ord. #7522, S2-6; Ord. #7810; Ord.
#13-08
3-8
3-8.1 Ord. #5, S1
3-8.2 Ord. #5, S2
3-9
3-9.1 Ord. #77, S1
3-9.2 Ord. #77, S2&3
3-9.3 Ord. #77, S4
3-10
3-10.1 Ord. #7709
3-10.2 Ord. #8508, SSI, II;
Ord. #13-02
3-11 Repealed by Ord. #8925
3-12
3-12.1 Ord. #8822, SI
3-12.2 Ord. #8822, SII; Ord. #13-08
3-12.3 Ord. #8822, SIII
3-12.4 Ord. #8822, SIV; Ord. #13-08
3-12.5 Ord. #8822, SV
3-12.6 Ord. #8822, SVI; Ord. #13-08
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:488
3-12.7 Ord. #8822, SVII; Ord. #9208, SI; Ord.
#9210, SI; Ord. #9411, SI; Ord. #2002-07;
Ord. #2004-13; Ord. #2007-06; Ord.
#2007-15; Ord. #13-08
3-12.8 Ord. #8822, SVIII
3-12.9 Ord. #8822, SIX
3-12.10 Ord. #8822, SX
3-12.11 Ord. #8822, SXI
3-13
3-13.1 Ord. #9010; Ord. #9202, SI
3-13.2 Ord. #9010; Ord. #9202, SI
3-13.3 Ord. #9010; Ord. #9202, SI
3-13.4 Ord. #9010; Ord. #9202, SI
3-13.5 Ord. #9010; Ord. #9021, SI; Ord. #9202,
SI
3-14
3-14.1 Ord. #9016, SI
3-14.2 Ord. #9016, SI
3-15 Ord. #9024
3-16 Ord. #9811, SS1-3
3-17
3-17.1 Ord. #2005-17
3-17.2 Ord. #2005-17
3-17.3 Ord. #2005-17
3-17.4 Ord. #2005-17
3-17.5 Ord. #2005-17
3-18
3-18.1 Ord. #2005-18
3-18.2 Ord. #2005-18
3-18.3 Ord. #2005-18
3-18.4 Ord. #2005-18
3-18.5 Ord. #2005-18
3-19 Ord. #2006-04
3-20
3-20.1 Ord. #2007-02 § 1
3-20.2 Ord. #2007-02 § 1
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:489
3-20.3 Ord. #2007-02 § 1
3-20.4 Ord. #2007-02 § 1
3-20.5 Ord. #2007-02 § 1
3-21
3-21.1 Ord. #2011-07, S1
3-21.2 Ord. #2011-07, S2
3-21.3 Ord. #2011-07, S3
3-21.4 Ord. #2011-07, S4
3-21.5 Ord. #2011-07, S5
3-21.6 Ord. #2011-07, S6
3-22
3-22.1 Ord. #2011-06, S1
3-22.2 Ord. #2011-06, S2
3-22.3 Ord. #2011-06, S3
3-22.4 Ord. #2011-06, S4
3-22.5 Ord. #2011-06, S5
3-22.6 Ord. #2011-06, S6
4-1
4-1.1 Ord. #8606, SI
4-1.2 Ord. #8606, SII
4-1.3 Ord. #8606, SIII
4-1.4 Ord. #8606, SIV
4-1.5 Ord. #8606, SV; Ord. #9120, SI
4-1.6 Ord. #8606, SVI
4-1.7 Ord. #8606, SVII
4-1.8 Ord. #8606, SVIII
4-2
4-2.1 Ord. #157R, S1
4-2.2 Ord. #157R, S2
4-2.3 Ord. #157R, S3
4-2.4 Ord. #157R, S4
4-2.5 Ord. #157R, S5
4-2.6 Ord. #157R, S6
4-3
4-3.1 Ord. #2007-08
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:490
4-3.2 Ord. #2007-08
4-3.3 Ord. #2007-08
4-3.4 Ord. #2007-08
4-3.5 Ord. #2007-08
4-3.6 Ord. #2007-08
4-3.7 Ord. #2007-08
4-3.8 Ord. #2007-08
4-3.9 Ord. #2007-08
4-4
4-3.8
4-4.1 Ord. #26R, S1; Ord. #7813, S2
4-4.2 Ord. #7813, S3
4-4.3 Ord. #7813, S4
4-4.4 Ord. #7813, S5
4-4.5 Ord. #7813, S6
4-4.6 Ord. #7813, S7
4-4.7 Ord. #7813, S8
4-4.8 Ord. #7813, S9
4-4.9 Ord. #7813, S10
4-4.10 Ord. #7813, S11
4-4.11 Ord. #7813, S12
4-4.12 Ord. #7813, S13
4-4.13 Ord. #7813, S14
4-4.14 Ord. #7813, S15
4-4.15 Ord. #7813, S16
4-4.16 Ord. #7813, S17
4-4.17 Ord. #7813, S18
4-5
4-5.1 Ord. #15, S1
4-5.2 Ord. #15, S2
4-5.3 Ord. #15, S2
4-5.4 Ord. #15, S3
4-5.5 Ord. #15, S4
4-5.6 Ord. #15, S4
4-6
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:491
4-6.1 Ord. #8107, SI
4-6.2 Ord. #8107, SII
4-6.3 Ord. #8107, SIII
4-6.4 Ord. #8107, SIV
4-6.5 Ord. #8107, SV
4-6.6 Ord. #8107, SVI
4-6.7 Ord. #8107, SVII
4-6.8 Ord. #8107, SVIII
4-6.9 Ord. #8107, SVIII
4-6.10 Ord. #8107, SIX
4-6.11 Ord. #8107, SX
4-6.12 Ord. #8107, SXI
4-7
4-7.1 Ord. #8813, SI; Ord. #8821, S3
4-7.2 Ord. #8813, SII
4-7.3 Ord. #8813, SIII
4-7.4 Ord. #8813, SIV; Ord. #8821, SSI, 4; Ord.
#9103, SI
4-7.5 Ord. #8813, SV; Ord. #8821, S2
4-7.6 Ord. #8813, SVI
4-7.7 Ord. #8813, SVII
4-8
4-8.1 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.2 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.3 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.4 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.5 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.6 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.7 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.8 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.9 Ord. #8920, SI
4-8.10 Ord. #8920, SI
4-9
4-9.1 Ord. #9102, SI
4-9.2 Ord. #9102, SI
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:492
4-9.3 Ord. #9102, SI
4-9.4 Ord. #9102, SI
5-1
5-1.1 Ord. #66, SI; Ord. #7916, SI; Ord. #8113,
SI; Ord. #8307, SI; Ord. #8807, SI; Ord.
#9013, SII
5-1.2 Ord. #66, S1
5-1.3 Ord. #66, S2
5-1.4 Ord. #66, S2
5-1.5 Ord. #66, S3
5-2
5-2.1 Ord. #66, S4
5-2.2 Ord. #66, S4
5-2.3 Ord. #66, S4
5-2.4 Ord. #66, S4
5-2.5 Ord. #66, S4
5-2.6 Ord. #66, S5
5-3 Ord. #66, S6
5-4 Ord. #66, S7
5-5 Ord. #66, S8
5-6 Ord. #66, S9, 10&11
5-7 Ord. #66, S12
5-8 Repealed by Ord. #9013, SIII
5-9 Ord. #66, S14
5-10 Ord. #66, S15; Ord. #9013, SIV
5-11 Ord. #9013, SI
6-1 New
6-2 New
6-3
6-3.1 New
6-3.2 New
6-3.3 New
6-3.4 See text
6-3.5 New
6-4
6-4.1 New; Ord. #62R
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:493
6-4.2 New; Ord. #62R; Ord. #9018, SI
6-4.3 New; Ord. #62R
6-4.4 New; Ord. #62R; Ord. #9018, SII
6-4.5 New; Ord. #62R
6-4.6 New; Ord. #62R
6-4.7 New; Ord. #62R
6-5
6-5.1 New
6-5.2 New
6-5.3 Ord. #2000-14; Ord. #13-14
6-6
6-6.1 Ord. #62R, S5
6-6.2 Ord. #62R, S6
6-6.3 Ord. #62R, S7
6-6.4 Ord. #62R, S8
6-6.5 Ord. #62R, S9
6-6.6 Ord. #62R, S11
6-6.7 Ord. #62R, S13
6-7 New
7-1 Ord. #7010, S1-1
7-2 New
7-3
7-3.1 Ord. #7010, S2-1
7-3.2 New
7-3.2A Ord. #13-07
7-3.3 Ord. #7010, S2-2; Ord. #7908; Ord.
#8203, S1; Ord. #8519, SSI, II; Ord.
#9204, SI; Ord. #2007-16; Ord. #13-08;
Ord. #13-13
7-3.4 Ord. #7010, S2-3; Ord. #8005, S1; Ord.
#8614, SI; Ord. #2007-16
7-3.5 Ord. #7010, S2-4; Ord. #7809; Ord.
#7808; Ord. #8614, SI; Ord. #2003-12;
Ord. #2003-17; Ord. #2004-13; Ord.
#2005-04; Ord. #2005-07 Ord. #2006-01;
Ord. #2007-16
7-3.6 Ord. #7010, S2-5; Ord. #8824, SI; Ord.
#2004-07; Ord. #2007-16
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:494
7-3.7 Ord. #8411, SSI, II
7-3.8 Ord. #8610, SI
7-4
7-4.1 Ord. #7010, S5; Ord. #2007-16
7-5 Ord. #7010, A4, S4
7-6
7-6.1 Ord. #7010, A5, S5-1
7-6.2 See text
7-6.3 Ord. #7010, A5, S5-3
7-7 Ord. #7010, A6, S6-1
7-8 Ord. #7010, A7, S7-1
7-9 Ord. #7010, A8, S8-1
7-10
7-10.1 Ord. #7010, A9, S9-1
7-10.2 Ord. #7010, A9, S9-2; Ord. #13-08
7-10.3 Ord. #7010, A9, S9-3
7-10.4 Ord. #8614, SI; Ord. #9805, SS3, 4
7-11
7-11.1 Ord. #7214
7-11.2 Ord. #7223
7-12 New; Ord. #8301, S2; Ord. #8911, SI; Ord.
#2003-05
7-13
7-13.1 Ord. #7923, S1; Ord. #2006-11, § I; Ord.
#2010-16
7-13.2 Ord. #7923, S2
7-13.3 Ord. #7923, S3
7-13.4 Ord. #7923, S4
7-13.5 Ord. #7923, S5; Ord. #9014, SI
7-13.6 Ord. #9119, SI
7-13.7 Ord. #7923, S6; Ord. #8301, S3; Ord.
#8910, SI; Ord. #8912, SI; Ord. #9014,
SII; Ord. #9119, SI
7-14
7-14.1 Ord. #2011-03, S1
7-14.2 Ord. #2011-03, S2
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:495
7-14.3 Ord. #2011-03, S3
7-14.4 Ord. #2011-03, S4
7-14.5 Ord. #2011-03, S5
8-1 Ord. #7506; Ord. #8116
8-2 Ord. #7506; Ord. #8116
8-3 Ord. #7506; Ord. #8301, S2
8-4 Ord. #7506; Ord. #8301, S2
8-5 Repealed by Ord. #8908, SI; Ord.
#2010-08
9-1
9-1.1 Ord. #7619, S1
9-1.2 Ord. #7619, S2
9-1.3 Ord. #7619, S3; Ord. #8010, S1; Ord.
#8403, SSI, II; Ord. #8616, SI; Ord.
#8817, SI; Ord. #8931, SI; Ord. #8935, SI;
Ord. #9205, SI; Ord. #9305 SI; Ord.
#9716; Ord. #2000-06; Ord. #2001-09;
Ord. #2006-23; Ord. #2009-07; Ord.
#2010-08
9-1.4 Ord. #7619, S4; Ord. #2000-06
9-1.5 Ord. #7803
9-1.6 Ord. #8005, S2
9-2
9-2.1 Ord. #67R, S1
9-2.2 Ord. #67R, S2
9-2.3 Ord. #67R, S3
9-2.4 Ord. #67R, S4
9-2.5 Ord. #67R, S5
9-2.6 Ord. #67R, S6
9-2.7 Ord. #67R, S7
9-3
9-3.1 Ord. #7426; Ord. #2004-10
9-3.2 Ord. #7426, SI
9-3.3 Ord. #7426, S2
9-3.4 Ord. #7426, S3; Ord. #2004-10
9-3.5 Ord. #2008-06; Ord. #2008-10
9-4
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:496
9-4.1 Ord. #29R, S1
9-4.2 Ord. #29R, S2
9-4.3 Ord. #29R, S3
9-4.4 Ord. #29R, S4
9-4.5 Ord. #29R, S5
9-4.6 Ord. #85R, S1
9-5
9-5.1 Ord. #51R, S1
9-5.2 Ord. #51R, S2
9-5.3 Ord. #51R, S3
9-5.4 Ord. #51R, S4
9-5.5 Ord. #51R, S5
9-5.6 Ord. #51R, S6
9-5.7 Ord. #51R, S7
9-5.8 Ord. #51R, S9
9-6
9-6.1 Ord. #7428
9-6.2 Ord. #7428, S1
9-6.3 Ord. #7428, S2; Ord. #2002-01
9-6.4 Ord. #7428, S3
9-6.5 Ord. #7428, S4
9-7
9-7.1 Ord. #7613
9-7.2 Ord. #7613, S1
9-7.3 Ord. #7613, S2
9-7.4 Ord. #7613, S3
9-7.5 Ord. #7613, S4
9-8
9-8.1 Ord. #7612, S1
9-8.2 Ord. #7612, S2
9-8.3 Ord. #7612, S3
9-8.4 Ord. #7612, S4
9-9
9-9.1 Ord. #7208
9-9.2 Ord. #7208
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:497
9-10
9-10.1 Ord. #44R, S1
9-10.2 Ord. #44R, S2
9-10.3 Ord. #44R, S3
9-10.4 Ord. #44R, S4
9-10.5 Ord. #44R, S5&6
9-10.6 Ord. #44R, S7
9-11
9-11.1 Ord. #25F, S1
9-11.2 Ord. #25F, S2; Ord. #6902
9-11.3 Ord. #25F, S3
9-11.4 Ord. #25F, S4
9-11.5 Ord. #25F, S5
9-12
9-12.1 Ord. #7429
9-12.2 Ord. #7429
9-12.3 Ord. #7429
9-12.4 Ord. #7429
9-13
9-13.1 Ord. #7212
9-13.2 Ord. #7212; Ord. #8505, SSI-III
9-13.3 Ord. #7212; Ord. #8505, SSI-III
9-13.4 Ord. #7212; Ord. #8505, SSI-III
9-13.5 Ord. #7212; Ord. #8505, SSI-III
9-14
9-14.1 Ord. #7710
9-14.2 Ord. #7710, S1
9-14.3 Ord. #7710, S2
9-14.4 Ord. #7710, S3
9-15 Ord. #8305, SSI-X; Ord. #9605; reserved
by Ord. #9715
9-16
9-16.1 Ord. #8510
9-16.2 Ord. #8510, SI
9-16.3 Ord. #8510, SII
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:498
9-16.4 Ord. #8510, SIII
9-16.5 Ord. #8510, SIV
9-17
9-17.1 Ord. #8603, S1; Ord. #12-14; Ord. #13-12
9-17.2 Ord. #8603, S2; Ord. #9510
9-17.3 Ord. #8603, S3
9-17.4 See text
9-17.5 Ord. #8603, S5
9-18
9-18.1 Ord. #8806, SI
9-18.2 Ord. #8806, SII
9-18.3 Ord. #8806, SIII
9-18.4 Ord. #8806, SIV
9-18.5 Ord. #8806, SV; Ord. #9007, SI; Ord.
#2009-07
9-19
9-19.1 Ord. #8921, SI
9-19.2 Ord. #8921, SI
9-19.3 Ord. #8921, SI
9-19.4 Ord. #8921, SI
9-19.5 Ord. #8921, SI
9-20
9-20.1 Ord. #9201, S1; Ord. #2004-06; Ord.
#2005-02
9-20.2 Ord. #9201, S2
9-20.3 Ord. #9201, S3
9-20.4 Ord. #9201, S4
9-20.5 Ord. #9201, S5
9-20.6 Ord. #9201, S6
9-21 Ord. #9511, SS1-9; reserved by Ord.
#9707
9-22
9-22.1 Ord. #9604, SII-1.1
9-22.2 Ord. #9604, SII-1.2
9-22.3 Ord. #9604, SII-1.3
9-22.4 Ord. #9604, SII-1.4
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:499
9-22.5 See text
9-22.6 See text
9-22.7 See text
9-22.8 See text
9-22.9 See text
9-22.10 See text
9-22.11 See text
9-22.12 See text
9-23
9-23.1 See text
9-23.2 See text
9-23.3 Ord. #9713, SI
9-24
9-24.1 Ord. #2010-07
9-24.2 Ord. #2010-07
9-24.3 Ord. #2010-07
10-1
10-1.1 Ord. #8925, SII
10-1.2 Ord. #8925, SII
10-1.3 Ord. #8925, SII
10-2
10-2.1 Ord. #8925, SII
10-3
10-3.1 Ord. #8925, SII
10-3.2 Ord. #8925, SII
10-3.3 Ord. #8925, SII
10-3.4 Ord. #8925, SII
10-3.5 Ord. #8925, SII
10-4
10-4.1 Ord. #8925, SII
10-4.2 Ord. #8925, SII
10-4.3 Ord. #8925, SII
10-5
10-5.1 Ord. #8925, SII
10-5.2 Ord. #8925, SII
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:500
10-5.3 Ord. #8925, SII
10-6
10-6.1 Ord. #8925, SII; Ord. #9912
10-6.2 See text
10-6.3 Ord. #8925, SII; Ord. #9912
10-7
10-7.1 Ord. #8925, SII
10-7.2 Ord. #8925, SII; Ord. #9209, SII; Ord.
#2000-06; Ord. #2003-10
10-8
10-8.1 Ord. #8925, SII
10-8.2 Ord. #8925, SII; Ord. #9116, SI
10-8.3 Ord. #8925, SII
10-9 Ord. #8925, SII; Ord. #9209, SIII
10-10
10-10.1 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.2 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.3 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.4 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.5 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.6 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.7 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.8 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.9 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.10 Ord. #9002, SI
10-10.11 Ord. #9002, SI
11-1
11-1.1 Ord. #151R, S1
11-1.2 Ord. #151R, S2
11-1.3 Ord. #151R, S3
11-1.4 Ord. #151R, S4
11-1.5 Ord. #151R, S5; Ord. #8905, SI
11-1.6 Ord. #151R, S6
11-1.7 Ord. #151R, S7
11-1.8 Ord. #151R, S8
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:501
11-1.9 Ord. #151R, S9
11-1.10 See text
11-1.11 Ord. #2005-25; Ord. #2006-20
11-2 Ord. #75, S1
11-3
11-3.1 Ord. #24R
11-3.2 Ord. #24R, S1
11-3.3 Ord. #24R, S2
11-4
11-4.1 Ord. #7927
11-4.2 Ord. #7927, S1
11-4.3 Ord. #7927, S2
11-4.4 Ord. #7927, S3
11-4.5 Ord. #7927, S4
11-5
11-5.1 Ord. #9705, S1.1
11-5.2 Ord. #9705, S1.2; Ord. #9806
11-5.3 Ord. #9705, S1.3; Ord. #2001-03, S1.3
11-5.4 Ord. #9705, S1.4; Ord. #9806; Ord.
#2001-03, S1.4
11-5.5 Ord. #9705, S1.5; Ord. #2001-03, S1.5
11-5.6 Ord. #9705, S1.6; Ord. #9806; Ord.
#2001-03, S1.6
11-5.7 Ord. #9705, S1.7; Ord. #2001-03, S1.7
11-6
11-6.1 Ord. #2005-15
11-6.2 Ord. #2005-15
11-6.3 Ord. #2005-15
11-6.4 Ord. #2005-15
11-6.5 Ord. #2005-15
11-7
11-7.1 Ord. #2005-19
11-7.2 Ord. #2005-19
11-7.3 Ord. #2005-19
11-7.4 Ord. #2005-19
11-7.5 Ord. #2005-19
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:502
11-7.6 Ord. #2005-19
11-8
11-8.1 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.2 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.3 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.4 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.5 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.6 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.7 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.8 Ord. #2007-10
11-8.9 Ord. #2007-10
12-1
12-1.1 Ord. #7108, S1:1
12-1.2 Ord. #7108, S1:2
12-2 Ord. #7108, S2
12-3 Ord. #7108, S3
12-4 Ord. #7108, S4
12-5
12-5.1 Ord. #7108, S5:1
12-5.2 Ord. #7108, S5:2
12-5.3 Ord. #7108, S5:3
12-5.4 Ord. #7108, S5:4
12-5.5 Ord. #7108, S5:5
12-6 Ord. #7108, S6:1
12-7
12-7.1 Ord. #7108, S7:1
12-7.2 Ord. #7108, S7:2
12-7.3 Ord. #7108, S7:3
12-8 Ord. #7108, S8
12-9 Ord. #7108, S9 &10
13-1
13-1.1 Ord. #8F, S1
13-1.2 Ord. #8F, S2
13-1.3 Ord. #8F, S3; Ord. #7811; Ord. #9008, SI;
Ord. #9901
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:503
13-1.4 Ord. #8F, S4
13-1.5 Ord. #8F, S5
13-1.6 Ord. #8F, S6
13-1.7 Ord. #8F, S7
13-2
13-2.1 Ord. #9F, S1
13-2.2 Ord. #9F, S2; Ord. #9711
13-2.3 Ord. #9F, S3
13-2.4 Ord. #9F, S4; Ord. #9711
13-2.5 Ord. #9F, S5; Ord. #9901
13-2.6 Ord. #9F, S6; Ord. #9711
13-2.7 Ord. #9F, S7; Ord. #9901
13-2.8 Ord. #9F, S8
13-2.9 Ord. #9F, S9
13-3
13-3.1 Ord. #6912, S1
13-3.2 Ord. #6912, S2
13-4
13-4.1 Ord. #7708
13-4.2 Ord. #7708, S1
13-4.3 Ord. #7708, S2
13-4.4 Ord. #7708, S3
13-4.5 Ord. #7708, S4
13-5
13-5.1 Ord. #8924, SI
13-5.2 Ord. #8924, SI
13-5.3 Ord. #8924, SI
14-1 Ord. #134R
14-2 Ord. #134R, S1
14-3 Ord. #134R, S2
14-4 Ord. #134R, S3
14-5 Ord. #134R, S4
14-6 Ord. #134R, S5
14-7 Ord. #134R, S6 New
15-1 Ord. #7R, AI
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:504
15-2 Ord. #7R, AII
15-3 Ord. #7R, AIII
15-4 Ord. #7R, AIV
15-5
15-5.1 Ord. #7R, AV
15-5.2 Ord. #7R; Ord. #152R
15-5.3 Ord. #152R
15-5.4 Ord. #7R, AV, S4
15-6
15-6.1 Ord. #7R, AVI, S1
15-6.2 Ord. #7R, AVI, S2
15-6.3 Ord. #7R, AVI, S3
15-7
15-7.1 Ord. #7R, AVII, S1; Ord. #166R
15-7.2 Ord. #7R, AVII, S2
15-7.3 See text
15-7.4 Ord. #69R
15-7.5 Ord. #152R, S3
15-7.6 Ord. #152R, S4
15-7.7 Ord. #152R, S5
15-7.8 Ord. #152R, S6
15-7.9 Ord. #8915, SI
15-8 Ord. #7R, AVIII
15-8.1 Ord. #7R, AVIII, S1
15-8.2 Ord. #7R, AVIII, S2; Ord. #152R
15-8.3 Ord. #7R, AVIII, S3
15-8.4 Ord. #7R, AVIII, S4
15-8.5 Ord. #7R, AVIII, S5
15-9 Ord. #7R, AIX; Ord. #152R
15-10
15-10.1 Ord. #7R, AXI, S1
15-10.2 Ord. #7R, AXI, S2
15-11 Ord. #9009, SI Chapter XVI Reserved
17-1 — 17-2 Ord. #8211, SSII, III, reserved by Ord.
#8522 and Ord. #2002-11
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:505
17-3 Ord. #8211, SIV; Ord. #8502, SI; reserved
by Ord. #8522 and Ord. #2002-11
17-4 — 17-8 Ord. #8211, SSV — IX; reserved by Ord.
#8522 and Ord. #2002-11
17-9
17-9.1 Ord. #8522
17-9.2 Ord. #8522, S1
17-9.3 Ord. #8522, S2
17-9.4 Ord. #8522, S3
17-9.5 Ord. #8522, S4
17-9.6 See text
17-9.7 Ord. #8522, S6A
17-9.8 See text
17-9.9 Ord. #8522, S6C
17-9.10 See text
17-9.11 Ord. #8522, S7
17-9.12 See text
17-9.13 See text
17-9.14 See text
17-9.15 See text
17-10
17-10.1 Ord. #9006, SI
17-10.2 Ord. #9006, SII
17-10.3 Ord. #9006, SIII
17-10.4 Ord. #9006, SIV
17-10.5 Ord. #9006, SV
17-10.6 Ord. #9006, SVI
18-1
18-1.1 Ord. #7618, AI, S1; Ord. #7904, S2; Ord.
#12-05
18-1.2 Ord. #7618, AI, S2; Ord. #2012-05
18-1.3 Ord. #7618, AI, S3
18-1.4 Ord. #7618, AI, S4
18-1.5 Ord. #7618, AI, S5
18-1.6 Ord. #7618, AI, S6
18-1.7 Ord. #7618, AI, S7; Ord. #12-05
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:506
18-1.8 Ord. #7618, AI, S8
18-1.9 Ord. #7618, AI, S9
18-1.10 Ord. #7618, AI, S10
18-1.11 Ord. #7618, AI, S11
18-1.12 Ord. #7618, AI, S12
18-2
18-2.1 Ord. #7618, AII, S1; Ord. #7904, S1; Ord.
#12-05
18-2.2 Ord. #7618, AII, S2; reserved by Ord.
#12-05
18-2.3 Ord. #7618, AII, S3; reserved by Ord.
#12-05
18-2.4 Ord. #7618, AII, S4; reserved by Ord.
#12-05
18-2.5 Ord. #7618, AII, S5; reserved by Ord.
#12-05
18-2.6 Ord. #7618, AII, S6; Ord. #12-05
18-2.7 Ord. #7618, AII, S7; Ord. #12-05
18-2.7A Ord. #12-13
18-2.8 Ord. #7618, AII, S8; Ord. #12-05
18-2.9 Ord. #7618, AII, S9; Ord. #12-05
18-2.10 Ord. #7618, AII, S10; Ord. #12-05
18-2.11 Ord. #7618, AII, S11; Ord. #12-05
18-2.12 Ord. #7618, AII, S12; Ord. #12-05
18-3
18-3.1 Ord. #7618, AIII, S1; Ord. #12-05
18-3.2 Ord. #7618, AIII, S2; Ord. #12-05
18-3.3 Ord. #7618, AIII, S3; Ord. #12-05
18-3.4 Ord. #7618, AIII, S4; Ord. #8409, SI; Ord.
#9203, SI; Ord. #2005-24; Ord. #12-05;
Ord. #13-06
18-3.5 Ord. #7618, AIII, S5; Ord. #12-05
18-3.6 Ord. #7618, AIII, S6
18-3.7 Ord. #7618, AIII, S7
18-3.8 Ord. #7618, AIII, S8
18-3.9 Ord. #7618, AIII, S9
18-3.10 Ord. #7618, AIII, S10
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:507
18-3.11 Ord. #8802, SSI, II
18-4
18-4.1 Ord. #7618, AIV, S1; Ord. #12-05
18-4.2 Ord. #7618, AIV, S2; reserved by Ord.
#12-05
18-4.3 Ord. #7618, AIV, S3; Ord. #12-05
18-5
18-5.1 Ord. #7618, AV, S1
18-5.2 Ord. #7618, AV, S2
18-5.3 Ord. #7618, AV, S3
18-5.4 Ord. #7618, AV, S4
18-5.5 Ord. #7618, AV, S5
18-5.6 Ord. #7618, AV, S6
18-5.7 Ord. #7618, AV, S7
19-1 Ord. #8102, SI
19-2 Ord. #8102, SII; Ord. #9303, SI
19-3 Ord. #8102, SIII; Ord. #9303, SI
19-4 Ord. #8102, SIV
19-5 Ord. #8102, SV
19-6 Ord. #8102, SVI
19-7 Ord. #8102, SVII
19-8 Ord. #8102, SVIII
19-9 Ord. #8102, SIX
19-10 Ord. #8102, SX
19-11 Ord. #8102, SXI
19-12 Ord. #8102, SXII
19-13 Ord. #8102, SXIII
19-14 Ord. #8102, SXIV; Ord. #8517, SS I, II;
Ord. #2006-03; Ord. #2007-04
19-15 Ord. #8102, SXV; Ord. #9303, SI
19-16 See text
19-17 See text
19-18 See text
19-19 See text
19-20 See text
19-21 See text
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:508
19-22 See text
20-1 Ord. #8721, SI
20-2 Ord. #8721, S2; Ord. #8815, SI; Ord.
#9403, SI
20-3 Ord. #8721, S3
20-4 Ord. #8721, S4; Ord. #8815, SI; Ord.
#9403, SII; Ord. #9412, SI
20-5 Ord. #8721, S5
20-6 Ord. #8721, S6; Ord. #9022, SI
20-7 Ord. #8721, S7
20-7.1 Ord. #8721, S7
20-7.2 Ord. #8721, S7
20-7.3 Ord. #8721, S7
20-7.4 Ord. #8721, S7
20-7.5 Ord. #8721, S7
20-7.6 Ord. #8721, S7
20-8 Ord. #8721, S8
20-9 Ord. #8721, S9
20-10 Ord. #8721, S10
20-11 Ord. #8721, S11
20-12 Ord. #8721, S12
20-13 Ord. #8721, S13
20-14 Ord. #8721, S14
20-14.1 Ord. #8721, S14
20-14.2 Ord. #8721, S14
20-15 Ord. #8721, S15
20-16 Ord. #8721, S16
20-17 Ord. #8721, S17
20-18 See text
20-19 Ord. #9413, SI
20-20
20-20.1 Ord. #2005-16
20-20.2 Ord. #2005-16
20-20.3 Ord. #2005-16
20-20.4 Ord. #2005-16
20-20.5 Ord. #2005-16
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:509
20-21 Ord. #12-12
21-1 Ord. #9011
21-2 Ord. #9011
21-3 Ord. #9011
21-4 Ord. #9011
22-1 Ord. #9111, SI
22-2 Ord. #9111, S2
22-3 Ord. #9111, S3
22-4 Ord. #9111, S4
22-5 Ord. #9111, S5
22-6 Ord. #9111, S6
22-7 Ord. #9111, S7
22-8 Ord. #9111, S8
22-9 Ord. #9111, S9
22-10 Ord. #9111, S10
22-10.1 Ord. #9111, S10
22-10.2 Ord. #9111, S10
22-10.3 Ord. #9111, S10
22-10.4 Ord. #9111, S10
22-11 Ord. #9111, S11
22-12 Ord. #9111, S12
22-13 Ord. #9111, S13
22-14 Ord. #9111, S14
22-15 Ord. #9111, S15
22-16 Ord. #9111, S16
22-17 Ord. #9111, S17
22-18 Ord. #9111, S18
22-19 Ord. #9111, S19
22-20 Ord. #9111, S20
22-21 Ord. #9111, S21
22-22 Ord. #9111, S22x
22-23 Ord. #9111, S23
22-24 Ord. #9111, S24
22-25 Ord. #9111, S25
22-26 Ord. #9111, S26
§ TSS-1 ENGLEWOOD § TSS-1
AO:510
22-27 Ord. #9111, S27
23-1 Ord. #9112, S1
23-2 Ord. #9112, S2
23-3 Ord. #9112, S3
23-4 Ord. #9112, S4
23-5 Ord. #9112, S5
23-6 Ord. #9112, S6
23-7 Ord. #9112, S7
23-8 Ord. #9112, S8
23-9 Ord. #9112, S9
23-10 Ord. #9112, S10
23-11 Ord. #9112, S11
23-12 Ord. #9112, S12
23-13 Ord. #9112, S13
24-1
24-1.1 Ord. #2002-09, S1
24-1.2 Ord. #2002-09, S2
24-1.3 Ord. #2002-09, S3
24-1.4 Ord. #2002-09, S4
24-1.5 Ord. #2002-09, S5
Chapters 25 — 29 Reserved
Chapter 30 Sources may be found within the text
Board of Health
Chapter BH1
GENERAL
[Editor's Note: The general power to adopt health ordinances is
contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-31. The penalties that may be provided for
a violation of health provisions are contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1, et
seq. In addition to the health regulations contained in this Code, the
State Sanitary Code promulgated by the State Public Health Council
is by reason of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9 enforceable in every municipality in
this State.]
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-1
AO:511
§ BH1-1. TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as the Revised General
Ordinances of the Board of Health, 1988, of the Borough of Englewood Cliffs
and is herein referred to as the Code.33
§ BH1-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 102]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Code:
BOARD — Shall mean the Board of health of the Borough of Englewood
Cliffs.
BOARDING HOME FOR CHILDREN — Shall mean any house or
establishment where children are boarded or cared for, whether for one day
or part thereof or a longer period, by or under supervision of persons not
close relatives of the children for compensation or as a business.
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean private housing or dwelling unit where
the owner, tenant or occupant is engaged in keeping four or more boarders,
not related to him by blood or marriage, and in serving food to some or all
of the lodgers, for a part of a day or longer period, under expressed contract
or rate of payment.
CARRIER — Shall mean any person who harbors an infectious agent of
disease, but who may or may not have symptoms of the disease.
CATTLE — Shall include the following animals and their respective young:
cows, horses, mules, asses, sheep, goats, reindeer, swine and other hoofed
animals.
CELLAR — Shall mean the lowest story of any building, dwelling or
tenement house, of which one-third or more of the height from the floor to
the ceiling is below ground level.
CLEANING — Shall mean the thorough removal of contaminating materials.
CODE — Shall mean this Code as herein designated, unless some other code
is expressly indicated.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES — Shall mean any infections, contagious or
communicable disease, so declared or defined by law or by this Code or
which has been or may be hereafter declared as "communicable disease" by
the Board or by the State Department of Health.
CONTACT: SUSPECT — Shall mean any person who has been sufficiently
near or exposed to any infected person to make probable the transmission
of an infectious or causative agent to such person.
CONTAINER — Shall be synonymous with "package" as herein defined.
DENSE SMOKE — Shall mean smoke which is so heavy and objects through
it at the point of emission into the external air or the equivalent of No. 3
33.Editor's Note: This Code contains ordinances adopted through October 3, 1988.
§ BH1-1 ENGLEWOOD § BH1-2
AO:512
grade of the Ringelmann Smoke Scale or thick as to prevent the seeing of
Greater (No. 4) the standard device used by the United States Bureau of
Mines, or comparable equipment (Smoke Scope).
DISINFECTION — Shall mean the application of any disinfectant materials
to infected materials in sufficient concentration and for a sufficient length
of time to destroy pathogenic organisms.
DWELLING — Shall mean any building or portion thereof, which is
occupied, or is intended to be occupied, as a residence or sleeping place of
one or more individuals, families or households.
FISH — Shall include every part of any marine or water dwelling animal.
FOOD — Shall include any article used for food or beverage for man or
other animals, and every ingredient therein, including (without limitation)
all confectionery, condiments, flavorings, and other components of any such
article.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall include any restaurant, bakery,
confectionery, cannery, packing house, slaughter house, dairy, creamery,
cheese factory, hotel, grocery, meat market, fish market, delicatessen, or
other place or vehicle used in the production, preparation, transportation or
handling of food intended for sale or distribution.
GARBAGE — Shall mean the accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or
both, liquid or otherwise, that tends to decay.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the health officer appointed or designated
by the President or the Board to enforce this Code or supervise work
on behalf of the Board, and duly licensed as such by the State Health
Department.
HOTEL — Shall mean a private housing or dwelling unit open to the public,
where the owner, tenant or occupant is engaged in keeping four or more
guests for a part of a day or longer period under expressed contract or
agreed rate of payment.
ISOLATION — Shall mean separation of a person affected, or suspected of
being affected, with a communicable disease, or a carrier of the infectious
or causative agent of a communicable disease, from other persons, in such
a manner as will prevent the direct or indirect conveyance of the infectious
or causative agent to other persons.
KENNELS — Shall include any building, yard, enclosure, premises or lot
of ground used as a commercial establishment for the keeping, raising,
breeding or boarding of dogs or other animals.
LABEL — Shall mean a display of written, printed or graphic matter upon or
affixed to the immediate container, not including the liners, of any article.
LABELLING — Shall mean all labels and other written, printed or graphic
matter: (a) upon an article or any of its containers or wrappers or (b)
accompanying such article.
§ BH1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-2
AO:513
LODGING HOUSE — Shall mean a private dwelling unit where the owner,
tenant or occupant is engaged in keeping four or more lodgers, not related
to him by blood or marriage, for a part of a day or longer period, under
expressed contract or agreed rate of payment.
MARKET — Shall include every store, cellar, stand, or place at or in which
the business of buying, selling or keeping for sale any meat, dairy products,
poultry, fish, vegetables or fruit, for human food, is conducted or
maintained.
MEAT — Shall mean and include every part of any animal, whether mixed
or not with any other substance.
MEMBER — Shall mean one of the persons who shall constitute the Board
of Health.
NUISANCE — Shall mean any condition which is dangerous to human life
or health or that which renders air, water, soil or any type of food hazardous
or injurious to human life or health, and as otherwise herein defined.
NURSE — Shall mean a person licensed as such under the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
NURSING OR MATERNITY HOME — Shall mean any home, house, or other
place conducted or maintained by any person advertised or held out by such
person as a hospital, sanitarium, nursing, maternity or obstetrical home, old
age home, or place where persons are attended or intend to be attended to
professionally or otherwise during any pregnancy, labor, lying-in or illness
requiring supervision, or observation period.
PACKAGE — Shall include any wrapper, case, basket, hamper, can, bottle,
jar, tube, cask, vessel, tub, firkin, keg, jug, barrel or other receptacle,
but shall not include open containers which permit a visual and physical
inspection by a purchaser at retail, nor bags and other receptacles which
are filled in the presence of a purchaser at retail.
PERMIT OR LICENSE — Shall mean a duly authorized permit or license
of the Board, issued in accordance with this Code or the regulation of the
Board.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, association, partnership, trust, or
corporation, or any one or more of them, or combinations of any of them.
PEST — Is any vermin, insect, small animal or thing that causes trouble,
destruction, disease or unsanitary condition, odor or the like.
POULTRY — Shall include chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea, fowl,
pigeons, pheasants, and all other fowl or winged animal, kept, raised or sold
for human consumption or for production of eggs.
PROPERTY AND PREMISES — Unless restricted or limited by the context
to either real or personal property, shall include both.
PUBLIC PLACES — Shall include any public place, as well as any
restaurant, and every other establishment or place where food or beverage
is sold or offered for sale to the public for consumption on the premises,
§ BH1-2 ENGLEWOOD § BH1-2
AO:514
and any camp, tourist home or public recreation place or any other place
of business where toilet facilities or water for drinking or culinary purposes
are available for the use of the public.
QUARANTINE — Shall mean the restriction of movement of any person who
has been exposed to a communicable disease, by confining such person to a
restricted area and the exclusion of other persons from that area.
REGISTRAR — Shall mean the person duly appointed as registrar of vital
statistics by the Board.
REGULATIONS — Shall include any regulations, whether general or special,
which the Board may lawfully adopt and issue.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean and include any restaurant, coffee shop,
cafeteria, short order cafe, lunch room, lunch wagon, diner, soda fountain,
snack bar, luncheonette, tavern, bar, grill, cocktail lounge, hotel, club,
boarding house, sandwich stand, refreshment stand and every other place
or establishment in which food or beverage is sold for consumption on or
near the premises or at the time.
RUBBISH — Shall include all coal or wood ashes, all loose material and
dirty-like substance and all waste material accumulated from buildings or
the cleaning of buildings.
SANITARY INSPECTOR — Shall include every officer appointed by the
Board to aid in the enforcement of the sanitary laws of this State or to aid
in the enforcement of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the Board
of health, excepting health officer, secretary, registrar or other persons
performing principally clerical duties in the office of the Board, and duly
licensed as such by the State Health Department as a sanitarian, 1st or 2nd
grade.
SMALL ANIMALS — Shall include rabbits, squirrels, mink, cats, dogs,
guinea pigs, rodents and any other small animal kept or raised for
commercial purposes or kept and raised for sale or for the production of
meat, fur or wool or kept and raised for exhibition or other purposes or
as a source of supply for laboratories; provided, however, that the term
"small animals" shall not apply if they total in the aggregate less than five
in number.
STATE DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Health.
STREET — Shall mean and include every public street, avenue, sidewalk,
gutter, highway, park or public place in the borough.
TENANT — Shall mean any person occupying any house, building or portion
thereof, which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as a house,
residence or a business establishment.
TENEMENT HOUSE — Shall mean and include every house, building or
portion thereof, which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or
is occupied as a house, home or residence by three or more families living
independently of one another and having facilities for doing their cooking
and sleeping upon the premises.
§ BH1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-3
AO:515
§ BH1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 103]
In the construction of this Code, or any amendments hereof or any
supplements hereto, words and phrases shall be read and construed:
§ BH1-4. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3501]
In the event that any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision
of this Code shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subsection,
clause or provision so adjudged invalid, and the remainder of this Code shall
be deemed valid, effective and in full force and effect.
§ BH1-5. PENALTY.
§ BH1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3401; New; Ord.
BH9001]
Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
borough board of health shall, upon first conviction, pay a penalty of not less
than $250, or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days or both.
Upon conviction for a second offense, a penalty of $500 or imprisonment for
a period not exceeding 90 days or both.
Upon conviction for a third offense, a penalty of $1,000 or imprisonment for
a period not exceeding 90 days or both.
Complaint shall be made in the municipal court of the borough or before
another judicial officer having authority under the laws of the State of
New Jersey. The court shall have the power to impose other and additional
penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
a. With their context and, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Board, as expressed herein.
b. Unless another or different meaning is expressly indicated, words or
phrases shall be given the meaning expressed herein, or if no such
meaning is given, their generally accepted meaning, according to the
approved usage of the language, shall be applied.
c. Technical, trade or commercial words and phrases, and words and
phrases having a special or accepted meaning in the law, shall be
construed in accordance with the technical, trade, commercial or
special and accepted meaning.
d. Unless otherwise indicated by the context, the definitions herein
contained shall apply to the terms used in the other definitions.
e. Unless otherwise indicated by the context, the singular shall include the
plural and one gender shall include the other genders.
§ BH1-3 ENGLEWOOD § BH1-5.2
AO:516
§ BH1-5.2. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the Board of health exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ BH1-5.3. Violation of State Law. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3405]
In the event that any violation of this Code shall also be a violation of a State
law, for which a greater penalty or judgment is provided than that contained
in this Code, the municipal judge or trial judge before whom any complaint
is brought, based upon the violation, shall, in his discretion, have the right
to impose, in the place and in lieu of any penalty provided for herein, that
so provided for in the New Jersey State law which has been so violated.
§ BH1-5.4. Collection of Fees and Penalties. [New]
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Board of health shall be paid to the treasurer of the Borough of
Englewood Cliffs.
§ BH1-6. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ BH1-6.1. Organization. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 201]
The Board shall organize annually on the first Monday of January, or as soon
thereafter as may be feasible, at which time it shall elect, by a majority vote
of all of the members of the Board and from its members, a President and a
vice President.
§ BH1-6.2. President of the Board. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 205]
The President shall be the chief executive officer of the Board. He shall
preside at all meetings of the Board and shall appoint all committees and
have all such other powers, as may, by law or by the provisions of this
Code, be vested in him. During the intervals between regular meetings, the
President shall represent the Board in all executive and judicial matters. He
shall have the power to appoint committees from among the members of
the Board, and, with the consent of the Board, such other officers as may
be required to be appointed and provision for whose appointment is not
otherwise made in this Code.
§ BH1-6.3. Vice President of the Board. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 206]
The vice President, in the absence, disability or disqualification of the
President, shall serve in the place of the President, with all of his powers
and duties.
§ BH1-6.4. Quorum; Meetings. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 202]
§ BH1-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-6.4
AO:517
§ BH1-6.5. Officers and Employees. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 203, 204,
207-211; New]
a. A majority of the whole number of members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business but a smaller
number may meet and adjourn.
b. Its regular meetings shall be held monthly in the office of the Board of
health, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. at 8:15 p.m. on the first Monday, which is
not a legal holiday, or on such date as may be decided upon at the
organization meeting.
c. The Board shall determine and establish the rules of its own
proceedings, and shall pass, promulgate or adopt such rules,
regulations, orders, ordinances, bylaws and resolutions pertaining to
the purposes and objectives of the Board as may be necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of applicable State laws governing the
powers and duties of local boards of health.
d. The President shall have the power to call special meetings of the Board
when necessary and in case of his neglect or refusal to do so, it shall be
lawful for any three members of the Board to call any special meeting
by written or printed notice to each member served personally or left at
their places of residence at least 24 hours previous to the time
appointed for the meeting.
a. Appointment. The President shall appoint, subject to confirmation by a
majority of the Board, a secretary, health officer, a sanitary inspector, a
registrar of vital statistics and such other officers and employees as he
may deem necessary, all of whom shall hold their respective offices until
December 31 of the calendar year of their appointment and until their
respective successors are appointed and shall qualify, except that the
registrar of vital statistics shall be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:8-13.
b. Compensation. The salaries or other forms of compensation for the
aforesaid officers and employees shall be that which is fixed at the time
of their appointment by resolution passed by a majority of the Board.
c. Duties.
1. The secretary shall keep the minutes of all the proceedings of the
Board; shall conduct all the official correspondence of the Board,
maintain proper copies of the same, tabulate and complete all
reports required by any superior authority, local, State or National,
and make such other reports as may be required or directed by the
Board. He shall procure all books, stationery and other supplies as
may be required by the Board and shall keep adequate record of all
applications for permits and the action of the Board, if any, and all
such other pertinent information as may be necessary for a
complete record of each matter.
§ BH1-6.4 ENGLEWOOD § BH1-6.5
AO:518
§ BH1-6.6. Inspections. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 212]
Every member of the Board and all officers and employees thereof, shall
by virtue of their respective appointments be vested with the power and
authority to make any and all inspections or examinations that are, under
State statutes, required to be made by local boards of health, or that are
required by any code, ordinance, regulation or order of the Board. They
shall report to the Board President any violations occurring in the interim
between meetings of the Board and all persons are hereby forbidden to
interfere with or obstruct such inspections or examinations.
§ BH1-6.7. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3502]
The Board may adopt such rules and regulations as by law it is permitted,
authorized or empowered to so adopt and which shall, in its judgment, aid
in the proper understanding and general enforcement of this Code.
§ BH1-6.8. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 3503, 3504]
Chapter BH2
VITAL STATISTICS, LICENSING AND FEES
2. The registrar of vital statistics shall keep all such records of that
office, as required by the State Bureau of Vital Statistics and he
shall perform such other duties as may be required.
3. The counsel, if appointed, shall be the legal adviser of the Board,
and shall attend its meetings. He shall, when ordered to do so by
the Board, represent it in all litigation to which it may be a party
and perform all such other legal services as may be required of him
by the Board.
4. The sanitary inspector, if appointed, shall assist the health officer
and, under his direction, perform the duties of the health officer in
his absence, or under his direction, perform such other and further
duties as may be delegated by the Board.
5. The health officer, sanitary inspector and registrar of vital statistics
shall submit a report at each regular meeting, which report shall be
incorporated in the minutes of the Board. All of the above named
appointees shall perform such duties as may be directed by State
statutes, the provisions of this Code or as they may be directed by
the Board.
a. The Board shall and may amend, supplement, or implement this Code
by other provisions amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto.
b. The Board may by general resolution, suspend or declare inoperative
any provisions of this Code, which, in their judgement, are not for the
time being required for the protection of the health of the borough.
§ BH1-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-1
AO:519
§ BH2-1. MARRIAGES; BIRTHS; DEATHS.
§ BH2-1.1. Marriages. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 3001, 3002]
§ BH2-1.2. Births. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3003]
Any physician or midwife present at the birth of any child born in the
borough and in case there be no physician or midwife present, then the
parent or witness present at the birth shall report in writing, to the borough
registrar of vital statistics within five days after the date of the birth all
particulars concerning the birth called for on the blank forms furnished by
the registrar for that purpose.
§ BH2-1.3. Deaths. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3004]
When any person dies within the borough, the physician who may have
attended the person during his illness shall furnish to the undertaker or
any member of the family applying therefor a certificate, in writing, of the
death. The certificate shall be made out and shall comprise all the facts
stated in the blank forms furnished by the registrar of vital statistics for that
purpose.
§ BH2-2. CEMETERIES. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2901]
Cemeteries and burials shall be governed by relevant State statutes and the
standards established therein.
§ BH2-3. LICENSING.
§ BH2-3.1. Definition. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3101]
It is intended that the terms "license" or "permit" wherever used in this
subsection, be synonymous if, in the interpretation of any part hereof, the
synonym is required to carry out the manifest intent and purpose of this
Code.
a. In accordance with the rules of the State Department of Health, both
contracting parties to a marriage shall appear before the registrar of
vital statistics to apply for a license at least 72 hours prior to the time
the ceremony is to be performed. Information must be furnished on
blanks supplied for that purpose before the license will be issued.
b. Every person having authority to solemnize marriages, and the clerk or
keeper of the minutes of every religious society before which any
marriage shall be solemnized in the borough, shall transmit to the
registrar of vital statistics a certificate, in writing, of every marriage
within five days after the same shall have been solemnized. The
certificate to be made out on blank forms furnished by the registrar for
that purpose and shall include all facts required by the forms.
§ BH2-1 ENGLEWOOD § BH2-3.2
AO:520
§ BH2-3.2. Application. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3102]
All applications for licenses, permits or certificates, shall be made at the
office of the board during regular office hours and the fees for every license
or permit shall be paid in advance at the time of making the application.34
All applications shall be accepted only if made on approved application
forms obtainable at the office of the board or upon a letter of request if no
application form is available.
§ BH2-3.3. Granting of License. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 3103, 3105]
§ BH2-3.4. Validity; Renewal. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3104; New]
All license permits or certificates issued under any of the several sections
of this Code shall be valid from the date issued until January 15, of the
following year in which they are issued unless otherwise herein provided.
All license renewal shall take effect January 15 of each year and run for a
period of one year thereafter.
§ BH2-3.5. Display of License. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3106]
Every license, permit or certificate issued by the board, shall be displayed in
a conspicuous place in the establishment, premises or other place for which
the same is issued, and shall likewise be so displayed on every vehicle or
conveyance so licensed, for the period that the license, permit or certificate
shall be in force, unless the board shall otherwise prescribe.
§ BH2-3.6. Suspension. [Ord. 3/6/66; §§ 3201-3204]
a. The granting of any license, permit or certificate may be withheld, at
the direction of the board, pending examination, investigation or
inspection of the person who, or the premises which may be the subject
matter of the license, permit or certificate under consideration.
b. The board shall evidence the granting of any license, permit or
certificate issued, by furnishing to the licensee, permittee or certificate
holder, a suitable card, sign, placard, disc, plate or other writing which
shall convey information concerning the nature of the license, permit or
certificate, the serial number of same, name of the person to whom
same has been issued, the year in which same is so issued, the premises
or vehicle so licensed, if that be material or required, and other
information as the board may deem pertinent.
a. Every license, permit or certificate issued may, at any time during the
term for which the same is issued, be suspended by the board (or in an
emergency, by its health officer), pending a hearing, to be granted the
holder, pursuant to a notice to show cause to the board why the license,
permit or certificate should not be suspended further or revoked.
34.Editor's Note: A schedule of fees can be found in subsection BH2-4.1 of this chapter.
§ BH2-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-3.6
AO:521
§ BH2-3.7. Revocation. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 3205, 3206]
§ BH2-3.8. Hearing. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 3207 — 3209]
b. No license, permit or certificate shall be suspended unless the health
officer shall file, with the board, a complaint or charges evidencing one
or more violations of the section under which the license, permit or
certificate was originally issued.
c. Every suspension ordered under this subsection shall automatically
terminate two weeks from the date thereof, unless the continuance of
the suspension shall be ordered by the board, and then the suspension
shall continue only during the period of any continuance so ordered by
the board.
d. During the period of any suspension, or ordered continuance thereof,
every license, permit or certificate suspended shall be ineffective and
the holder shall, during the entire period of the suspension, cease the
operation of any business or discontinue every activity or use permitted
under the license, permit or certificate suspended.
a. Any license, permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
Code, may be revoked at any time by the board, for just cause, or if
licensee, permittee or certificate holder, or any of the employees,
agents or servants of the licensee, permittee or certificate holder shall
violate:
1. Any of the provisions of this Code or any amendments hereof or
supplements hereto.
2. The Sanitary Code of the State Department of Health specifically
applicable to the subject matter for or upon which the license,
permit or certificate was issued.
b. Before any license, permit or certificate may be revoked, the holder
shall be given a hearing and an opportunity to be heard on the
complaint made or violation charged against him.
a. The time and place for a hearing shall be fixed at the discretion of the
board; provided, however, that an unreasonable time shall not be
permitted to elapse between the date of any suspension of license and
the date fixed for the hearing.
b. Notice of the time and place of any hearing held under this section shall
be given by the board to the holder of the license, permit or certificate
so involved, in writing, and served either personally, or sent to him by
registered mail, addressed to him at the address stated in the license,
permit or certificate.
c. A licensee, permittee or certificate holder who fails to appear at the
time and place fixed for the hearing, shall not be entitled to any further
§ BH2-3.6 ENGLEWOOD § BH2-3.8
AO:522
§ BH2-4. FEES.
§ BH2-4.1. Fees Established. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 3301, 3302; Ord. 2/5/
73, § 2; Ord. 8803-BH, § 3301, 10/3/88; Ord. BH-8901, § 1; Ord.
BH-8904; Ord. BH-9101; Ord. BH-9102; Ord. No. BH-9501; Ord. No.
BH2016-01]
hearing and in that event, his license, permit or certificate may be
revoked.
a. The annual fee for the several licenses, permits or certificates referred
to in this Code, are hereby fixed as follows:
1. Barber Shops, Beauty Salons, Nail Salons and Tanning Salons -
health certificate - $50 for each health certificate issued.
2. Birth/Death/Marriage - Certified Copies - $10 for each certified
copy issued.
3. Fat, Bones and Refuse - license to engage in business to remove -
$100 for each vehicle licensed.
4. Fitness Club, Personal Training Center - license to engage in such
business - $25 per facility with five fitness trainers or less. $50 per
facility with six to 10 fitness trainers. $75 per facility with over 10
fitness trainers.
5. Food Handlers — all employer/employees who handle food are
required to have a health certificate - $10 for each health
certificate issued.
6. Food Vendors, Mobile Food Trucks - license to engage in such
business - $100 for each vehicle licensed.
7. Food or Beverage Processing - $100 for each premises or
establishment licensed and $100 for each vehicle so used.
8. Frozen Foods Processing, Sale or Distribution - license required to
engage in such business - $100 for each license issued.
9. Ice, Manufacture, Sale or Delivery - license required to engage in
such business - $30 for each plant, depot, establishment, place,
wagon, truck, vehicle or conveyance licensed.
10. Marriage - license - $28 for each so couple licensed. (Regulated by
N.J.S.A. 37:1-12; 37:1-12.1)
11. Massage Operator or Masseur - license required to engage in such
business - $75 for each person so licensed. (As per BH18-1 must
present diploma and health certificate)
§ BH2-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-4.1
AO:523
12. Milk, Cream and Dairy Products - sale and distribution - license
required to engage in such business $50 for each premises or place
licensed and $75 for each vehicle or conveyance licensed.
13. Nursery School or Child Care Center - license to operate same -
$200 for each premises licensed.
14. Permanent Cosmetics, Body Art, Tattoos, Body Piercing - $500 for
each business licensed. [Must show certification pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.]
15. Portable Toilets for Building Sites - required permit of $50 for a sixmonth
period.
16. Restaurant, Cafeterias, Delicatessen - license required to engage in
such business per establishment if under 50 seating places $150 - if
over 50 seating places $300 - if over 100 seating places $500.
(a) Temporary 1-7 Day(s) - license required to engage in such
business per establishment or vendor for a period of one day to
seven days is $50.
(b) Permanent catering - $150 to engage in each such business.
17. Small Animals, Keeping of:
(a) Dogs (Neutered/Spayed) - $10 for each dog.
(b) Dogs (NOT Neutered/Spayed) - $15 for each dog.
(1) Late Fees - $25 for late assessment from March 1st to April
30th.- $50 for late assessment from May 1st to December
31st.
(c) Cats (Fixed) - $10 for each cat.
(d) Cats (NOT Fixed) - $15 for each cat.
(1) Late Fees - $25 for late assessment from March 1st to April
30th.- $50 for late assessment from May 1st to December
31st.
(e) Commercial Purposes (Pet Store) - $150 for each
establishment licensed.
(As per BH1-2 of the Board of Health codes)
18. Swimming Pool - license to operate as a business or for profit - $400
for each business in operation.
Whirlpool - license to operate as a business or for profit - $400 for
each business in operation.
19. Vending - license required to engage in business - $25 per each
machine.
§ BH2-4.1 ENGLEWOOD § BH2-4.1
AO:524
b. Whenever, in this Code, a license or permit is required and no specific
fee is established for such license or permit, the fee shall be $2 payable
on issuance of the license or permit, which shall be for the balance of
the calendar year in which the same is issued.
c. Late Fee for Licenses: All license permit or certificate fees established
herein shall expire on January 15 of the year next following issue. All
license permit or certificate fees required under any of the several
sections of this Code shall be paid on or before January 15 of the year of
renewal. Should such fees not be paid on or before January 15 of the
renewal year, there shall be a late fee imposed of 25% of the yearly
license fee.
Should such fees not be paid on or before January 31st of the renewal
year, complaint shall be made in the municipal court of the borough or
before another judicial officer having authority under the laws of the
State of New Jersey. The court shall have the power to impose those
penalties established in BH1-5, Penalty.
d. Fees for Retail Food Service Establishments and Restaurants Receiving
Conditional Ratings. Retail food service establishments and restaurants
which require six or more inspections per year as a result of conditional
and/or unsatisfactory ratings as provided under the State Sanitary Code
or Title 24, N.J.S.A. shall within 30 days of receipt of notice of said
inspection pay a reinspection fee of 25% of the yearly license fee
applicable for the second conditional and/or unsatisfactory reinspection
and every subsequent reinspection required thereafter.
Should such reinspection fee not be paid within 30 days of receipt of
written notice complaint shall be made in the municipal court of the
borough or before another judicial officer having authority under the
laws of the State of New Jersey. The court shall have the power to
impose those penalties established in BH1-5, Penalty in addition to all
other revocation and suspension rights established by this Code.
e. Fees for Swimming Pools Receiving Conditional Ratings: Swimming
pools, public or private, which require four or more inspections per
year as a result of conditional and/or unsatisfactory ratings as provided
under the State Sanitary Code shall within 30 days of receipt of notice
of said inspection pay a reinspection fee of 25% of the yearly license fee
applicable for the second conditional and/or unsatisfactory reinspection
and every subsequent reinspection required thereafter.
Should such reinspection fee not be paid within 30 days of receipt of
written notice, complaint shall be made in the municipal court of the
borough or before another judicial officer having authority under the
law of the State of New Jersey. The court shall have the power to impose
those penalties established in BH1-5, Penalty in addition to all other
revocation and suspension rights established by this Code.
§ BH2-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-4.2
AO:525
§ BH2-4.2. Marriage, Death and Birth Certificates. [Ord. 3/6/66,
§ 3305; Ord. 10/15/79, § 3305; Ord. 8804-BH, § 3305, 10/3/88; Ord.
No. BH2016-01]
The fee for certified copies of marriage, death and birth certificates shall be
as stated in subsection 2-4.1.
§ BH2-4.3. Exemptions. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3303]
No fee for any permit, license or certificate issued shall be required of any
person declared by State law to be exempt from the payment of any fee.
§ BH2-4.4. Waiver. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 3304]
For good reason shown, the board may waive or reduce the license fee in
any particular class of cases where the imposition would work hardship or
injustice.
Chapter BH3
REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE SALE AND HANDLING
OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES
§ BH3-1. RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT CODE OF NEW JERSEY.
§ BH3-1.1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 601 —
603]
§ BH3-1.2. License. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 605, 606]
a. A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A
copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text herein.
b. The code established and adopted by this subsection is commonly
known as the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)."
c. Three copies of the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965)" have been placed on file in the office of the borough clerk and
the secretary of the local board of health upon the introduction of this
subsection and will remain on file there until final action is taken on this
subsection for the use and examination of the public.
a. Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail food
establishment as defined in and governed by the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) without first having procured
a license from the local board of health to do so or without complying
with any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance
of the same as contained in the Retail Food Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1965).
§ BH2-4.2 ENGLEWOOD § BH3-1.2
AO:526
§ BH3-1.3. Licensing Regulations For Food Establishments
Excluding Restaurants. [Ord. 10/15/79, §§ 1 — 5; Ord. No.
BH2016-01]
b. Revocation; Suspension. Any license issued under the terms and
provisions of this section may be suspended or revoked by the board of
health for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this
subsection or the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade, calling, profession
or occupation of the person to whom the license was issued, is
conducted in a disorderly or improper manner, or in violation of any law
of the United States, the State of New Jersey, or any ordinance of this
municipality, or that the person conducting the retail food
establishment is of an unfit character to conduct the same, or that the
purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to the
detriment of the public, or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for
which the license was issued.
c. Hearing. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this
subsection shall not be revoked, cancelled or suspended until a hearing
has been had by the board of health. Written notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three
days prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall also contain a
brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking,
cancelling or suspending the license. Notice may be given either by
personal delivery to the person to be notified or be deposited in the
United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to the person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the board of health
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the board of health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the board
concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it
may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
d. Approval Required. If any license shall have been revoked, neither the
holder nor any persons acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be
entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the
borough unless the application for such license shall be approved by the
board of health.
a. Definition.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS — For the purpose of this subsection, shall
exclude any restaurant, hotel, cafeteria or spa and shall include but not
be limited to any bakery, confectionery, dairy, grocery, meat market, fish
market, delicatessen or other place used in the product preparation or
handling of food intended for sale or distribution.
RESTAURANTS — Shall be defined as any eating place where food or
beverage is sold for on premises consumption.
§ BH3-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH3-1.3
AO:527
§ BH3-1.4. Restaurants. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 1101 — 1104, 1107]
§ BH3-2. FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES.
§ BH3-2.1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2701 —
2703; Ord. 10/15/79, §§ 1 — 3]
b. License Required. No person shall operate in the borough, any food
establishment without having first obtained from the board of health a
license to do so covering the premises in which the food establishment
is operated or intends to be so operated.
c. Fee. The license fee for each food establishment shall be as stated in
subsection BH2-4.1. Each license shall expire December 31 of the year
for which it is issued. The license fee shall be paid at the time the
application is made for a license.
d. Revocation. Any license may be revoked if the license holder is found to
have created, permitted or maintained on the premises a condition
which endangers the health or public safety. Revocation shall be upon
notice to the license holder and after hearing by the board of health.
e. Posting of License. Every license issued shall be posted conspicuously
in that part of each food establishment as is frequented by the public.
a. Reference to Code. The provisions of the Retail Food Establishment
Code of New Jersey — 1965, as adopted by reference in subsection
BH3-1.1 is hereby referred to, with respect to restaurants.
b. License Required. No person shall operate, in the borough, any
restaurant without having first obtained from the board a license to do
so, covering the premises in which every restaurant is operated or
intended to be operated.
c. Posting of License. Every license issued shall be posted conspicuously
in that part of the restaurant as is frequented by the public.
d. Access. The person operating the restaurant shall, upon request of the
health officer, sanitary inspector, or officer of the board, permit access
to all parts of the establishment.
e. Nonapplicability. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a
restaurant operated for a temporary period, not exceeding seven days,
in connection with a public exhibition, charitable or club function, or
other group or organization affair; provided, however, that the operator
of the public exhibition, charitable or club function, or other group or
organization affair shall first have secured, from the board, written
permission to operate the same without a license.
a. A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and
beverage vending machines and licenses thereof; prohibiting the sale
or possession with intent to sell through vending machines of
§ BH3-1.3 ENGLEWOOD § BH3-2.1
AO:528
§ BH3-2.2. License. [Ord. 10/15/79, §§ 4 — 6; Ord. No. BH2016-01]
adulterated or misbranded foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of
vending machines and operations connected therewith; and providing
for the enforcement of this section and the fixing of penalties for
violations is established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy
of the code is annexed thereto and made a part thereof without the
inclusion of the text herein.
b. The code established and adopted by this subsection is described and
commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending Machines Code of
New Jersey (1961)."
c. Three copies of the "Food and Beverage Vending Machines Code of New
Jersey (1961)" have been placed on file in the office of the secretary of
the board of health upon the introduction of this subsection and will
remain on file there until final action is taken on this subsection for the
uses and examination of the public.
a. Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or
agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or for
any body corporate, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise to:
1. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered
for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, or token, or by other
means dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk
or package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices
between each vending operation, without first having applied to
and procured a license from the board of health to do so or without
complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and
Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961).
2. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in the
borough, one or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin or token or by other means
dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied for each
machine or device from the board of health or without complying
with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending
Machine Code of New Jersey (1961).
3. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in the
borough, any vending machine which offers for sale to patrons a
combination of food and cigarettes or a combination of beverages
and cigarettes.
b. Fee.
1. The license fee for vending machines or devices dispensing one
variety of loose candies, gum or nuts shall be as stated in
subsection BH2-4.1 per machine.
§ BH3-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH3-2.2
AO:529
§ BH3-2.3. Applicability. [Ord. 10/15/79, § 7; Ord. BH9201]
No provision of this section shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the State or Federal
Government.
§ BH3-3. CANDY, GUM AND SODA, ETC.
§ BH3-3.1. License. [Ord. 10/15/79, §§ 1 — 4]
§ BH3-4. FROZEN FOODS.
2. The license fee for each automatic vending machine dispensing
prepackaged soda, candies, chips and nuts shall be as stated in
subsection BH2-4.1 per machine.
3. The license fee for all other automatic coin vending machines or
devices shall be as stated in subsection BH2-4.1 per machine.
4. The license fee shall be paid at the time the application is made for
a license.
c. Revocation. Each license shall expire on December 31 of the year for
which it is issued.
d. Suspension; Revocation; Reinstatement. Licenses issued under
authority of this section may be suspended, revoked, or reinstated by
the board of health pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Beverage
Vending Code of New Jersey (1961).
a. Required. No person shall operate in the borough, any store or business
which, in addition to its usual business, sells sweets, prepackaged
cakes, candies, gum, soda, chips and nuts, etc. without having first
obtained, from the board of health, a license to do so covering the
premises in which the items are sold to the public.
b. Fee; Expiration. The license fee for each store or business selling any of
the items such as sweets, pre-packaged cakes, candies, gum, soda,
chips and nuts, etc. shall be $50 per year. Each license shall expire
December 31 of the year for which it is issued. The license fee shall be
paid at the time the application is made for a license, but no later than
January 31 of each year.
c. Revocation. Any license may be revoked if the license holder is found to
have created, permitted or maintained on the premises a condition
which endangers the health or public safety. Revocation shall be upon
notice to the license holder and after hearing by the board of health.
d. Posting of License. Every license issued shall be posted conspicuously
in that part of each store or business as is frequented by the public.
§ BH3-2.2 ENGLEWOOD § BH3-4.1
AO:530
§ BH3-4.1. License Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 702]
Any person desiring to sell, distribute or store frozen foods in the borough
shall first obtain a license from the board.
§ BH3-4.2. Labeling. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 701]
All labeling shall conform to the provisions of N.J.S.A. Title 24, Chapter 5,
Article 3 and as the same may hereafter be amended or supplemented.
§ BH3-5. MILK, CREAM AND OTHER DAIRY PRODUCTS.
§ BH3-5.1. Adoption of State Statute by Reference. [Ord. 3/6/66,
§ 801]
Reference is made to Title 24, Chapter 10, entitled, "Dairy Products," in
N.J.S.A. which chapter and article are incorporated by reference and shall
be in force in the borough.
§ BH3-5.2. Licensing. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 802-806]
a. Required. No person shall distribute, sell, offer for sale, or have in his/
her possession, with intent to distribute, sell or offer for sale, within the
borough, any milk, cream, ice cream, ice cream mix, dry mix, or frozen
custard unless that person shall have first obtained a license from the
board, covering each premises or place or vehicle from which the same
is distributed, sold or offered for sale, and a license covering each
vehicle from which the same is sold, or offered for sale, or intended to
be sold, or offered for sale.
b. Separate License for Place of Business. A separate license is required
and must be obtained for each place of business used for any of the
purposes set forth in this section and for each vehicle used for any of
the purposes.
c. Refuse to Issue; Suspension; Revocation.
1. The board may refuse, at any time, to issue a license, or revoke any
license issued to any person who: is operating in violation of the
relevant New Jersey statute, or the regulations or ordinances
adopted, pursuant thereto, provided that the board finds, in
addition, that the suspension of the license in question is necessary
to the protection of the public health. In such case, the board shall,
upon request of the person whose license has been suspended, (or
whose license has been refused) shall proceed to a hearing to
ascertain the facts.
2. The board may terminate the suspension or revocation of a license
upon proof satisfactory to the board, that the violation, under
which the license was suspended, refused, or revoked, has been
corrected.
§ BH3-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH3-5.2
AO:531
§ BH3-6. FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE.
§ BH3-6.1. Food Handler's Certificate Required. [Ord. BH-8302,
§§ 3107, 3110; Ord. BH-9602]
Upon 90 days from the inspection or opening of any food establishment
subject to this section, no retail food establishment shall operate without
the supervisor(s) employed in that establishment possessing a valid food
handler's certificate. This section shall not apply to those retail food
establishments selling only non-potentially hazardous foods which are prepackaged,
pre-wrapped or in an approved bulk serving container.
§ BH3-6.2. Food Handler's Certification Expiration. [Ord. BH-9602]
The food handler's certificate shall expire five years after the date of the
successful completion of an approved food handler's course, unless required
to be updated or repeated sooner by the health officer or his/her designee,
by reason of improper food handling practices being employed.
§ BH3-6.3. Requirements. [Ord. BH-8203, § 3108; Ord. BH-9602]
No establishment shall operate for more than 90 days without the
supervisor(s) employed in that establishment completing a course of
general instruction in bacteria characteristics and growth, spread of food
borne diseases, methods of preventing food poisoning, proper food handling
techniques, equipment and establishment sanitation, dishwashing and
sanitization and insect and rodent control.
§ BH3-6.4. Nontransferability. [Ord. BH-8203, § 3109]
No person to whom a food handler's certification is issued or granted shall
give loan, transfer or permit the same to be used by another person for any
purpose whatsoever.
§ BH3-6.5. Exception to Requirements. [Ord. BH-8203, § 3111]
A food handler's certificate may be granted to a supervisor(s) taking a
comparable course of instruction in another municipality approved by the
Englewood Cliffs Board of Health.
§ BH3-7. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. BH-9602]
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Shall mean any food which consists
in whole or in part of milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish,
edible crustacea, raw seed sprouts, heat treated vegetables and vegetable
products, or other ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, in a form
d. Display of License. Every license, tag or tags, and every other evidence
issued by the board as proof of the granting of a license together with
the number of the license, shall be prominently displayed in the
premises, licensed, and on each vehicle, licensed.
§ BH3-5.2 ENGLEWOOD § BH3-7
AO:532
capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or
toxigenic microorganisms, or the slower growth of C. Botulinum. The term
does not include foods which have a pH level of 4.6 or below or a water
activity (aw) value of 0.85 or less.
Chapter BH4
ICE
§ BH4-1. LICENSE.
§ BH4-1.1. Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1001]
No person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale or deliver any ice in the
borough without first having obtained a license from the board to do so and
covering each premises or place from or on which ice is to be sold, offered
for sale, delivered or manufactured.
§ BH4-1.2. Application. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1002]
No license shall be issued unless there is an application, in writing, signed
by the applicant, setting forth the source of his ice supply and the source of
the water from which the ice is made or intended to be made.
§ BH4-1.3. Separate License Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1003]
A separate application shall be made for and a separate license shall be
required for each wagon, truck, vehicle, ice depot or plant, place or
premises used or to be used in the sale, delivery or manufacture of ice.
§ BH4-2. CHANGE OF SOURCE. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1004]
No ice shall be sold, delivered or manufactured if the source of supply of
the ice or the source of the water used in the manufacture thereof, shall be
changed or shall be different from that set forth in the application for the
license. However, the board, upon notice of such change, may authorize the
manufacture, sale and delivery of the ice under the then existing license.
§ BH4-3. SAMPLES TO BE MADE AVAILABLE. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1006]
Every licensee shall, at all times, and upon request of any authorized
representative of the board, make available samples of the ice
manufactured, sold or delivered, and in the case of the manufacture of ice,
the water from which the same is manufactured.
§ BH4-4. IMPURE OR POLLUTED WATER. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1005]
No person shall manufacture, sell or deliver ice which has been cut from
or made from, any impure or polluted water, or which has been obtained
§ BH3-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH4-4
AO:533
or made from a source not approved by the board or which has otherwise
become unfit for use.
§ BH4-5. TRANSPORTATION OF ICE.
§ BH4-5.1. Vehicles to be Kept Clean. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1007]
Wagons, trucks or vehicles used for the transportation of ice shall be kept
clean and free from contaminating material.
Chapter BH5
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE
§ BH5-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 305]
As used in this chapter:
SITUATION DANGEROUS TO HEALTH AND LIMB — Shall mean any
nuisance which may, in the usual course of events, cause injury, disease, or
the like, to any individual in and about the location.
§ BH5-2. ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 301
— 303]
§ BH5-3. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
a. A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions, or
acts and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or
sounds, requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease
or rental of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public
buildings, conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of
premises by an enforcing official, providing for the removal or
abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by
the board of health in removing or abating such nuisances and
prescribing penalties for violations is established pursuant to Chapter
188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a
part hereof without the inclusion of the text herein.
b. The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)".
c. Three copies of the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)" have been placed on file in the office of the borough clerk and
the secretary of the local board of health upon the introduction of this
section and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the
public.
§ BH4-4 ENGLEWOOD § BH5-3.1
AO:534
§ BH5-3.1. Authority. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 304]
Whenever there is created within the confines of the borough a situation
dangerous to health or limb, the board of health, in addition to all other
rights it may have under this or any other law, ordinance or statute of this
State code shall have the right to abate the situation in accordance with the
terms of this chapter.
§ BH5-3.2. Responsibility of Property Owner. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 306]
Any person owning the property upon which this dangerous or unhealthy
condition exists and any person who creates such a situation who shall
permit the same to continue to exist after two weeks' notice to abate the
same, shall be deemed in violation of the terms of this code.
§ BH5-3.3. Action by Borough. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 307]
After two weeks' written notice by the board of health to abate any such
unhealthy or insanitary situation as above indicated, and upon the failure
of the persons so notified to abate the same, the board of health and/or the
borough shall have the right to enter upon the property in question and to
abate the unhealthy or insanitary condition at the expense of the person
charged with the responsibility as above indicated.
§ BH5-3.4. Costs Assessed. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 308, 309]
§ BH5-4. APPEALS.
a. In the event that the person so notified is the owner of the property in
question, and in the event that the owner fails, within the two week
allowable period, to abate the nuisance after proper notice, then any
expense incurred by the borough or the board of health in abating the
same shall be imposed as a lien upon the property in question. In such
event, the president of the board of health shall, upon the expenditure
of any funds, notify the borough tax collector of the assessment
together with a copy of the invoices or vouchers indicating the amount
spent, so that the same may be placed on record against the property.
b. The procedure for the imposition of liens shall be as follows:
1. The tax collector, upon being notified of the expenditure of funds by
the president of the board of health, shall bill the person to be
charged.
2. In the event the bill is not paid within 15 days after presentation,
the tax collector shall, by appropriate book entry, establish the
charge as a lien against the property; unless within that time, the
person against whom the lien is sought to be charged protests the
amount of the bill or the imposition of the lien and seeks a hearing
as hereinafter set forth.
§ BH5-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH5-4.1
AO:535
§ BH5-4.1. Notice. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 310, 311]
§ BH5-4.2. Hearing. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 312]
Upon being served with the notice of objection, the board of health shall
call a special meeting to be held not less than 10 days nor more than 30
days from the date of the service of the notice of objection, and shall advise
the aggrieved party or his attorney of the time and place of the hearing.
At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall be entitled to be represented by
counsel, call witnesses on his own behalf, and to demand the appearance
and testimony of the borough sanitary inspector or the members of the
board of health who made the determination that the condition abated was
in fact a nuisance, dangerous to life, limb or health of the public.
§ BH5-4.3. Decision. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 313]
After the hearing in question, the board of health shall, within 10 days,
render an opinion in writing setting forth specifically its reasons for its
determination and advising the aggrieved party of the disposition of the
appeal.
§ BH5-4.4. Appeal to Mayor and Council. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 314]
The aggrieved party, if the board of health decides contrary to his position,
shall have the right, within 10 days after receipt by him of the decision of
the board of health, to appeal to the mayor and council. On such appeal
the aggrieved party may be heard and his counsel may be heard and a
representative of the board may be heard, and written briefs or memoranda
may be filed, but no new testimony shall be taken.
Chapter BH6
NOISE
§ BH6-1. DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND POLICY: SCOPE. [Ord.
#8103, 12-7-81]
Excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety and
the quality of life; and
a. Any person feeling aggrieved by the action of the board of health, as
indicated above, shall have the right to a hearing in connection with his
grievance, provided however, that the notice of objection be served
upon the board of health (either its secretary or president) or upon the
borough clerk prior to 15 days having elapsed from the date of notice to
the property owner in question from the tax collector.
b. The notice of objection to be served upon the board of health or
borough clerk shall contain the basis of the objection and, if the
aggrieved party is to be represented by counsel, the name and address
of counsel.
§ BH5-4.1 ENGLEWOOD § BH6-1
AO:536
A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
sound may be substantially abated; and
The people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from
excessive sound that may jeopardize their health or welfare or safety or
degrade the quality of life.
It is the policy of the Englewood Cliffs board of health to prevent excessive
sound which may jeopardize the health and welfare or safety of the citizens
or degrade the quality of life.
This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound originating from or
received by the area contained within the limits of the Englewood Cliffs
board of health.
§ BH6-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #8103, § 2601A, 12-7-81]
As used in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION — Shall mean any facility
or property used primarily for the dispatching, garaging, servicing,
maintaining, selling or leasing of any truck registered at a gross weight
in excess of 6,000 pounds, omnibus, tractor, trailer, semitrailer, poletrailer,
or any vehicle registered in this State engaged in interstate commerce
which is now or hereafter subject to regulation and license by the Interstate
Commerce Commission or the Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety of the Federal
Highway Administration.
COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS — Shall mean any facility or property used
for the purchase or utilization of goods, services, or land or its facilities,
including but not limited to:
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition for
or of public or private rights-of-way structures, utilities or similar property.
a. Commercial dining establishments.
b. Noncommercial vehicle operations.
c. Retail services.
d. Wholesale services.
e. Office buildings and banks.
f. Recreation and entertainment.
g. Community services.
h. Public services.
i. Other commercial services.
§ BH6-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH6-2
AO:537
CONTINUOUS AIRBORNE SOUND — Shall mean sound that is measured
by slow response setting of sound level meter.
DBA — Shall mean the measured sound level expressed in dB when using
the "A" weighted network of a sound level meter.
DECIBEL — Shall mean a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to
the logarithm of the ratio of the sound pressure of the sound, to the sound
pressure of a standard sound (0.0002 microbars): abbreviated "dB".
DEMOLITION — Shall mean any dismantling, intentional destruction or
removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or
similar property.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances
involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
EMERGENCY ENERGY RELEASE DEVICE — Shall mean emergency safety
devices expressly used to release excess energy which do not have regularly
scheduled operation. Process control devices are not to be considered
emergency devices.
EMERGENCY WORK — Shall mean any work performed for the purpose
of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage
threatened or caused by an emergency.
FREQUENCY — Shall mean the number of oscillations per second;
expressed in hertz (abbreviation Hz).
IEC — Shall mean International Electrotechnic Commission.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Shall mean either a single pressure peak or a single
burst (multiple pressure peaks) for a duration less than one second.
IMPULSIVE SOUND LEVEL — Shall mean the maximum instantaneous
sound pressure level measured by an impulse sound level meter meeting
IEC - Publication 179 or the latest revision thereof.
INDUSTRIAL OPERATION — Shall mean any facility or property used for
the following:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean as described in the Motor Vehicle Code of
the NJ Statutes Annotated Title 39.
MOTORBOAT — Shall mean a vessel which operates on water and which is
propelled by a motor, including but not limited to, boats, barges, amphibious
craft, water ski towing devices and hover craft.
Storage, warehouse or distribution, provided that the operation shall
not be construed to be an industrial operation when it is part of a
commercial motor vehicle operation as defined herein.
a.
Property used for the production and fabrication of durable and
nondurable man-made goods.
b.
c. Activities carried out on the property.
§ BH6-2 ENGLEWOOD § BH6-2
AO:538
MOTORCYCLE — Shall mean an unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle
for the use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the
ground, including, but not limited to, motor scooters, minibikes and
mopeds.
NOISE — Shall mean any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which
causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any sound which: (a) endangers or
injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or (b) annoys or disturbs
a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers or injures
personal or real property.
OCTAVE BAND SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Shall mean sound pressure
level measured in standard octave bands with sound level meter and octave
band analyzer that meet ANSI S 1.4 & S 1.11 or the latest revision thereof.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Shall mean any self-propelled airborne,
waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designated
to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car
or rocket.
PROPERTY LINE — Shall mean any imaginary line along with ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned
by one person from that owned by another person, including intra-building
divisions, between rented dwelling units.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard,
highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by
a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Shall mean any real property or structure thereon which
are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Shall mean property used for human
habitation, including but not limited to the following:
SOUND — Shall mean any oscillation in pressure, particle displacement,
particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal
forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — Shall mean the measured level of a sound, expressed in
dB re 0.0002 microbar, obtained using a sound level meter. "Sound levels"
include all factors inherent in measuring with a sound level meter including
microphone frequency response, amplifier characteristics, meter damping,
observer effects, and weighting networks.
Commercial living accommodations, commercial property used for
human habitation.
a.
b. Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation.
c. Community service property used for human habitation.
§ BH6-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH6-2
AO:539
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Shall mean the sound pressure level, in
decibels, of a sound is 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of
the pressure of the sound to the reference sound pressure. Sound pressure
level is measured with a sound level meter meeting ANSI - S 1.4 or the latest
revision thereof.
STATIONARY EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICE — Shall mean any device,
excluding those attached to motor vehicles, used to alert persons engaged
in emergency operations. These include but are not limited to fire fighters,
first aid squad members and law enforcement officers, whether paid or
volunteer.
WEEKDAY — Shall mean any day Monday through Friday which is not a
legal holiday.
WEEKEND — Shall mean any Saturday or Sunday.
§ BH6-3. PROHIBITED ACTS.
§ BH6-3.1. Noise Disturbance Prohibited. [Ord. #8103, § 2602A;
12-7-81]
No person shall unreasonably make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking and
public assembly activities conducted by permit on any public space or
public right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this subsection.
§ BH6-4. SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. #8103, § 2603A, 12-7-81;
Ord. 11-8-82, § 1; Ord. BH-9601]
The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be in violation
of this chapter:
a. Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, phonographs, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or
similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day in such a
manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential property
line (except for activities open to the public and for which a permit has
been issued by the borough).
b. Loudspeakers/Public Address Systems. Using or operating for any
purpose any loudspeaker, public address systems, or similar device,
such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
residential property line unless a permit has been issued by the
borough.
c. Animals and Birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird
which frequently or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows,
squawks or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance
across a residential property line.
§ BH6-2 ENGLEWOOD § BH6-4
AO:540
§ BH6-5. SOUND LEVELS.
§ BH6-5.1. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels. [Ord. #8103,
§ 2605A, 12-7-81]
d. Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans
or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential property line.
e. Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work after 9:00
p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. weekdays and before 9:00 a.m. and after 8:00
p.m. on weekends and legal holidays as recognized by the State, such
that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
residential property line except for emergency work of public service
utilities.
f. Vehicle or Motorboat Repairs and Testing. Repairing, rebuilding,
modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor boat in
such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
property line.
g. Powered Model Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a
residential property line.
h. Landscaping. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools, power
equipment, or machinery utilized in landscaping, landscaping
construction before 7:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and
before 9:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. on the weekends and legal holidays
as recognized by the State, when the sound therefrom creates a noise
disturbance across a residential property line, except for emergency
work of public service or utilities.
i. Enforcement. For purpose of this section and enforcement of the
provisions hereunder, (Section 6-1 et al. and any future amendments
thereto) the Board of Health hereby authorizes the Police Department
to enforce the provisions of this section and subsections. This power
shall include but not be limited to issuance of citations and cease and
desist orders. Nothing in this section shall limit or prohibit the Board of
Health from enforcing or prosecuting the provisions of this section or
Section 6-1 et seq.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit sound from any industrial,
commercial operation or residential property which when measured at
any residential property line is in excess of any of the following:
1. From 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.:
§ BH6-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH6-5.1
AO:541
(a) Continuous airborne sound which has sound level in excess of
65 dBA; or
(b) Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band sound
pressure level in decibels which exceeds the values listed
below in one or more octave bands.
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 96
63 82
125 74
250 67
500 63
1,000 60
2,000 57
4,000 55
8,000 53
(c) Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in
excess of 80 decibels.
2. From 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.:
(a) Continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of
50 dBA; or
(b) Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band sound
pressure level in decibels which exceeds the values listed
below in one or more octave bands.
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 86
63 71
125 61
250 53
500 48
1,000 45
2,000 42
4,000 40
§ BH6-5.1 ENGLEWOOD § BH6-5.1
AO:542
§ BH6-6. EXCEPTIONS. [Ord. #8103, §§ 2604A, 2606A, 12-7-81]
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
8,000 38
(c) Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in
excess of 80 decibels.
b. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit sound from any industrial,
commercial operation which when measured at the property line of any
other is in excess of any of the following:
1. Continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of 65
dBA.
2. Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band sound
pressure level in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in
one or more octave bands.
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound Pressure
Level
(dB)
31.5 96
63 82
125 74
250 67
500 63
1,000 60
2,000 57
4,000 55
8,000 53
3. Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in excess
of 80 decibels.
a. Emergency Exception. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance
of emergency work or the emission of sound from existing borough
owned facilities and equipment.
b. The operational performance standards established in this chapter shall
not apply to any of the following noise sources:
§ BH6-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH6-6
AO:543
§ BH6-7. PERFORMANCE TEST PRINCIPLE. [Ord. #8103, § 2607A,
12-7-81]
For the purpose of measuring sound in accordance with the applicable
provisions of these regulations, test equipment and procedures shall
conform to standards as published by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or its approved equivalent.
Chapter BH7
ANIMALS
§ BH7-1. RABIES AND DOGS.
§ BH7-1.1. Reference to State Statute. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 501]
Reference is specifically made to N.J.S.A. Title 26, Chapter 4, Article 7,
entitled "Rabies and Control of Dogs", which chapter and article are
incorporated by reference.
§ BH7-1.2. License and Registration. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 502 — 505;
Ord. #7015, § 1, 11/22/70; New; Ord. #BH2004-01; Ord. No.
BH2016-01]
1. Bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with
religious services.
2. Emergency energy release devices.
3. Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public
utilities when public health or safety are involved.
4. Public celebrations.
5. Public roadways.
6. Activities in the public parks, school grounds, playgrounds, public
buildings or private property under the permission or authority of
the municipal or school officials or to activities of the municipal
departments in the performance of their duties, drills or public
demonstration.
a. Required. Any person who shall keep or harbor a dog of licensing age
(attained the age of seven months, or which possesses a set of
permanent teeth) shall, in January and annually thereafter, apply for
and procure from the secretary of the board, a license and official metal
registration tag for each dog owned, kept or harbored, and shall place
upon each dog a collar or harness with the registration securely
fastened.
b. Fee. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a
fee as stated in subsection 2-4.1. In order to obtain a license, proof of a
§ BH6-6 ENGLEWOOD § BH7-1.2
AO:544
§ BH7-1.3. Control of Dogs. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 506; Ord. 11/2/70, § 1;
Ord. 12/6/76, § 1; Ord. 12/1/80, § 2]
§ BH7-1.4. Nuisances by Pets. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 507; Ord. 11/2/70, § 1;
Ord. 12/6/76, § 1; Ord. 12/1/80, §§ 3; Ord. # 2005-14]
current rabies vaccination, which does not expire prior to November
1st of each licensing year, must be shown.
c. Expiration. Registration tags and renewals shall expire on January 31 in
each year.
d. Newly Acquired Dog. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing
age or of any dog which attains licensing age, shall make application for
a license and registration tag for such dog within 10 days after
acquisition or age attainment.
a. Running at Large. The owner, keeper or custodian of a dog found
running at large in the borough shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.
b. Leash Required. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall
suffer or permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public
places of the borough unless the dog is accompanied by a person who is
capable of controlling the dog and who has the dog securely confined
and controlled by a leash.
a. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not consistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess,
maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet,
whether or not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability
assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the
bowels of the pet; excrement.
§ BH7-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH7-1.4
AO:545
§ BH7-1.5. Injury to Property. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 507; Ord. 12/6/76, § 2]
The owner, keeper or custodian of a dog which injures or damages any
lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property of another, shall be guilty of
a violation of this section.
§ BH7-1.6. Bites; Quarantine. [Ord. 3/3/80; § 509]
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse
container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other
refuse collector; or disposal into a system designated to convey
domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
b. Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the
care, custody or control of any pet to permit the pet to soil, defile or to
commit any nuisance upon said any sidewalk of any public street or
thoroughfare; nor in or upon any public building or any approach to the
building from the street; nor in or upon any public park, public
playground or school playground; nor in or upon the property of
persons other than the owner, person owning or having the care,
custody or control of the pet; provided, however, for the purpose of this
paragraph of this subsection, the above mentioned restrictions shall not
apply to that portion of the street lying between the curb lines which
shall be used to curb the pet.
c. Removal of Feces. No person shall walk a pet on a public street or any
other public place or on any public place, or on any private premises
other than property owned by or under the control of the owner, person
owning or having the care, custody or control of the pet, unless that
person shall at all times have on his person a proper scoop and
container or similar efficient sanitary means to immediately remove any
and all feces deposited by the pet and immediately removes the
deposited feces.
d. All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pets' solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
e. Responsibility for Acts. Any pet found to be in violation of this
subsection, paragraphs a through d, shall be deemed to be in such place
by permission or order of the owner, harborer or keeper of such pet,
and any pet committing any of the acts specified therein shall be
deemed to have committed such act by permission or order of the
owner, harborer or keeper of such pet, and such owner, harborer and
keeper shall be guilty of violation of this subsection.
f. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
§ BH7-1.4 ENGLEWOOD § BH7-1.6
AO:546
§ BH7-1.7. Penalty. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 508; Ord. 12/6/76, § 2; Ord. 12/1/
80, § 4; Ord. # 2005-14]
§ BH7-1A. VICIOUS DOGS.
§ BH7-1A.1. Regulation and Licensing of Vicious Dogs. [Ord.
8800-BH, § 509]
a. An owner of an animal having bitten a human being is required under
the State statutes of the State of New Jersey, and under the rules and
regulations governing the borough board of health to place the animal
under quarantine for a period of 10 days from the date of the bite.
b. An owner may remove the animal from quarantine by obtaining a health
certificate from a licensed veterinarian; the health certificate must be
obtained on the 10th day from the date of the bite and the certificate
must be immediately forwarded to the borough board of health.
c. Should the animal escape or should the owner, for any reason, be
unable to produce the animal on the expiration of the quarantine
period, or having failed to obtain a release from quarantine, the owner
shall be liable under the penalty provisions of this section and State law.
a. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations of
this section shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 for each
offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the Borough. A person
who refuses or neglects to pay the amount of a judgment rendered
against him and the costs and charges incident thereto shall be
committed by the court to the county jail for a period not exceeding two
days in the case of a conviction.
b. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police
department and the superintendent of the department of public works
or his designee.
a. Definition and Authority. For the purposes of this section, the owner of a
dog shall include any person, corporation, or legal entity which owns,
keeps, maintains, or harbors a dog within the borough and shall also
include the head of any household wherein a dog is kept, maintained or
harbored.
Pursuant to the authority conferred upon the governing body by N.J.S.
4:19-15.2, the board of health is authorized to license dogs in the
borough.
For purposes of this section, a dog shall be deemed vicious, if
unprovoked, the dog (a) has attacked any human by biting or which has
caused any person to be fearful for his safety by chasing, snapping at or
otherwise frightening the person, or (b) demonstrates a propensity to
approach persons in an apparent attitude of attack, or (c) has habitually
attacked other dogs or animals.
§ BH7-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH7-1A.2
AO:547
§ BH7-1A.2. Investigation, Hearing and Appeal. [Ord. 8800-BH,
§ 510]
The health officer or his designated representative is authorized to
investigate complaints concerning vicious or possible vicious dogs. If such
an investigation discloses that a dog within the borough is vicious, the
health officer shall notify all persons or entities classified as owners of the
dog in writing of such determination. The written notification shall inform
the owner that the owner has 15 days to notify the board of health that the
owner challenges the determination of viciousness and desires a hearing on
that issue. If the owner fails to demand a hearing within 15 days of receipt
of the health officer's notification, then the determination of viciousness
shall become final and binding. In the event the owner demands a hearing,
then the board of health shall provide for same as hereinafter specified.
Any notice to an owner as herein described must be by personal delivery
or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Either the mail receipt or a
certification of the personal service shall be required as proof of notification
to the owner.
The board of health shall conduct the hearing. A verbatim record of the
hearing shall be made and maintained for at least two years.
At the hearing, evidence shall be presented relative to past acts of the dog
and its propensities to commit similar acts in the future. A finding shall be
made as to whether the dog in question is vicious and as to whether the
continued presence of the dog without restriction within the borough would
be contrary to the health and welfare of the residents of the borough.
At the hearing, the owner may be represented by counsel and the health
officer or his designated representative and owner may present relevant
evidence, may confront adverse witnesses, may examine adverse evidence
and may present reasonable argument. The owner of the dog shall be
afforded at least one week advance notice of the hearing and a copy of this
section.
If, after conducting the hearing, the board of health finds that the dog is
vicious, the board of health shall reduce the determination to writing, listing
the salient findings upon which the determination is based, and shall serve
a copy of same upon the dog's owner. The board of health shall maintain a
central file of all such written determinations and a central storage location
for all verbatim records. Verbatim records need not be reduced to transcript
unless the owner appeals the determination, in which case the expense of
transcript production shall be borne by the party appealing.
The owner of any dog aggrieved by a determination of the board of health
may, in his discretion, appeal the determination to the mayor and council
by the filing of a written request for such appeal with the municipal clerk
and the service of a copy of same upon the officer within 30 days of the
date of notification of the board of health's determination. Any appeal to the
mayor and council shall be upon the record below. Such owner, may also,
in the owner's discretion appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. The
§ BH7-1A.2 ENGLEWOOD § BH7-1A.2
AO:548
procedure to be followed as a result of any determination of viciousness as
hereinafter provided shall not be stayed by the filing of an appeal unless so
ordered by the appellate body.
§ BH7-1A.3. Penalty Provisions. [Ord. 8800-BH, § 511]
Upon a finding that a dog is vicious, the owner of such dog shall:
§ BH7-1B. (RESERVED)35
§ BH7-2. KEEPING OF SMALL ANIMALS.
§ BH7-2.1. Licensing. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2001, 2002]
a. Pay an annual vicious dog fee of $100 which shall be in addition to the
regular dog owner license fee and which shall go into a separate fund to
be used towards expenses incurred conducting vicious dog hearings.
b. Shall forthwith provide the board of health with proof of existence of an
insurance policy with a policy limit of at least $100,000 insuring against
liability resulting from conduct of the dog, which policy must be
maintained in full force and effect.
c. Shall promptly have the dog permanently identified by placement of an
indelible identification number on the dog's upper left thigh by a
veterinarian licensed by the State of New Jersey or by such other
persons as the board of health may designate.
d. Shall conspicuously post such number of signs bearing the words
"VICIOUS DOG ON PREMISES" at the location where the dog resides,
as may be necessary to adequately inform the public of the presence of
a vicious dog, as determined by the board of health.
e. Shall not permit the dog upon the public streets or in public places
unless muzzled and adequately controlled by a leash no longer than
four feet in length.
f. Shall provide such fencing as may be adequate in height and strength to
ensure the dog is incapable of escaping any private yard or enclosure in
which it is kept.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this section shall be a fine up to
$200 or imprisonment of up to 90 days or both.
a. Required. No person shall keep small animals, as defined in section
BH1-2, on any premises within the borough unless a license for that
purpose shall have been first secured from the board covering the
premises to be used.
35.Editor's Note: Former Section BH7-1B, Pit Bulls, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance Nos. BH9401 and BH7404, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. BH9801.
§ BH7-1A.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH7-2.1
AO:549
§ BH7-2.2. Running at Large. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2003]
No person shall allow any small animal to run at large in the borough, but
the same shall, at all times be confined to the premises licensed for the
keeping thereof.
§ BH7-2.3. Pigeons and Other Fowl. [Ord. #8501, § 2004, 5/6/85;
Ord. #8601, § 2004, 11/10/86]
The keeping or raising of pigeons or other fowl shall be strictly prohibited
within the borough.
§ BH7-2.4. Number of Small Animals Limited. [Ord. #BH-8902]
Notwithstanding the rules and regulations applicable to small animals as
defined in this section hereof, no person shall allow more than a combined
total of five small animals to be kept or raised at any one time on any
premises in the borough regardless of the number of family units occupying
the premises.
§ BH7-3. SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1901]
No person shall slaughter or engage in the business of slaughtering any live
animals within the borough.
Chapter BH8
WATER SUPPLY
§ BH8-1. STANDARDS OF QUALITY. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 901]
No person shall use, or make available for the use of any other person, for
drinking, bathing, culinary purposes or for the cleaning of utensils or for
other domestic or potable purposes, any water, unless the same shall be of
a quality safe for the use to which the same is intended to be put and unless
the water shall fully meet the standards of quality for such purposes as fixed
by the State Commissioner of Health or by any other officer or department
having the right or the power to fix or determine such quality.
§ BH8-2. POLLUTED WATER.
b. Refusal to Grant. No license for the keeping or raising of small animals,
shall be granted to any person when the keeping or raising of small
animals, because of the nature or characteristics thereof, would be
detrimental to the general health of the residents of the neighborhood
of the premises sought to be licensed.
§ BH7-2.1 ENGLEWOOD § BH8-2.1
AO:550
§ BH8-2.1. Prohibited. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 902]
No person shall pollute or permit to be polluted any spring, well, cistern,
reservoir or other source of domestic or potable water supply, or any
surface waters which drain into any source of supply.
§ BH8-2.2. Discontinuation of Use. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 903]
Whenever the board shall have satisfactory evidence that any spring, well,
or cistern, or other source of water, the water of which is used for domestic
or potable purposes or for any of the purposes set forth in section BH8-1
above, has become polluted or rendered unsafe for the use to which the
same is being put, or is intended to be put, written notice to discontinue the
use of the water and the well, cistern or other sources, may be sent to the
owner, agent or person in charge of any spring, well, cistern, reservoir or
other source of water, and the owner, agent or person shall on receipt of
the notice, close the spring, well or cistern or other source and discontinue,
and cause the discontinuance of the use of the water, until the cause of the
pollution has been abated and until the water shall be rendered safe and of
the quality provided for in section BH8-1.
Chapter BH9
SEWER
§ BH9-1. SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS AND PRIVIES.
§ BH9-1.1. Permits and Licenses. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2801 — 2803]
§ BH9-1.2. Compliance. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2804]
All construction undertaken under any permit under this section shall fully
comply with every provision of this code affecting the same.
§ BH9-1.3. Nuisance. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2805, 2807]
a. No person shall construct any privy or septic tank upon any property,
without first obtaining, from the board, a permit to construct the same.
b. No person shall clean or empty any privy vault or septic tank, without
first obtaining, from the board, a permit to do so.
c. Every person engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying privy
vaults or septic tanks, shall use, in such instances, a suitable vehicle,
properly provided with watertight, completely closed tanks or boxes,
designed to prevent leakage onto the street or highways within the
borough and further designed to prevent the escape of offensive odors
into the atmosphere. A license shall be required for each vehicle used.
a. No person shall maintain a septic tank which creates a nuisance as a
result of overflow, lack of absorption or faulty construction.
§ BH8-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH9-1.3
AO:551
§ BH9-1.4. Receptacle for Human Excrement. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2808]
No person shall maintain, use or permit to be used, any receptacle for
human excrement, unless the receptacle is so constructed and maintained
that flies cannot gain access to the excremental matter contained therein,
and unless the excremental matter shall, at all times, be prevented from
flowing over or upon the surface of the ground. Every receptacle for human
excrement located within 100 feet of any stream, the waters of which are
used for drinking or domestic purposes, shall be provided with a watertight
vault.
§ BH9-1.5. Connection to Sewer May Be Required. [Ord. 3/6/66,
§ 2809]
The board may order that any premises shall be connected to a sanitary
sewer, which is now or may hereafter be laid in the street, easement, or
other place adjoining, abutting or accessible to the premises. The owner,
agent or lessee of such premises shall comply with the order within 30 days
after service upon him of a copy of the order, unless the board shall specify
or grant a longer period of delay.
§ BH9-1.6. Abandonment. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2806]
Whenever any premises which shall have thereon any privy or cesspool
which is abandoned or which the board determines is in a dangerous
condition, the same shall, upon notification to the owner, be filled promptly
with ashes or clean earth.
Chapter BH10
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
§ BH10-1. DUMPING PROHIBITED. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2301; Ord.
8801-BH, § 2301, 10/3/88]
No person, firm, association, partnership, trust, corporation, school, church,
industrial, commercial or retail business establishment, either profit or nonprofit,
shall dump, bury or allow to accumulate any garbage, ashes, rubbish,
condemned or spoiled animal or vegetable substances, swill or any offensive
or putrescible material on any land or premises in the borough, except as
may be specifically authorized by the borough.
§ BH10-2. COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION.
§ BH10-2.1. (Reserved)36
b. No cesspool shall hereafter be constructed upon any property, nor shall
any cesspool, now in existence, be maintained if the board shall
determine that the maintenance thereof shall be detrimental to public
health.
§ BH9-1.3 ENGLEWOOD § BH10-2.2
AO:552
§ BH10-2.2. Receptacles; Duty to Provide; Specifications. [Ord. 3/6/
66, § 2304; Ord. 3/1/71, § 1; Ord. BH9002]
a. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of every dwelling, market,
restaurant or other premises in the borough where paper, garbage,
rubbish or refuse accumulates shall provide and keep on the premises
sufficient and suitable receptacles, cans or barrels with tight fitting
covers, for receiving and holding garbage, rubbish or refuse.
SUFFICIENT — For the purposes of this section, shall mean at least one
metal or sturdy plastic receptacle, metal can or metal barrel for each
family unit residing on the premises and at least two such receptacles
for each restaurant, market, store or similar establishment where the
aforesaid material will accumulate.
SUITABLE — Shall mean a receptacle, can or barrel, made of sturdy
plastic or metal of a substantial nature, such as galvanized iron, with a
tight-fitting plastic or metal cover, so constructed as to prevent spilling
or leakage of its contents. It shall be waterproof, and, when filled, weigh
not more than 50 pounds, and be equipped with pull handles.
b. The use of baskets as receptacles for waste materials shall not be
permitted.
c. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section, may be classed as rubbish and may be
collected as such.
d. In dwellings, tenements and apartment houses containing three
dwelling units or less, the receptacles shall be purchased and
maintained, in the absence of a contract, by the tenants. In dwellings,
tenements and apartment houses of more than three dwelling units,
such receptacles shall be purchased and maintained, in the absence of a
contract, by the landlord.
e. Collections; Time of Placing and Removing Receptacles. No person
shall place, or cause to be placed, any receptacle or bundle or refuse
material on any portion of the sidewalk or street at any time except on
the day of collection, and then not more than eight hours before the
collection times, nor shall any person allow or permit any empty
receptacle to remain upon the sidewalk or street later than 11:00 p.m.
of the day the contents have been collected. The days of collection shall
be as set by the department of public works for city collection and by
contract for private collection.
f. Placement of Receptacles. The owner, lessee, tenant or other occupant
of every privately owned building shall, on the scheduled day for
collection, place or have placed all waste material for collection at the
nearest curbline in front of the building.
36.Editor's Note: Former subsection BH10-2.1, License Required, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 3/6/66 and Ord. 8801-BH, was repealed in its
entirety by Ord. BH9501.
§ BH10-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH10-2.2
AO:553
§ BH10-2.3. Vehicles. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2303, 2307]
§ BH10-2.4. Inspection. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2306]
All vehicles and receptacles mentioned in this section shall be available for
inspection by the health officer at all reasonable hours.
Receptacles awaiting collection shall be stored or kept in such place so
as not to become a nuisance to the occupants of any dwelling. At no
time shall they be kept under the windows of any adjacent dwelling.
g. Preparation of Wastes for Collection. Garbage shall be thoroughly
drained of all water, wrapped securely in paper and placed in a
receptacle as described in paragraph a herein. Ashes, combustible and
noncombustible rubbish and trade waste shall be stored and held in a
receptacle, described in paragraph a., that may be the same receptacle
used to contain the wrapped garbage. Where these materials are of
such a nature that they cannot be deposited in a receptacle, can or
barrel, they shall be securely and properly tied into bundles or
packages to prevent spilling.
Paper shall be secured and properly tied into bundles, or other
packages in a manner to prevent any scattering.
All receptacles, cans and barrels used for the purposes herein
described, shall not be filled higher than three inches below the top. No
person shall use barrels, baskets and paper or wooden boxes for this
purpose.
Bundles or packages shall be securely and properly tied to prevent
spilling or scattering while being handled by collectors or while bundles
or packages are located on the sidewalk awaiting collection. Bundles or
packages shall be of a size and weight to permit ease of handling by one
person and shall not exceed 65 pounds in weight.
Recyclable material shall not be mixed with waste material for pick-up
or disposal.
a. Requirements. All vehicles used in the collecting, transporting, or
disposing of materials or substances shall have been closed, watertight
metal body, and shall at all times be maintained and operated in a
cleanly and sanitary manner. The vehicles shall be kept closed at all
times, except while actually being filled or emptied.
b. Hours of Collection. All vehicles approved and licensed shall be
permitted to collect refuse only within the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
§ BH10-2.2 ENGLEWOOD § BH10-2.5
AO:554
§ BH10-2.5. Applicability. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2305]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the collection of garbage,
ashes, rubbish or other matter by the borough, but a contractor with the
borough shall not be exempt from the provisions.
§ BH10-3. REMOVAL OF FAT, BONES AND REFUSE.
§ BH10-3.1. License. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2401]
No person shall engage in the borough in the business of removing fat,
bones or refuse from any butcher shop, meat market or other food
establishment without first having obtained, from the board, a license for
that purpose.
§ BH10-3.2. Containers. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2402]
All containers used for the collection and removal of fat, bones or other
refuse from any meat market, butcher shop or other establishment shall be
made of metal and with suitable tight-fitting covers.
§ BH10-3.3. Vehicles. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2403, 2404]
Chapter BH11
HOUSING REGULATIONS: SUPPLYING OF HEAT
§ BH11-1. HOUSING REGULATIONS.
§ BH11-1.1. State Tenement Housing Act. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2101]
The articles and provisions of the State Tenement Housing Act and other
relevant State statutes are incorporated by reference.
§ BH11-1.2. Buildings Unfit for Human Habitation. [Ord. 3/6/66,
§ 2102]
Whenever it shall be decided by the board that any building or part thereof
is unfit for human occupation by reason of its harboring disease among the
occupants, and notice of the decision shall have been affixed conspicuously
on the building, or any part thereof, and personally served upon the owner,
agent or lessee, if the same can be found in the State, requiring all persons
a. All vehicles used for the collection or transporting of any fat, bones or
refuse, shall be fully closed, except when engaged in the actual
collection thereof.
b. No vehicle used in any business permitted by this section under a
license granted by the board, shall remain or be permitted to remain in
any place in the borough, for any period longer than that necessarily
required to transact the particular business for which he is licensed.
§ BH10-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH11-1.2
AO:555
therein to vacate from the building, or part thereof, for such reason as
stated in the notice, the building or part thereof, shall within 10 days be
vacated, or in case of a special emergency, when such shorter time, as
is in the notice may be specified. Every notice shall be void if within the
premises, so vacated the cause for the giving of the notice shall be cured,
so that the condition existing, and upon which the notice is based, shall no
longer exist.
§ BH11-1.3. Regulations. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2103 — 2105]
§ BH11-1.4. Inspection. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2106]
The owner or occupant of any structure, covered by this section, shall
permit access to a representative of the board for inspection at reasonable
hours; except in the case of an emergent health situation when such access
shall be awarded forthwith.
§ BH11-2. SUPPLYING OF HEAT.
§ BH11-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. 12/4/78, § 1]
As used in this section:
CONTRACT — Shall mean a written, verbal or implied contract.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS — Shall mean any building or structure or group
or complex of buildings or structures in which two or more units of dwelling
space are occupied or are intended to be occupied by two or more persons
who live independently of each other.
PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT — Shall mean a building or structure where one
or more persons is employed.
§ BH11-2.2. Responsibility for Furnishing Heat. [Ord. 12/4/78,
§ 2(a)]
For the purpose of this section, wherever a building is heated by means
of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under control of the owner, agent
or lessee, the owner, agent or lessee must be deemed to have contracted,
a. The owner or other person in charge and control of any building in the
borough, shall provide watertight and covered receptacles for receiving
garbage and other refuse matter. No building, or any part thereof, shall
be used as a place of storage for any article detrimental to health.
b. Every building, and its appurtenant premises, shall, at all times, be kept
clear and free from accumulation of dirt, filth, garbage or other
detrimental matter.
c. The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of every building or structure,
within the right or ability either to remedy or to prevent the same, shall
not cause or allow any matter or thing to be done, in or about any
building or structure which is dangerous or prejudicial to health.
§ BH11-1.2 ENGLEWOOD § BH11-2.2
AO:556
undertaken or bound himself to furnish heat in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection, in the absence of a contract or agreement to
the contrary.
§ BH11-2.3. Implied Contract. [Ord. 12/4/78, § 2(b)]
The presence of heating ducts, radiators, risers or returns in any halls or
apartments or any subdivision of a building shall be prima facie evidence of
an implied contract to furnish heat.
§ BH11-2.4. Minimum Temperatures. [Ord. 12/4/78, § 3]
Chapter BH12
BOARDING HOUSES, LODGING HOUSES AND HOTELS
§ BH12-1. CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1204]
The provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code shall be enforced.
The code has been adopted by the board and is hereby incorporated by
reference.
§ BH12-2. LICENSE.
§ BH12-2.1. Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1201]
No person shall conduct or maintain a hotel, lodging house or boarding
house without first having obtained from the board a license.
a. Every multiple dwelling, business, commercial, governmental,
industrial and institutional building shall contain heating facilities
which are properly installed and maintained in safe and good working
condition and the heating facilities shall be capable of maintaining a
minimum inside temperature of 70° F. in all occupiable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments, whenever the outside
temperature is at or above 0° F. The temperature shall be read at a
height of 48 inches above the floor level at the center of the occupiable
rooms located in the aforesaid buildings.
b. From October 1 to April 30, every occupiable room, bathroom and
water closet compartment shall be supplied with sufficient heat to
maintain therein a minimum temperature of 70° F. regardless of the
outside temperature, whatever hours of each day the building is in use
and occupied.
c. From May 1 to September 30 every occupiable room, bathroom and
water closet compartment shall be supplied with sufficient heat to
maintain therein a minimum temperature of 70° F., whenever the
outside temperature falls below 55° F., between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. in multiple dwellings, and during the usual hours of
employment in places of employment and public buildings.
§ BH11-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH12-2.2
AO:557
§ BH12-2.2. Application. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1202]
The application for a license shall be made in writing on forms supplied by
the board and signed by the applicant.
§ BH12-2.3. Inspection Required for Issuance. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1203]
No license to conduct or maintain a boarding house, lodging house or hotel
shall be issued until the premises have been inspected and approved for
such by the health officer.
§ BH12-3. REGISTERS. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1205]
The registers of every boarding house, lodging house and hotel shall be
made available to the health officer upon request and shall contain such
information as may be requested by the board.
Chapter BH13
BOARDING HOMES FOR CHILDREN
§ BH13-1. STATE SANITARY CODE. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1301]
Chapter VI of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code entitled "Boarding Homes
For Children" is hereby incorporated by reference.
§ BH13-2. LICENSE.
§ BH13-2.1. Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1302]
No person shall conduct or maintain a boarding home for children without a
license first having been obtained from the board, covering all the premises
to be used.
§ BH13-2.2. Application. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1303]
Every application for a license shall be in writing, and it shall contain a
full description of the premises and buildings intended to be used for such
purposes, the age, qualifications and training of the person in charge, and
satisfactory proof that each person residing in the licensed premises, or
otherwise employed thereat, is free from communicable disease.
Chapter BH14
NURSING OR MATERNITY HOMES
§ BH12-2.2 ENGLEWOOD § BH14-1
AO:558
§ BH14-1. STATE STATUTE INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE. [Ord.
3/6/66, § 1413]
Reference is made to N.J.S.A. Title 30, Chapter 11, entitled, "Nursing Homes
or Hospitals", which chapter and article are hereby incorporated by
reference.
§ BH14-2. LICENSE.
§ BH14-2.1. Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1401]
No person shall conduct or maintain a maternity home or engage in
conducting a business of attending women during pregnancy, labor or
lying-in-period, outside their several homes, without first having obtained a
license from the board, covering all the premises intended to be used.
§ BH14-2.2. Application. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1402]
Every application for a license shall state the following:
§ BH14-2.3. Display. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1403]
Every license granted under this section shall provide that the same shall
be posted permanently on the licensed premises and the same shall, in fact,
at all times be posted.
§ BH14-2.4. Limitation. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1404]
Every license, granted, shall provide a limitation upon the number of
patients who may be cared for in the licensed premises at any one time
and such limitation shall be determined solely by the board, based upon the
number of rooms available in the licensed premises for the care of patients,
their size, height and such other factors as may bear upon the services
contemplated to be rendered.
§ BH14-3. RECORDS. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 1405, 1406]
a. Name of proposed licensee.
b. A particular description of the premises and buildings in or at which the
same is contemplated to be conducted.
c. The maximum number of women and infants to be cared for at any one
time.
a. The licensee shall, at all times, keep and maintain complete records in
the form to be prescribed by the board and covering the name, age,
color, religion, place of residence and such other information
concerning the care, maintenance, treatment and progress of all
customers, patrons, and patients, together with full and complete
records, concerning births, deaths, disease or illness, as are now or
§ BH14-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH14-3
AO:559
§ BH14-4. INSPECTION. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1407]
The licensed premises shall, at all times, be open to inspection by the board
or any of its duly authorized representatives.
§ BH14-5. REGULATIONS. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 1409 — 1412]
§ BH14-6. NONAPPLICABILITY. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1408]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any institution or
department maintained or operated by the State or by any county,
municipality or subdivision thereof.
Chapter BH15
SWIMMING POOL CODE
§ BH15-1. ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE. [Ord. 3/6/66,
§ 1801-1803; Ord. 3/5/73, § 1]
hereafter may be required by any regulation of law, statute or
ordinance.
b. All records required to be kept under this section shall be open to
inspection, check and audit by the board, or any of its duly authorized
representatives.
a. No maternity home shall be operated in conjunction with a boarding
home for children.
b. The number of women cared for during pregnancy, labor or lying-inperiod
shall, at no time, exceed the number authorized or permitted by
the terms of the license.
c. No women or infants shall be kept, cared for, or administered to, within
any place or building not designated in the license.
d. In addition, the same regulations shall apply to the conduct and
maintenance of a maternity home and the premises and buildings used
in connection therewith; as provided in Chapter BH13 regarding the
conduct and maintenance of boarding homes for children.
a. The "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey - 1970" which is more
particularly described as a code regulating and controlling swimming
pools as nuisances, and fixing penalties for violations be adopted by
reference.
b. Three copies of the code have been placed on file in the office of the
borough board of health.
c. The three copies of the code will remain on file for the use and
examination of the public as prescribed by law.
§ BH14-3 ENGLEWOOD § BH15-2
AO:560
§ BH15-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1804]
As used in this chapter:
ARTIFICIAL POOL — Shall mean a pool composed entirely of artificial
construction.
PARTLY ARTIFICIAL POOL — Shall mean a pool formed from a natural body
of water which has either so limited a flow or such an inadequate natural
circulation that the quality of water must be maintained by artificial means.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS — Shall mean any pool designed, used and
maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his household
and guests and located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence. Unless
otherwise qualified, the term "private swimming pool" shall be construed as
including both artificial and partly artificial pools.
WADING POOL — Shall mean any artificially constructed pool, not designed
or used for swimming, with a maximum area of 120 square feet and a
maximum water depth of 24 inches.
§ BH15-3. WATER SUPPLY. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1805]
There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or private
water supply system and the private swimming pool at a point below the
maximum waterline, of the pool or to a recirculating or heating system of
the pool.
§ BH15-4. DISCHARGE SYSTEM. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1806]
All private swimming pools hereafter constructed within the borough shall
be provided with one drainage outlet not in excess of three inches in
diameter extending from the pool to either a brook, storm sewer, or lawnsprinkling
system in the premises on which the private pool is located.
The discharge of water from the private swimming pool into a brook or
storm sewer shall be permitted only following approval by the proper state,
county and borough officials, as each case requires. No private pool drain
shall be connected into the county's sanitary sewer system except upon
written approval of the mayor and council. Application for approval shall
be in writing. The board of health or his designated employee, shall inspect
the premises on which the pool is planned to be constructed in order
to determine the proper place and type of connection with the sanitary
sewerage system, if the connection is authorized by the borough. Approval
of an application shall not be given if it is feasible to discharge water from
a pool into an accessible brook, storm sewer or use such water for purposes
of lawn-sprinkling on the premises. Approval shall not be given to discharge
water at the curb or upon the surface of any street.
§ BH15-5. SEWER CHARGES. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1807]
Where approval is obtained to discharge water from a private swimming
pool into the sanitary sewage system, the owner of the pool shall be
§ BH15-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH15-5
AO:561
responsible to pay an annual sewer charge to the borough in the sum of $50
which sum shall be noted on the taxbill covering the property in question.
The purpose of the sum is to reimburse the borough for its cost in disposing
of the water in question. The annual sewer charges shall be paid to the
borough upon obtaining approval as required in section BH15-4 of this
chapter and shall be paid every year thereafter.
§ BH15-6. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1808]
Every private swimming pool or wading pool constructed, or to be
constructed in the borough shall at all times comply with the requirements
of the local board of health. Any nuisance or hazard to health which may
exist or develop in or in consequence of or in connection with any swimming
pool, shall be abated and removed by the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises on which the pool is located within 10 days of receipt of notice
from the building department, borough engineer or board of health of the
borough.
Chapter BH16
CAMPS
§ BH16-1. PROHIBITION. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1501]
No person shall establish, construct or maintain any construction camp,
labor camp or other similar living quarters, or any trailer camp or tourist
camp in the borough.
Chapter BH17
SMOKE CONTROL CODE
§ BH17-1. ADOPTION BY REFERENCE. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2501 —
2503]
a. A code regulating the emission of smoke from fuel-burning equipment,
internal combustion engines, open fires, stacks or chimneys, and
providing for the inspection of fuel-burning equipment, is established
pursuant to the Public Health and Sanitation Codes, Adoption by
Reference Act (L-1950 et al). A copy of the code is annexed hereto and
made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text herein.
b. The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Smoke Control Code of New Jersey (1953)".
c. Three copies of the "Smoke Control Code of New Jersey (1953)" have
been placed on file in the office of the borough clerk and the secretary
of this local board of health upon the introduction of this section and
§ BH15-5 ENGLEWOOD § BH17-1
AO:562
§ BH17-2. NEW JERSEY AIR POLLUTION CONTROL CODE. [Ord. 3/
6/66, § 2504]
In addition to the code above adopted by reference there shall be enforced
in the borough, the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code as it now stands
or as it may in the future be amended.
Chapter BH18
MASSAGE OPERATOR OR MASSEUR
§ BH18-1. LICENSE.
§ BH18-1.1. Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1701]
No person shall be engaged or employed as a massage operator or masseur
in the borough, without first having obtained, from the board, a license to
do so.
§ BH18-1.2. Information Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1702]
No license shall be issued to any person unless the applicant shall furnish
to the board, the following:
Chapter BH19
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
§ BH19-1. NEW JERSEY STATE SANITARY CODE. [Ord. 3/6/66,
§ 401]
For the purpose of controlling the spread of illness and disease in the
borough, reference is made to Chapter II of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code and the list of reportable diseases there set forth, which diseases
together with such others as may be added by the State Board of Health,
are hereby declared to be communicable, preventable, especially dangerous
to the public health and reportable. Those diseases requiring quarantine
together with the period of quarantine shall also be as set forth in Chapter
II of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code as the same may now be written or
in the future may be amended.
will remain there for the use and examination by the public so long as
this section is in effect.
a. A diploma from a school recognized by the New Jersey State Health
Department, showing the applicant's qualifications to practice as such.
b. A medical certificate that the applicant is free from contagious or
communicable diseases, in form identical to that required to obtain a
health certificate in Chapter BH22, Barber Shops and Beauty Parlors.
§ BH17-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH19-1
AO:563
Chapter BH20
PUBLIC PLACES AND PUBLIC LAVATORIES
§ BH20-1. MAINTENANCE. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2201]
The owner, tenant, manager and all other persons maintaining, operating or
in charge or control of any public place, shall at all times, keep and maintain
every public place, and all parts thereof, in a clean and sanitary condition
and open to inspection by the board, its officers or any employee of the
board.
§ BH20-2. REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 2202]
Every public place shall contain the following:
§ BH20-3. PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. 3/6/66, §§ 2203 — 2204]
Chapter BH21
BARBER SHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS
a. Proper lavatory facilities for the use of persons patronizing the place.
b. A wash room, comfort station or other place of a like nature.
c. A sufficient quantity of toilet tissue.
d. Individual towels.
e. A sanitary waste receptacle for towels customarily discarded after
usage.
f. Separate toilets for male and female patrons.
g. Provision for the thorough cleansing, boiling and sterilizing of cloth
towels, if used.
h. A mechanical dispenser for liquid or powdered soap of a type approved
by the board.
a. In all public places there is prohibited:
1. The use of cake soap in common.
2. The use of any drinking cup in common.
3. The use of towels in common.
b. Use of cleansing agents containing hydrocyanic acid or other poisonous
ingredients is specifically prohibited.
§ BH19-1 ENGLEWOOD § BH21-1
AO:564
§ BH21-1. REFERENCE TO STATE STATUTE. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1602]
Reference is made to N.J.S.A. Title 45, Chapters 4 and 4A, entitled,
respectively, "Barbers" and "Beauty Culture" which chapters and articles
are hereby incorporated by reference.
§ BH21-2. LICENSE.
§ BH21-2.1. Required. [Ord. 3/6/66, § 1601]
No person shall conduct or maintain a barber shop or beauty parlor without
first having obtained, from the board of health, a license.
Chapter BH22
NURSERY SCHOOLS - CHILD CARE CENTERS
§ BH22-1. LICENSE.
§ BH22-1.1. Required. [Ord. BH-8905]
No person shall establish or maintain any nursery school or child care
center for the care and training of children of pre-school age, without first
having obtained a license therefor from the board covering all the premises
intended to be so used. These premises must conform to the building and
zoning ordinances of the borough.
§ BH22-2. REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. BH-8905]
Every nursery school or child care center shall meet the following
requirements:
§ BH22-3. REGULATIONS. [Ord. BH-8905]
a. Every application for a license shall be in writing and it shall contain a
full description of the premises and building intended to be used for
such purpose and satisfactory proof that every person employed thereat
is free from communicable disease.
b. Every license issued under this chapter shall state the name, or names
of the licensee, or licensees, location of the licensed premises, and the
maximum number of pupils to be cared for at one time.
c. No license for a nursery school or child care center shall be issued until
the board is satisfied that the State of New Jersey Department of
Human Services has approved the said facility.
a. A nursery school or child care center shall be considered in the same
category as a restaurant, if food is being served, and shall be subject to
the same regulations as apply to a restaurant. However, payment of
only one license fee would be required for such an establishment.
§ BH21-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH22-3
AO:565
Chapter BH23
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH
§ BH23-1. SANITATION AND HOUSEKEEPING. [Ord. BH-8903]
b. A nursery school or child care center shall be subject to the same
regulations as "Public Places" referred to in Chapter BH20.
a. The sanitation and housekeeping at all places of employment shall be
such as to promote a healthful environment. No unsanitary condition
shall exist or be permitted to exist. All places of employment,
passageways, stairs, floors, walls, locker rooms, ceilings, toilet rooms,
service rooms and storerooms shall be kept clean and in a sanitary
condition. Every factory building and every place of employment and
every part thereof and the yard, court, cellar, passage, areaways or
alleys connected with the same shall be kept clean and free of any
accumulation of dirt, filth, garbage or other matter of any source of
foulness or odors. The owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any factory
building or place of employment or part thereof, shall thoroughly
cleanse all the rooms, passages, stairs, floors, windows, doors,
sidewalks, ceilings and drains thereof and shall well and sufficiently
paint the sidewalk and ceilings thereof.
b. The floor of every workroom shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and,
so far as possible, dry condition. When wet processes are used, suitable
drainage shall be maintained and false floors, platforms, mats or other
dry standing places shall be provided.
c. Every floor, working place and passageway shall be kept free of
protruding nails, splinters or holes and loose or defective boards and
flooring.
d. So far as practical, sweeping and cleaning shall be done outside of
working hours and in such manner as to avoid the contamination of air
with dust.
e. Expectorating upon the walls, floors, workplaces or stairs or any other
part of any establishment shall not be permitted.
f. Use of the common drinking cup is prohibited. When and where single
service cups are provided, such cups shall be of the disposable type, to
be used but once, and there shall be provided a suitable enclosed
container for unused cups and a receptacle for disposing of used cups.
Where sanitary drinking fountains are provided they shall meet the
following requirements: The jet of drinking fountains shall issue from a
nozzle of nonoxidizing, impervious material set at an angle from the
vertical such as to prevent the return of water in the jet to the orifice
from whence the jet issues. The nozzle and every other opening in the
water pipe or conductors leading to the nozzle should be above the
edge of the bowl, to prevent flooding in case of drain clogging.
§ BH22-3 ENGLEWOOD § BH23-1
AO:566
§ BH23-2. TEMPERATURE, HUMIDITY, AND AIR MOVEMENT. [Ord.
BH-8903]
There shall be provided in each and every place of employment, a minimum
temperature of 70° F. on the inside of each occupied area during the usual
working hours.
Natural or mechanical ventilation shall be provided in all places of
employment to insure a healthful and a comfortable environment as regards
temperature, humidity, heat radiation and air movement. All closed office
buildings which are mechanically ventilated shall provide an adequate
supply of natural fresh air from the outside so that the carbon dioxide levels
shall not exceed 600 ppm (parts per million) in the work place.
These requirements shall not apply to places of employment or portions
thereof used and occupied for trades, business or occupations, where due to
the inherent nature of such occupation, trade or business, abnormally high
or low temperatures are essential.
§ BH23-3. ILLUMINATION. [Ord. BH-8903]
The quality and quantity of illumination in any place of employment shall
be adequate to permit the performance of all necessary work in a safe
manner and without injury to the eyes. The requirements for lighting any
workplace or place of employment shall not be less than the minimum
requirements specified by the American Standard Association in its Code
of Lighting Factories, Mills and other Workplaces-A-11-1930, or the latest
revision thereof.
§ BH23-4. OVERCROWDING. [Ord. BH-8903]
All working areas and places of employment shall be kept free of
overcrowding. To prevent such condition, there shall be provided for each
and every employee in work areas, occupied areas and in places of
employment, a minimum of 400 cubic feet of air space.
§ BH23-5. PERSONAL AND PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND
EQUIPMENT. [Ord. BH-8903]
Working in operations, processes or conditions of work which unduly expose
them to dampness and wet environments, excessive heat, coldness,
g. In all places of employment where employees are permitted to lunch on
the premises, an adequate space suitable for that purpose shall be
provided for the maximum number of employees who may use such
space at any one time. A covered receptacle shall be provided and used
for disposing of all waste food and debris. In every establishment where
there is exposure to injurious dusts, industrial poison, toxic materials or
other substances that may be injurious to health, a separate lunchroom
shall be maintained unless it is convenient for the employees to lunch
away from the premises.
§ BH23-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH23-5
AO:567
excessive noise, hazardous radiations, skin irritants or other health hazards
shall be provided with proper protective clothing and other devices when
such exposure may constitute an occupational health hazard and may result
in an occupational disease or affliction.
§ BH23-6. INSPECTIONS AND EXAMINATIONS; INTERFERENCE
WITH OFFICERS. [Ord. BH-8903]
The health officer shall make the inspections and examinations required
by any law of this State, or by any code, ordinance or regulation, upon
exhibiting his or her badge or credentials and all persons are hereby
forbidden to interfere with or obstruct such inspection, examination or
survey.
§ BH23-7. EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY. [Ord. BH-8903]
Every employer shall comply with the various provisions of this section
pertaining to industrial health hazards and occupational health and shall
maintain a healthful place of employment.
§ BH23-8. PENALTY. [Ord. BH-8903]
The penalty for a first violation of this chapter shall be a fine of $100; for a
second violation - $200; and for a third or subsequent violation - $400.
§ BH23-9. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. BH-8903]
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, clause or phrase hereof shall, for any reason, be held to
be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining section, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that
this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2010-01 2-24-10 Refund bond, Special 40
2010-02 4-14-10 Stormwater management Best
Management Practices, 30-23
40
2010-03 4-14-10 Establish Local Assistance Board,
2-10.4
40
§ BH23-5 ENGLEWOOD § DL-1
AO:568
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2010-04 5-12-10 Easement, Special 40
2010-05 CAP, Special 40
2010-06 Easement, Special 40
2010-07 6-9-10 Business zoning application, 9-24 40
2010-08 6-9-10 Uniform Construction Code - Fees -
reroofing, 9-1.3
40
2010-09 6-9-10 Repeal Local Assistance Board,
2-10.14
40
2010-10 Not used 40
2010-11 8-11-10 Salary, Special 40
2010-12 Salary, Special 40
2010-13 Not used 40
2010-14 10-13-10 Bond, Special 40
2010-15 10-13-10 Salary, Special 40
2010-16 9-29-10 Handicapped parking, 7-13 40
2010-17 12-8-10 Emergency appropriation, Special 40
2011-01 Bond, Special 40
2011-02 Not adopted 40
2011-03 2-17-11 Traffic control monitoring system,
7-14
40
2011-04 Not adopted 40
2011-05 2-14-11 Repeal Deputy Municipal Clerk,
2-20
40
2011-06 7-20-11 Maintenance outdoor dumpsters
and refuse containers, 3-22
40
2011-07 7-20-11 Private storm drain inlet retrofitting,
3-21
40
2011-08 5-24-11 CAP, Special 40
2011-09 Financial statement, Special 40
2011-10 Bond, Special 40
2011-11 Bond, Special 40
2011-12 12-14-11 Deputy Municipal Clerk, 2-20 40
2011-13 12-14-11 Emergency appropriation, Special 40
2011-14 12-24-11 Criminal history background checks
for Borough employees and
volunteers, 2-29
40
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:569
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
12-01 Not used 40
12-02 4-18-12 Refund bond, Special 40
12-03 4-18-12 Refund bond, Special 40
12-04 3-14-12 Placement of stationary generators,
30-6.3b
40
12-05 4-18-12 Planning Board, dissolve Zoning
Board of Adjustment, Chapter 18
40
12-06 5-9-12 Bond, Special 40
12-07 CAP, Special 40
12-08 Not adopted 40
12-09 Not adopted 40
12-10 5-9-12 Criminal history background checks,
2-29
40
12-11 7-8-12 Police Department, 2-13.1 40
12-12 8-8-12 Deposit of materials at Department
of Public Works, 20-21
40
12-13 10-10-12 Checklists for development, 18-2.7A
(codified in Supplement No. 41)
40
12-14 8-8-12 Certificate of Continued Occupancy,
9-17
40
12-15 8-8-12 Bond, Special 40
12-16 9-12-12 Salary, Special 40
12-17 See Ordinance No. 12-20 40
12-18 10-10-12 Permits for demolition, construction,
renovation and dumpsters, 20-18
40
12-19 9-27-12 Road improvements, Special 40
12-20 10-10-12 Create B-2A Limited Business
Southeast Overlay Zone, 30-3,
30-5.11, 30-6.1, 30-7.10
40
12-21 11-20-12 Shade trees - cost of trees and
improvements, ST1-4
40
12-22 12-3-12 Emergency appropriations, Special 40
12-13 10-10-12 Checklists for development, 18-2.7A 41
13-01 2-13-13 Permits for demolition, construction,
renovation, dumpsters and pods,
20-18
41
13-02 6-12-13 Dogs in parks, 3-5.1; bicycles in
Witte Field, 3-10.2
41
§ DL-1 ENGLEWOOD § DL-1
AO:570
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
13-03 5-8-13 Salaries, Special 41
13-04 6-12-13 CAP, Special 41
13-05 8-14-13 Fees for police services for traffic
control, 2-13.16
41
13-06 7-10-13 Fees and escrow deposits for
development applications, 18-3.4
41
13-07 9-11-13 Parking prohibited-snow plowing,
7-3.2A
41
13-08 8-14-13 Outdoor parking of commercial
vehicles, 3-7; residential parking
only, 3-12.2, 3-12.4, 3-12.6, 3-12.7;
parking prohibited at all times,
7-3.3; turn prohibitions, 7-10.2
41
13-09 8-14-13 Improvements, Special 41
13-10 8-14-13 Salaries, Special 41
13-11 9-11-13 Acquisition of equipment, Special 41
13-12 10-9-13 Certificate of continued occupancy,
9-17
41
13-13 12-11-13 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-3.3 41
13-14 12-11-13 Alcoholic beverages-violations and
penalties-purchase, possession,
consumption by persons under legal
age, 6-5.3
41
13-15 12-11-13 Bond, Special 41
2014-01 2-11-14 Amends Ch. 15, Land Subdivision,
15-7.3, building permit
requirements in Neighborhood or
Limited Business Zones
42
2014-02 2-11-14 Amends Ch. 30, Zoning, 30-7.1,
prohibited uses-superseded by Ord.
2014-04-moved material to Ch. 10,
10-6.2
42
2014-03 2-11-14 Amends Ch. 2, Administration,
2-7.1, Create Board of Health
42
2014-04 5-14-14 Amends Ch. 10, Property
Maintenance Code, 10-6.2,
appearance of exterior of premises
or structures
42
2014-05 Not adopted 42
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:571
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2014-06 4-9-14 Amends Ch. 11, Sewer and Water,
11-1.10, maintenance and repair of
sewer lines
42
2014-07 6-18-14 Amends Ch. 20, Recycling,
dumpster permit fees
42
2014-08 6-18-14 CAP Bank, Special 42
2014-09 6-18-14 Salary, Special 42
2014-10 7-22-14 Bond, Special 42
2014-11 8-13-14 Amends. Ch. 30, Zoning, not
codified at direction of the Borough
42
2014-12 Not used 42
2014-13 12-10-14 Emergency appropriation, Special 42
2014-14 12-10-14 Amends Ch. 9, Building and
Housing, 9-17.4, Certificate of
continued occupancy
42
2014-15 12-10-14 Salary, Special 42
2015-01 3-11-15 Bond, Special 42
2015-02 3-11-15 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-6.2, stop
intersections
42
2015-03 4-8-15 Amends Ch. 6, Alcoholic Beverage
Control, 6-3.4, fees
42
2015-04 5-13-15 Street name change, Special 42
2015-05 5-13-15 Street name change, Special 42
2015-06 6-10-15 CAP Bank, Special 42
2015-07 6-10-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration,
2-13.16, payment of fees for traffic
control and work place safety
42
2015-08 6-10-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration, adds
2-13A.22, removal of vehicle by
private towing company
42
2015-09 6-10-15 Acquisitions and improvements,
Special
42
2015-10 7-8-15 Salary, Special 42
2015-11 7-8-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration,
2-10.2, Superintendent of Public
Works
42
2015-12 10-14-15 Refund Bond, Special 42
2015-13 11-9-15 Appropriation, Special 42
§ DL-1 ENGLEWOOD § DL-1
AO:572
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2015-14 12-9-15 Emergency appropriation, Special 42
2015-15 12-9-15 Emergency appropriation, Special 42
2015-16 12-9-15 Amends Ch. 17, Fire Prevention;
17-9.6, 17-9.8, 17-9.10, 17-9.12,
17-9.13, 17-9.14, 17-9.15, Uniform
Fire Code
42
2016-01 1-13-16 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
deletes 2-10.15 Recreation Director;
creates 2-30 Recreation
43
2016-02 2-10-16 Salary, Special 43
2016-03 3-9-16 Amends Ch. 19 Signs, Billboards
and Outdoor Advertising, 19-18.1
Municipal Recreation Fields
43
2016-04 3-9-16 Amends Ch. 9 Building and Housing;
9-22.9 Fees
43
2016-05 5-9-16 CAP Bank, Special 43
2016-06 5-9-16 Amends Ch. 6 Alcoholic Beverage
Control; 6-3.4, License Fees
43
BH:2016-017-11-16 Amend BH2 Vital Statistics, BH2-4.1
Fees Established; Ch. BH3 Food and
Beverage Regulations; BH3-1.3;
BH3-22, Fees; BH7 Animals;
BH7-1.2 Fees
43
2016-07 7-13-16 Bond, Special 43
2016-08 7-13-16 Feasibility study for Witte Field
Recreation Complex
43
2016-09 10-13-16 Salary, Special 43
2016-10 Not used 43
2016-11 12-29-16 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; adds
2-13.8 Police Department Hiring
Policies and Procedures
43
2016-12 12-29-16 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-18.4 Borough Administrator,
General Duties
43
2017-01 3-8-17 Amends Ch. 2, Administration, adds
2-13.8.3, Fees Related to
Employment in the Police
Department
44
2017-02 Not adopted 44
2017-03 Amends Salaries, Special 44
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:573
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2017-04 Establishes CAP Bank, Special 44
2017-05 4-12-17 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations;
Adds Use of Recreational Facilities
and Required Use Permits, amends
3-6
44
2017-06 Capital Improvement, Special 44
2017-07 7-12-17 Amends Chapter 9, Building and
Housing, 9-1.3, Fees; Amends
Chapter 10, Property Maintenance
Code, 10-7.2, Exterior Maintenance,
Penalty
44
2017-08 8-9-17 Amends Chapter 18, Land Use
Procedures, 18-3.4, Schedule of
Fees, paragraph m
44
2017-09 Salaries, Special 44
2017-10 Not adopted 44
2017-11 Not adopted 44
2017-12 9-13-17 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
creates 2-31 Public Safety Director,
2-31.1 — 2-31.4
44
2017-13 Salaries, Special 44
2017-14 11-9-17 Amends Chapter 2, Administration,
2-13.16, Fees in Regard to Traffic
Control
44
2017-15 Not adopted 44
2017-16 1-1-18 Amends Chapter 3, Police
Regulations, adds new regulations
for use of parks and recreation
areas, amends 3-5 and 3-6
44
2018-01 Street project, Special 44
2018-02 Not adopted 44
2018-03 Salaries, Special 44
2018-04 Salaries, Special 44
2018-05 Salaries, Special 44
2018-06 Not adopted 44
2018-07 5-9-18 Amends Chapter 2, Administration,
adds 2-13.4A, Promotional
Procedures for Position of Chief of
Police
44
§ DL-1 ENGLEWOOD § DL-1
AO:574
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2018-08 5-9-18 Amends Chapter 2, Administration,
Repeals Ord. No. 2017-12, 2-31,
Public Safety Director
44
2018-09 Salaries, Special 44
2018-10 6-13-18 Amends Chapter 2, Administration,
2-13.1, Creates (Police Department);
repeals 2-13.4.1, Deputy Police
Chief
44
2018-11 CAP Bank, Special 44
2018-12 Bond, Special 44
2018-13 Salaries, Special 44
2018-14 9-26-18 Amends Chapter 30, Zoning, adds
30-19A, Mandatory Inclusion of and
Set-Aside for Affordable Housing
44
2018-15 Not adopted 44
2018-16 Acceptance of title and deed,
Special
44
2018-17 11-8-18 Amends Chapter 2, Administration,
repeals Ord. No. 2018-07, 2-13.4A,
Promotional Procedures for Position
of Chief of Police
44
2018-18 12-12-18 Amends Ch. 2, Administration, adds
2-31, Public Contracting Reform
44
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2019-01 Vetoed
2019-02 2-13-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 45
2019-03 3-13-2019 Cap Bank NCM 45
2019-04 3-13-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 45
2019-05 3-13-2019 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 3 45
2019-06 4-17-2019 Charitable
Solicitation
Ch. 16 45
2019-07 5-8-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 45
2019-08 7-10-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 45
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:575
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2019-09 7-10-2019 Signs, Billboards and
Outdoor Advertising
Amendment
Ch. 19 45
2019-10 9-11-2019 Bond Refunding NCM 45
2019-11 10-16-2019 Capital NCM 45
2019-12 10-16-2019 Special Emergency
Appropriation
NCM 45
20-01 4-15-2020 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 45
20-02 4-15-2020 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 3 45
20-03 4-15-2020 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 45
§ DL-1 ENGLEWOOD § DL-1
AO:576

ZONING
30 Attachment 1
Borough of Englewood Cliffs
Schedule A - Schedule of Regulations
(Subsection 30-6.1)
District Minimum/Max Lot Dimensions Minimum Yard Dimensions (Feet) Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Maximum
Rear Yard
Coverage
Max. Building Height Minimum Floor Areas (square feet) Shade Tree
Area (square feet) Width (feet) (1) Front (2) Rear One Side Both Sides Corner Side Feet Stories One Floor Two Floor (4) 8 Pts. Curb
R-A Residential Single Family 10,000 100 30 25 10 30% of lot
width at
setback line
15 32% (3,7) 51% 60% 30 32 2.5 1600 1800 1 per 35 feet Frontage
R-B Residential Single Family 7,000 70 25 25 7 31.5% of
lot width at
setback line
15 32% (3,7) 51% 60% 30 32 2.5 1400 1600 1 per 35 feet Frontage
R-B1 Residential Single Family 5,000 50 20 20 5 13 15 32% (3,7) 51% 60% 30 32 2.5 1000 1200 1 per 35 feet Frontage
B-1 Office 10,000 100 25 25 10 30 20 33.3% (3) 35 2(5)
B-2 Limited Business 80,000 125 60 20% of
lot depth
30 60 30 33.3% (3) 35 2
B-2A Limited Business Southeast
Overlay (See Table 2)
B-3 Special Retail 10,000 Max. (8) 50 20 20% of
lot depth
10 22 15 33.3% (3) 30 2(5) See note (6), (8), (9)
B-4 Restricted Commercial 10,000 100 20 20% of
lot depth
10 22 15 33.3% (3) 35 2
I Institutional 10 Acres 300 75 75 75 150 75 33.3% (3) 70 6
Residential Assisted Living 100,000 300 75 75 40 80 75 30.0% (3) 30 2 A maximum of 20 assisted living
apartment units per 40,000 square feet
of the lot area or parts thereof
P-1 Public Zone 10,000 100 20 20% of
lot depth
10 22 20 33.30% 35 2
NOTES ON SPECIFICATIONS
1. In case of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel, the lot frontage shall not be less than 75% of the minimum lot width requirements
2. In cases where the street frontage on the same side is developed to the extent of 50% or more, the average setback of the existing buildings between the nearest intersecting street shall govern, but in no event shall the front setback be less than 30 feet. This
exception shall not apply to the B-2 and I zones.
3. Maximum lot coverage shall include all accessory buildings, covered and uncovered porches, terraces, chimneys, steps, stairs and extensions
a. In a R-B1 residential, single-family district, the maximum lot coverage shall be 32%. However, it may be increased to 35% if at least 3% of the coverage of building area is utilized for accessory buildings, covered and uncovered porches, terraces, chimneys, steps,
stairs, and extensions.
4. Areas indicated are for living areas only, exclusive of finished basements, garage or other finished rooms in the basement area.
5. Maximum of 2 stories of office floors above 1 level of ground level parking, but not to exceed height limit in feet.
6. Second floor shall not exceed the exterior building limits of the first floor.
7. See Table 1.
8. No lot or parcel of land utilized within this zone shall exceed a maximum area of 10,000 square feet.
9. Ground floor total area not to exceed 1,600 square feet.
30 Attachment 1:1 Supp 1, Oct 2020
ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS CODE
TABLE I
COVERAGE FOR OVERSIZE PARCELS*
30 Attachment 1:2 Supp 1, Oct 2020
RA Zone
Parcel Size %
Coverage
Area
Coverage
10,000
(min.)
32% 3,200
11,000 31% 3,410
12,000 30% 3,600
13,000 29% 3,770
14,000 28% 3,920
15,000 27% 4,050
16,000 26% 4,160
17,000 25% 4,250
18,000 24% 4,320
19,000 23% 4,370
20,000** 22% 4,400
Unlimited N/A 4,400 (max.)
R-B Zone
Parcel Size %
Coverage
Area
Coverage
7,000 (min.) 32% 2,240
8,000 31% 2,480
9,000 30% 2,700
10,000 29% 2,900
11,000 28% 3,080
12,000 27% 3,240
13,000 26% 3,380
14,000** 25% 3,500
Unlimited N/A 3,500 (max.)
R-B-1 Zone
Parcel Size %
Coverage
Area
Coverage
5,000 (min.) 32% 1,600
6,000 31% 1,860
7,000 30% 2,100
8,000 29% 2,320
9,000 28% 2,520
10,000** 27% 2,700
Unlimited N/A 2,700 (max.)
* Parcel size and area coverage figures are in square feet.
** At or beyond this size parcel, lots may be subdivided.
ZONING
Table 2
Zone Schedule
B-2A (Limited Business Southeast Overlay Zone District)
Regulation Overlay Standard No. 1 Overlay Standard No. 2
Minimum Lot Area1 Min.: > 5 acres;
Max.: 205 acres
Minimum 20 acres
Minimum Lot Width 250 feet 500 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 60 feet 60 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback (one/both) 60 feet 100 feet
Minimum building setback from any North Woods
of the New LG Corporate Campus Inclusionary
Housing 1 (IH-1) inclusionary housing zone
boundary
0 feet 0 feet
Minimum Rear Yard 22.5% of lot depth 25% of lot depth
Maximum Lot Coverage2
22.5% 24%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 40% 42%
Maximum Building Height (Ft./Sty)3
35 Ft./2 stories 35 Ft./2 Stories
Buffer for Residential Zones4
100 feet 100 Feet
1 Lots of less than 5 acres in area are required to meet the underlying B-2 zone area and bulk requirements.
2 Maximum Lot Coverage shall include all accessory buildings, parking garage, covered and uncovered porches,
terraces, chimneys, steps, stairs and extensions.
3 Building Height is measured from the mean curb level to the highest point of building.
4 No buffer is required from any inclusionary housing project constructed in the North Woods of the New LG
Corporate Campus Inclusionary Housing 1 (IH-1) Zone provided that the two (2) areas of freshwater wetlands
and their transition areas remain undisturbed and continue to act as a natural buffer.
30 Attachment 1:3 Supp 1, Oct 2020