The Charter
Part I: Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Board of Water Commissioners — See Ch.
14A, Art. V.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
Purchasing and contracting — See Ch. 68.
C:1

ARTICLE I
Incorporation, Succession, General Law Defined, General Powers
Enumerated
§ C-1. Incorporation and corporate name. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(71)
§ C-2. Succession. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(72)
Any city adopting this Act shall succeed to all the right, title and interest
in property, of every kind, nature or description, which was owned, held
or enjoyed by the municipality of which it is the successor. All ordinances
and resolutions of the City to the extent they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act shall remain in full force and effect until modified
or repealed as provided by law. All contracts, bonds and other obligations
theretofore entered into by any city adopting this Act shall remain in full
force and effect.
§ C-3. "General law" defined. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(73)
For the purposes of this Act, a "general law" shall be deemed to be any law
or provision of law, not inconsistent with this Act, heretofore or hereafter
enacted which is by its terms applicable or available to all municipalities,
and the following additional laws whether or not such additional laws are so
applicable or available to all municipalities: legislation relating to taxation,
local courts, education, health, public authorities serving more than one
municipality, and municipalities in unsound financial condition.
§ C-4. General powers vested in city and construction thereof.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(74)
A. Any city of this state that may adopt the provisions of this Act shall
thereby be and become a body corporate and shall have the officers,
government and powers that are herein provided for or conferred and
by all applicable provisions of general law.
B. Upon the adoption of this Act the name of the City adopting its
provisions shall be, and it shall thereafter be known as "The City of
.................." (inserting in the said blank the territorial name by which
said city has been theretofore designated or known, not including in
said name such words as the Mayor and City Council or other like
words).
A. Each city adopting this Act shall, subject to the provisions of this Act or
other general law, have full power to:
(1) Organize and regulate its internal affairs, and establish, alter,
merge, consolidate or abolish offices, departments, positions and
employments and define the functions, powers and duties thereof;
and fix their term, tenure and compensation; provided, however,
any board established for the operation of any department by vote
§ C-1 CHARTER § C-4
C:3
of the people shall not be abolished, merged or consolidated except
by vote of the people;
(2) Adopt regulatory ordinances and enforce both regulatory and
health ordinances enacted by the local Board of Health and impose
penalties or fines not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or both, for the violation thereof;
(3) Construct, acquire, operate or maintain any and all public
improvements, projects or enterprises for any public purpose
except as otherwise limited by law, and exercise all powers of local
government in such manner as its governing body may determine;
(4) Expend moneys for any public purpose, enter into any contract,
buy, sell, lease, hold and dispose of real and personal property
within or without the geographical boundaries of the City or do any
act similar to or dissimilar to the foregoing authorized expressly or
impliedly by any other general law for municipalities generally and
for cities of the same form and class.
B. It is the intention and purport hereof to confer the greatest power of
local self-government consistent with the Constitution of this state. Any
specific enumeration of municipal powers contained in this section or in
this Act shall not be construed in any way to limit the general
description of powers contained in this article, and any such specifically
enumerated municipal powers shall be construed as in addition and
supplementary to the powers conferred in general terms by this article.
All powers vested by this Act or general law in the City shall be liberally
construed in favor of the City and its governing body. Powers delegated
by law or this Act to a subordinate city agency, board or commission
shall be strictly construed as not removing any powers from the
governing body and vesting the same in any subordinate body except to
the extent expressly set forth or necessarily implied from any such
provision.
§ C-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-4
C:4
ARTICLE II
Elected Officials
§ C-5. Number and term. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(75)
The City shall be governed by an elected Mayor and a City Council
consisting of two elected Councilmen from each ward, each of whom shall
serve for a term of four years beginning at 12:00 o'clock noon January 1
next following his election.
§ C-6. Time of election. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(76)
The Mayor and one Councilman from each ward shall be elected in the
general election in which members of the general assembly are to be
elected next following the date of adoption by any city of the provisions of
this Act, and the remaining Councilman from each ward shall, except as
provided in § C-56 of this Act, be elected at the second succeeding general
election at which members of the general assembly are to be elected.
§ C-7. Eligibility for office. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(77)
§ C-8. Vacancies filled by election. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(78)
Vacancies occurring in any elective office shall be filled by election for the
remainder of the unexpired term at the next general election occurring not
less than 60 days thereafter, and shall, until a successor is elected and
A. No person shall be eligible as a candidate for election as Mayor or
qualified to serve as Mayor unless he shall be a citizen of the United
States and shall have resided in the City continuously for a period of
two years next preceding the date of his election to office and
continuously after the date of election and during his term of office. No
person shall be eligible for election or appointment to the office of
Councilman unless he shall be a citizen of the United States and shall
have resided:
(1) In the City continuously for a period of two years next preceding
the date of his election or appointment to office; and
(2) In the ward which he is to represent continuously for a period of
one year next preceding the date of his election or appointment to
office and shall maintain each such residence after his election or
appointment, as the case may be.
B. If any such person shall terminate the residency hereinbefore required
while a candidate, then the said position shall thereupon become vacant
and be filled as provided by law; if the termination shall occur after
election to office but before commencement of the term thereof, then
the said office shall be deemed vacant as of the date of commencement
of the term; if the required residency shall cease during service in
office, then the office shall be deemed immediately vacant.
§ C-5 CHARTER § C-8
C:5
qualified, be filled in accordance with this article. Unless such vacancies
occur not less than 60 days prior to a primary election, nomination for such
vacant offices shall be made by the filing at least 40 days prior to such
general election with the County Clerk of:
§ C-9. Interim filling of vacancies until election. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(79)
A. A statement duly certified by the members of the county committee of a
political party from the territory affected by such vacancy setting forth
the name of a candidate who shall thereupon be the candidate of such
political party at the general election.
B. A petition directly nominating a candidate made in the manner
provided by law for the filling of vacancies in municipal offices where
candidates are nominated by direct petition for a general election.
A. The Mayor shall in case of his absence from the City or his disability,
such that he is unable to attend to the usual and routine functions of his
office, designate a City officer as Acting Mayor for a period not
exceeding 60 consecutive days. In the event of the absence from the
City or disability of the Mayor exceeding 60 consecutive days or
vacancy in the office of the Mayor, the Chairman of the City Council
shall serve as Acting Mayor until such absence shall terminate,
disability be removed, or the vacancy be filled by the election and
qualification of a successor as provided by this article. Any person
serving as Acting Mayor shall be vested with all the rights, powers and
duties of Mayor; provided, however, that, during the first 60
consecutive days of such absence or disability, no appointments shall be
made by the Acting Mayor except temporary appointments necessary
for the continuing function of government.
B. Vacancies in the office of Councilman shall be filled by an interim
appointment of the City Council of a qualified person from the same
political party as the most recent incumbent thereof, if elected as a
nominee of a political party, until the election and qualification of a
successor as provided by this article.
§ C-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-9
C:6
ARTICLE III
City Council
§ C-10. Organization, meetings and election of Council Chairman.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(80)
§ C-11. Council Chairman. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(81)
The Council Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the City Council. In
the event of the absence from the City or disability of the Council Chairman
for any cause or reason, then the members of the City Council shall elect
one of their own number as Acting Chairman during such absence or
disability or, in the case of a vacancy in the office of Council Chairman,
shall elect a new Council Chairman. The Council Chairman while acting as
Mayor shall be disabled and disqualified from participating in or voting on
any matter before Council.
§ C-12. Majority and quorum. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(82)
A quorum of the City Council required for the transaction of business shall
consist of a majority of the whole number of the City Council as provided
by law and, unless otherwise required by law, all actions of the City Council
shall be by an affirmative vote conducted at a public meeting of at least a
majority of the members of Council then in office and not disqualified by law
from voting thereon; provided, however, in the absence of a quorum, any
meeting of the City Council may be adjourned without such affirmative vote.
§ C-13. Adoption and publication of ordinances. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(83)
Every ordinance or resolution introduced for consideration shall be reduced
to written form, and except as otherwise provided by this Act, shall be
adopted and published in the manner required by general law; provided,
however, that any ordinance may incorporate by reference technical
A. The annual organizational meeting of the City Council shall be held at
12:00 o'clock noon on January 1 (or if said day falls on a Sunday, then
January 2), at which time the members of the City Council shall elect
one of their own number to serve as Council Chairman until his
successor is elected.
B. Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at least once each
month at such time and place within the City as it shall designate.
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or Council Chairman upon
such notice as may be set forth in the rules of the City Council. Upon the
filing with the City Clerk of a petition signed by at least 100 registered
voters of the City requesting a special meeting of the City Council to
consider any matter relating to the welfare of the City referred to in
such petition, the Chairman shall forthwith call such a meeting at a date
and place specified in a notice thereof published in an official
newspaper at least 10 days prior to the date of such meeting.
§ C-10 CHARTER § C-13
C:7
regulations or codes, official or unofficial, which need not be so published
whenever 10 copies of said regulations or code have been placed on file
in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the body or department
charged with the enforcement of said ordinance for the examination by the
public so long as said ordinance is in effect.
§ C-14. Powers of the City Council. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(84)
The governing body of the City shall be the City Council in which, unless
otherwise provided herein or by general law, all legislative power of the City
shall vest, including but not limited to the following enumerated powers to:
A. Pass, adopt, amend and repeal any ordinance or, where permitted, any
resolution for any purpose required for the government of the City, or
for the accomplishment of any public purpose for which the City is
authorized to act.
B. Enact any regulatory ordinance authorized by law and provide penalties
for the violations thereof as hereinbefore provided.
C. Pass or adopt rules governing its internal procedures not inconsistent
with any applicable provisions of this Act or general law.
D. Control and regulate the finances of the City and raise money by
borrowing or by taxation and notwithstanding other provisions of this
Act or of any other law except Title 18 of the Revised Statutes
(Education), enact an ordinance requiring that there shall be attached
to the budget request of each office, department, board, commission or
agency a schedule containing the number of persons employed or to be
employed for each office, position or employment, except where the
City Council by ordinance has exempted a particular category of
employment from such specification, and the salary to be paid for each,
and said schedule shall not be revised by such office, department,
board, commission or agency subsequent to the initial approval of the
budget by the City Council unless such revision is approved prior to the
final adoption of the budget by the City Council in the same manner as
the budget is amended, or subsequent thereto by two-thirds (2/3) of the
members of the City Council serving in office and not disqualified from
voting thereon, unless an affirmative vote of a greater number is
otherwise required by general law.
E. Enact ordinances governing the administrative structure of the City and
its departments1 and, except as otherwise provided herein and in Title
11 of the Revised Statutes (Civil Service) where adopted and in effect in
a municipality, governing personnel practices of the City2 and
prohibiting actions and activities of city officers and employees inimical
to the integrity of the government of the City.
1. Editor's Note: As to the administrative organization in the City, see Ch. 5.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Personnel Policies.
§ C-13 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-14
C:8
F. Except as hereinafter limited by reason of the establishment of a
commission pursuant to the vote of the people of the City, establish,
regulate and maintain a Police Department and Fire Department or
combined department therefor.
G. Except as hereinafter limited by reason of the establishment of a
commission pursuant to the vote of the people of the City, establish,
regulate and maintain a Water Department; provide a supply of pure
and wholesome water for the use of the City, its inhabitants and such
other persons and for such incidental use as may be authorized
including water for fire and sprinkling purposes; regulate the use of
water; fix and establish rates or charges, provide for the collection of
the same; provide by ordinance for administration of the Department;
and do all such things which a Board of Water Commissioners may do
when acting in lieu thereof.3
H. Perform all other acts, duties or functions to the fullest extent permitted
by law.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 14A, Art. V, Board of Water Commissioners.
§ C-14 CHARTER § C-14
C:9

ARTICLE IV
Duties and Powers of the Mayor
§ C-15. Executive powers; powers and duties of Mayor. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(85)
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall have, in
addition to other duties and powers vested in him by this Act or by general
law, the power and duty to:
§ C-16. Approval or veto of ordinances and resolutions. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(86)
A. Administer the affairs of the City and supervise all City departments not
otherwise entrusted by law or this Act to some other officer, board,
agency or commission.
B. Enforce this Act, City ordinances and all general laws applicable
thereto.
C. Recommend from time to time to the City Council such ordinances,
resolutions or other action as he may deem necessary or expedient for
the welfare or good government of the City.
D. Present at the annual organizational meeting of the City Council a
general statement with respect to the government and finances of the
City, together with such recommendations as he may deem proper.
E. Control and direct the police force and police officers of the City to quell
insurrections, riots or disorderly assemblages or to meet any
emergency imperiling public safety and, in the absence of a Board of
Police Commissioners, to control and direct them generally.
F. Serve as the appointing authority with respect to all employees of the
City not otherwise by law or the provisions of this Act subject to the
jurisdiction of another board, commission or agency, with power to
remove, suspend, discharge or otherwise discipline employees as
permitted by law, personally or through the head of the department in
which the said employee is employed.
G. Perform such duties, functions and acts as the representative of the City
not otherwise vested in any other city officer, board, agency or
commission.
A. Every ordinance and resolution passed or adopted by the City Council,
or by the Board of Police Commissioners, Board of Fire Commissioners
or Board of Water Commissioners, where such boards have been
established, shall be submitted to the Mayor by the City Clerk or by the
Secretary of any such Board within three business days after its final
passage or adoption and shall be duly certified to him by the City Clerk
and either by the City Council Chairman, if originating from the City
Council, or by the Secretary of the originating Board. If the Mayor shall
§ C-15 CHARTER § C-16
C:11
approve the same by affixing his signature thereto or shall fail to act
thereon within 10 days after the said ordinance or resolution has been
submitted to him, the said ordinance or resolution shall thereupon
become effective as provided by law or in accordance with its terms.
If the Mayor shall disapprove any ordinance or resolution submitted
to him, he shall transmit it together with a statement containing his
objections to the City Clerk. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, upon
receiving any such ordinance or resolution with objections from the
Mayor, to report the same to the City Council at its next regular meeting
and where a resolution was adopted by a Board, then also to advise the
Secretary of such Board. At such meeting the objections of the Mayor
shall be read in full and entered into the minutes, and thereupon the
City Council may proceed to consider the Mayor's objections and vote
thereon. Upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the number
of members of the City Council then in office and not disqualified by
law from voting thereon to approve the said ordinance or resolution
notwithstanding the veto of the Mayor at the aforesaid meeting or at
any subsequent meeting within 30 days from the date thereof, the same
shall become effective as provided by law or in accordance with its
terms.
B. Every ordinance or resolution shall be presented to the Mayor as herein
provided notwithstanding the absence of any statutory reference to the
Mayor where the statute requires action by the governing body, unless
by the express terms of this Act or of any law the Mayor is excluded
from consideration thereof.
§ C-16 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-16
C:12
ARTICLE V
City Officers and Departments
§ C-17. Establishment of City departments. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(87)
Except as limited by law or this Act, the City shall operate with such
departments as may be established from time to time and with such powers
and duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, which departments may
be reorganized, merged, consolidated or abolished when necessary or
appropriate for the efficient operation of the City; provided, however, that
except by vote of the people no change shall be made in the Board of
Police Commissioners, Board of Fire Commissioners or Board of Water
Commissioners4 where established by vote of the people.
§ C-18. City officers; certain offices specified; designation as City
officers; provisions governing offices. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(88)
§ C-19. Appointment and term of office of City officers. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(89)
All City officers, unless otherwise provided by law or this Act, shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council and
shall serve for a term coterminous with the term of office of the Mayor
A. The following offices shall exist in any city under this Act and shall not
be subject to abolition by ordinance or referendum: Mayor, members of
the City Council, City Clerk.
B. The following offices once created by referendum can only be merged
or abolished by referendum: Police Chief, Fire Chief, members of the
Board of Police Commissioners, members of the Board of Fire
Commissioners, members of the Board of Water Commissioners.
C. The following offices shall exist in any city under this Act, unless
otherwise provided by ordinance: Corporation Counsel, Director of
Finance, Collector of Taxes,5 Tax Assessor or Director of Property
Taxation, City Treasurer and Director of Public Works. [Amended
11-25-1968 by Ord. No. 59-1968; 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986;
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
D. Each member of each board or commission entrusted with powers of
government and each head of a department, whether or not expressly
recited herein, shall be considered a City officer.
E. The City Council shall by ordinance prescribe the powers and duties for
each office in the City unless otherwise provided by law; fix the salaries
and compensation for each office to the extent permitted thereby; and
establish other offices as needed from time to time.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 14A, Art. V, Board of Water Commissioners.
5. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 59-1968, adopted 11-25-1968, amended the Code of the City of
East Orange to change "Collector of Taxes" to read "Collector of Taxes and Revenue."
§ C-17 CHARTER § C-19
C:13
unless a different term is fixed by ordinance; provided, however, that the
Police Chief and the Fire Chief shall serve unless removed for cause in
accordance with this article; and provided, further, that the expiration of the
then current term of an incumbent City officer shall not be affected by any
ordinance adopted during such term.
§ C-20. Vacancies in appointive offices. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(90)
§ C-21. Citizenship and residency requirements for City officers.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(91)
No person shall be eligible for an appointive City office unless he be a
citizen of the United States and a resident of the City. If any such officer
shall move from the City during his term, his office shall thereby become
vacant.
§ C-22. Failure to appear or testify before court, legislative
committee or Governor. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(92)
If any person hereafter elected or appointed to any office or position in
the City shall, after lawful notice or process, willfully refuse or fail to
appear before any court, any legislative committee, or the Governor, or
having appeared shall refuse to testify or answer any question regarding
the property, government or affairs of the City, or regarding his nomination,
election, appointment or official conduct on the ground that his answer
would tend to incriminate him, or shall refuse to waive immunity from
prosecution on account of any such matter in relationship to which he
may be asked to testify, shall be subject to removal for cause as provided
by this Act. Any person removed from any office pursuant to this section
shall not thereafter be eligible for election or appointment to any office or
employment in the City.
§ C-23. Conflicts of interest. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(93)
A. Any vacancy occurring for any reason in any appointive office shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment to such office.
B. In case any appointed City officer be suspended or through illness or
other cause temporarily be unable to perform the duties of his office,
then the Mayor shall have power to designate, by a written statement
signed by him and filed with the City Clerk, a suitable person to act in
the place and stead of such officer until such disability be removed.
A. Any elected or appointed City officer having a direct or indirect
personal interest in any City business shall, immediately upon learning
of such interest, file written notice thereof with the Mayor and with the
body, board, commission or department head having jurisdiction of such
business; provided, however, that if the Mayor shall have such personal
interest, he shall also file written notice with the City Clerk.
§ C-19 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-23
C:14
§ C-24. Suspensions and removal for cause. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(94)
The Mayor shall have power for sufficient cause to suspend any appointed
City officer, and in case of the suspension of any such officer, the Mayor
shall within five days thereafter deliver to the City Clerk a specification
in writing of the charges preferred against such officer and cause a copy
of the same to be served personally, and if personal service cannot be
affected, then by registered mail addressed to the accused officer's last
known address; and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to present such
charges to the City Council at its next regular meeting, and thereafter the
City Council shall proceed as speedily as possible to hear and determine the
said charges, after reasonable notice of such hearing to the accused and
an opportunity to the accused to be heard with his witnesses. If upon such
hearing the charges preferred against such officer shall not be sustained
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council, the officer shall be thereby
immediately restored to office, but if such charges be sustained by a like
vote of the City Council, then said office shall become and be vacant, and
the vacancy caused thereby may be filled as herein provided.
§ C-25. Appointment and duties of City Clerk. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(95)
The City Council shall appoint a City Clerk for a term of four years
commencing on 12:00 o'clock noon of January 1. The City Clerk shall serve
as Clerk of the City Council and shall keep its minutes and records of its
proceedings, maintain and compile ordinances and resolutions, as provided
by this Act, and perform such additional functions as may be required by
law or ordinance. The office of Deputy Clerk may be created by ordinance,
and the appointment thereof shall be made in the manner provided by
this Act for the appointment of City officers generally. In the absence or
temporary disability of the City Clerk, the City Council shall appoint an
acting City Clerk during such absence or temporary disability with all his
powers and duties, provided that if a Deputy City Clerk shall be serving,
he shall so act without action of the City Council. Any vacancy in the office
of the City Clerk shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term
thereof.
B. After written notice has been given in accordance with this section, no
further action shall be taken on said City business with the interested
officer; provided, however, that if by resolution it is determined that the
welfare of the City requires the purchase of real property or any right,
title or interest therein from the interested officer, or the taking of any
other action, such City business may be conducted with the interested
officer after full public disclosure thereof.
C. Failure to comply with this section shall be cause for removal from
office. The City Council may by ordinance regulate limitations and
procedures concerning City employees as to any personal interest of
such employees in City business.
§ C-23 CHARTER § C-26
C:15
§ C-26. Office of Chief Finance Officer or Director of Finance.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(96) [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986]
A. The Director of Finance, unless the City Council shall designate another
City officer by ordinance, shall supervise and direct a system of internal
controls over the fiscal affairs of the City and, unless otherwise
expressly provided by law, each of its constituent boards, commissions
or bodies. The ordinance shall provide for an encumbrance system of
budget operation, for expenditures only upon written requisition, for
the preaudit of all claims and demands against the City prior to
payment and for the control of all payments out of any public funds by
individual checks for each payment to the official having custody
thereof.
B. The Director of Finance, or other officer so designated, shall have the
duty to maintain records of all fiscal transactions of the City, including
all vouchers or checks audited by him, and shall make such
examinations and render reports as required by law or as directed by
resolution. He shall have the right, duty and power to examine all
books, records of accounts, and vouchers of any board, commission,
body or officer and may compel by subpoena where necessary any City
officer or employee of the City to submit to examination under oath on
any matter pertaining to the fiscal affairs of the City.
§ C-26 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-26
C:16
ARTICLE VI
Special Boards for the Operation of the Police, Fire or Water
Departments
§ C-27. Establishment, merger, consolidation or abolition. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(97)
A. The City Council, by resolution, may, and upon the filing with the City
Clerk of a written petition signed by 100 residents of the City registered
to vote in the last preceding general election requesting said action
shall, place on the ballot for the next general election a proposition for
the establishment, merger, consolidation or abolition of a Board of
Police Commissioners, Board of Fire Commissioners or Board of Water
Commissioners; except that, if no general election is to be held within
90 days of such resolution, the Council may provide for a special
election to consider such a proposition. Each proposition shall relate to
only one such Board; provided, however, that more than one proposition
may appear on the same ballot. The proposition shall be publicized and
advertised, and any such special election shall be conducted in the
manner hereinafter provided in this Act.
B. The proposition shall be presented in the following general form:
C. If at an election held as hereinabove provided the voters, by a majority
of those of the legal voters of the City who vote on the proposition,
assent to the establishment, merger, consolidation or abolition as the
case may be of any board, an ordinance effectuating the expressed
desire of the voters shall be adopted within 60 days from the date
thereof.
§ C-27 CHARTER § C-27
C:17
§ C-28. Powers and duties of the boards governing the Police or Fire
Departments. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(98)
When established by the voters of the City, the board shall assume
responsibility for the operation, conduct and efficiency of the Police or Fire
Department, as the case may be, and shall have power by resolution to:
§ C-29. Powers and duties of the Board of Water Commissioners.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(99)
When established by the voters of the City, the Board of Water
Commissioners shall assume responsibility for the operation, conduct and
efficiency of the Water Department and shall have power to:
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the City
Council may, by ordinance, abolish any of the boards created herein.
Upon the adoption of an ordinance abolishing any of the boards created
herein, all of the assets and liabilities of the board shall become the
assets and liabilities of the municipality. The municipality may, however,
create such advisory councils for its police, fire and water functions as
it may deem necessary.
A. Appoint all the personnel thereof necessary for the operation of the
Department; provided, however, that in the case of the Police
Department, the Police Chief, and of the Fire Department, the Fire
Chief shall be appointed as otherwise provided in this Act, and as the
appointing authority establish regulations and administer the same
governing personnel practices and policies including the exercise of the
power according to law to suspend, discharge, demote, promote or
discipline personnel.
B. Fix compensation as part of the annual budget of the Department,
which when adopted shall not thereafter be changed for the balance of
the fiscal year except as provided in this Act upon recommendation to
and after approval by resolution of the City Council.
C. Provide for the care and maintenance of all lands, improvements,
buildings, vehicles and other personalty entrusted to the Department,
but not for the acquisition, leasing or disposition of real property or any
right, title or interest therein except with the consent and approval of
the City Council.
D. Enter into contracts and agreements necessary for the operation of the
business of the Department and purchasing of equipment and supplies,
except as limited by ordinance requiring the purchase and disposition
of equipment and supplies of a character not unique to the Department
to be conducted through a central purchasing agency for the City.
A. Appoint, fix the compensation of and, in accordance with law, to
suspend, discharge and discipline all personnel thereof necessary for
the operation of the Department.
§ C-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-29
C:18
§ C-30. Fiscal operation of the Water Department by the Board of
Water Commissioners. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(100)
B. Appoint by resolution a Water Engineer for a term of three years and
prescribe his duties.
C. Provide for the care and maintenance of all lands, improvements,
buildings, vehicles and other personalty entrusted to the Department.
D. Enter into contracts and agreements necessary for the operation of the
business of the Department and purchasing of supplies and equipment.
E. Exercise custody, control and management of the waterworks and
water supply of the City, including the power and authority to maintain,
repair, equip and extend the waterworks and water supply system of the
City both within the City and outside the boundaries thereof.
F. Establish and, from time to time, change the rates to be charged for
water supplied to the inhabitants of the City or others and adopt and
establish rules and regulations with respect to the use and protection of
the water supply and waterworks and determine, where service to
inhabitants of the City will not be impaired, the terms, bases and extent
that water may be sold or supplied to other municipalities or to the
residents thereof.
A. All moneys received from:
(1) The residents of the City or from other consumers for water
supplies;
(2) Other services performed by the Water Department;
(3) Sale, lease or disposal of water reserve lands as hereinafter
provided;
(4) The proceeds of bonds or notes issued in such city for the uses or
purposes of the Water Department; and
(5) Appropriations of the City Council for the use or purposes of the
Water Department,
shall be kept in a special fund to be known as the "Water
Department Fund," which shall be paid out only on warrants or
checks signed by the Chairman or President of the Board of Water
Commissioners and the Mayor.
B. The said Board shall, on or before a certain day in each year to be fixed
by the Board, cause a careful estimate to be made of the interest on the
water debt, cost of managing and keeping in repair and operation the
works for the ensuing year, the amount to be received during the same
year for the use of water and water rents, and the deficiency, if any, of
such receipts for the payment of such expenditures, and shall report the
§ C-29 CHARTER § C-30
C:19
§ C-31. Limitation of powers over acquisition and disposition of
water reserve lands. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(101)
The Board of Water Commissioners shall have use of real property needed
for water reserve and water supply purposes. No real property or interest
therein shall be leased, sold or disposed of or easement given or contract
thereafter authorized for purposes other than the operation of the
waterworks or water supply system unless the Board of Water
Commissioners shall determine that the sale, lease, easement or disposition
can be made without impairing the operation and function, present or
anticipated, of the water supply and water reserve system for the people of
the City. No such lease, sale, disposition or easement or contract therefor
shall be authorized by the City Council unless and until notice 30 days in
advance thereof has been filed in writing with the Secretary of the Board
to afford opportunity by the Board to make any appropriate determination
and advise the City Council thereof. Real property or interests therein
acquired as part of the water supply or water reserve system shall be
held in the name of the City, and such acquisition shall be made upon
recommendation of the Board of Water Commissioners and adoption of an
ordinance concurring therein by the City Council.
same in writing to the City Council, and if there is any deficiency,
the said report shall be submitted no later than January 25 of the
year in which the deficiency is anticipated, whereupon the City Council
shall include in the annual budget an appropriation to meet any such
deficiency. In case of any such deficiency, the City Council shall have
the right and power to review and pass upon the budget of the Water
Department for the year of the deficiency in the same manner as the
rest of the municipal budget, but otherwise shall not be required to vote
thereon.
C. The Board shall not have the power to incur indebtedness, and any
bond issue required for capital expenditures shall require authorization
by ordinance. If the surplus accumulated by the Water Department and
reserves not committed as allowed by law shall exceed at the end of the
fiscal year 50% of the gross revenue for that year from the sale of water
to the inhabitants of the City or other consumers, then the Board of
Water Commissioners shall appropriate the excess over 50% to and for
the general use of the City unless the City Council by resolution
authorizes the Board of Water Commissioners to retain part or all of the
said excess for some other lawful purpose.
§ C-30 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-31
C:20
ARTICLE VII
Recall
§ C-32. Elective officers; removal by recall petition and vote. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(102)
Any elective officer shall be subject to removal from office for cause
connected with his office, after he has served at least one year, upon the
filing of a recall petition and the affirmative vote of a majority of those
voting on the question of removal at any general or special election.
§ C-33. Recall petition. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(103)
A recall petition shall demand the removal of a designated incumbent, shall
be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least 25% of the persons
registered to vote at the last preceding general election of the territory
represented by said incumbent and shall be filed with the City Clerk. It shall
set forth a statement of the cause upon which the removal is sought.
§ C-34. Signatures to recall petition. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(104)
The signatures to a recall petition need not all be appended to one paper,
but each signer shall add to his signature his place of residence giving the
street and number or other sufficient designation if there shall be no street
and number. One of the signers to each such paper shall take an oath before
an officer competent to administer oaths that the statement therein made
is true as he believes and that each signature to the paper appended is
the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Within
10 days from the date of filing the petition the City Clerk shall complete
his examination and ascertain whether or not such petition is signed by
the requisite number of qualified voters and shall attach to the petition his
certificate showing the result of his examination. If by that certificate the
petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended within 10 days from
the date of said certificate. The City Clerk shall, within five days after such
amendment, make a similar examination and determination of the amended
petition, and if the certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, it shall
be returned to the person filing it without prejudice to the filing of a new
petition to the same effect.
§ C-35. Notice to officer; recall election; notice of filing of petition.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(105)
If the petition shall be sufficient the City Clerk shall, within two days, notify
the Mayor, Councilman or Councilmen whose recall is sought thereby. If
such notice cannot be served personally upon the Mayor, Councilman or
Councilmen affected, service may be made by registered mail addressed to
the officer's last known address. If, within five days after the service of the
notice by the City Clerk, the Mayor, Councilman or Councilmen sought to
be recalled by such petition do not resign, the City Clerk shall order and fix
a date for holding a recall election not less than 70 nor more than 100 days
§ C-32 CHARTER § C-35
C:21
from the filing of the petition as finally amended and advertise the same as
hereinafter provided in this Act.
§ C-36. Ballots. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(106)
The ballots at the recall election shall conform to the requirements
respecting the election of officers in the City, as provided in this Act or in
Title 19 of the Revised Statutes (Elections), except that the words "recall
election" shall appear on the ballot. The recall feature of the ballot shall
appear at the top thereof and shall be separated from the portion of the
ballot for the election of officers by a heavy black line. The proposal for
recall shall be placed on the ballot in the following manner: "Shall ..........
(here insert name of incumbent) .......... be removed from office by recall?"
This matter shall occupy two lines in boldface type. Immediately below
the above wording shall appear the phrase "for recall" and immediately
underneath such phrase the words "against recall." Immediately at the left
of each of these two phrases shall be printed a square, in which the voter
may make a cross (X) or plus (+) or a check ( ) mark. Immediately below
the foregoing shall appear the following:
"Indicate your vote by placing a cross (X) or plus (+) or check ( ) mark
in one of the squares above."
§ C-37. Removal of more than one officer. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(107)
If the removal of more than one officer is sought, the same provisions
for submitting to the electors the question and direction hereinbefore
described shall be repeated in the case of each officer concerned and his
position on the ballot for his recall shall be in the order of the filing of the
petition with the City Clerk.
§ C-38. Election of successor; use of recall ballot. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(108)
The same ballot used for submitting the question or questions of recall
shall be used for the election of a successor to the incumbent sought to be
removed, and immediately under the black line following the recall question
shall appear the phrase "Nominees for successors of .......... (here insert
name of incumbent) .......... in the event he is recalled." The names of all
persons nominated as successors shall be placed upon the ballot in the same
manner provided for other elections of elected officers in the City.
§ C-39. Nomination of candidate for successor of recalled
incumbent. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(109)
Nomination of candidates for successor of recalled incumbent shall be made
in the same manner provided in this Act for nomination of candidates to fill
a vacancy in an elective office.
§ C-35 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-40
C:22
§ C-40. Results of election. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(110)
§ C-41. Successor where incumbent resigns after a certain date or
is recalled. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(111)
If the office of the incumbent shall become vacant either by his resignation
after the date is fixed by the City Clerk for the recall election or by the
result of the recall election, his successor shall be the nominee receiving
the greatest number of votes at the recall election. The person so elected
shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
A. If a majority of votes in connection with the recall of any officer be in
favor of the recall, the term of office of such officer shall terminate upon
the certificate of the results of election by the City Clerk.
B. If the results of such recall election shall, by the certificate of the City
Clerk, be shown to be against the recall of the officer, he shall continue
in office as if no recall election had been held, and the vote for the
election for the successor of such officer taken at the time of such
attempted recall shall be void.
§ C-40 CHARTER § C-41
C:23

ARTICLE VIII
Initiative and Referendum
§ C-42. Petition; percentage of registered voters required. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(112)
The voters of the City may propose any ordinance and may adopt or reject
the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any
initiated ordinance may be submitted to the City Council by a written
petition delivered to the City Clerk and signed by qualified voters equal
in number to at least 15% of the persons registered to vote at the last
preceding general election.
§ C-43. Power of referendum; time for filing petition. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(113)
The voters shall also have the power of referendum, which is the power to
approve or reject at the polls any ordinance submitted by the Council to the
voters or any ordinance passed by the Council against which a referendum
petition has been filed as herein provided. No ordinance passed by the
City Council other than the local budget ordinance, except when otherwise
required by general law or passed following the adoption of a resolution on
the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the number of members of the City
Council then in office and not disqualified by law from voting thereon, shall
take effect before 20 days from the time of its final passage and its approval
by the Mayor. If within 20 days after such final passage and approval of such
ordinance a written petition signed by qualified voters equal in number to
at least 15% of the persons registered to vote at the last preceding general
election, protesting against the passage of such ordinance, shall be filed
with the City Clerk, the ordinance shall be suspended from taking effect
until proceedings are had as herein provided.
§ C-44. Petition papers; affidavits. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(114)
All petition papers circulated for the purposes of an initiative or referendum
shall be uniform in size and style. Initiative petition papers shall contain
the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or
referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each
separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator
thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any such petition paper
shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall indicate after his
name his place of residence by street and number or other description
sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition paper
the names and addresses of five voters, designated as the "Committee of the
Petitioners," who shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and
filing of the petition and for its possible withdrawal as hereinafter provided.
Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the
circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing
paper, that all the signatures appended thereto were made in his presence,
§ C-42 CHARTER § C-44
C:25
and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose
names they purport to be.
§ C-45. Filing of petition papers; examination; certificate of result.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(115)
All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall
be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one instrument. Within
20 days after a petition is filed, the City Clerk shall determine whether
each paper of the petitioner has a proper statement of the circulator and
whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters.
After completing his examination of the petition, the City Clerk shall certify
the result thereof to the Council at its next regular meeting. If he shall
certify that the petition is insufficient, he shall set forth in his certificate
the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify at least two
members of the Committee of the Petitioners of his findings.
§ C-46. Amendment of initiative or referendum petition. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(116)
An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within 10
days after the notification of insufficiency has been served by the City Clerk
by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed
as provided in case of an original petition. The City Clerk shall, within five
days after such an amendment is filed, examine the amended petition and,
if the petition be still insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in
his office and notify the Committee of the Petitioners of his findings, and no
further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding of the
insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for
the same purpose.
§ C-47. Suspension of ordinance. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(117)
Upon the filing of a referendum petition with the City Clerk, the ordinance
shall be suspended until 10 days following a finding by the City Clerk that
the petition is insufficient or, if an amended petition be filed, until five days
thereafter, or, if the petition or amended petition be found to be sufficient,
until it is withdrawn by the Committee of the Petitioners or until repeal
of the ordinance by vote of the Council or approval or disapproval of the
ordinance by the voters.
§ C-48. Submission to City Council. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(118)
Upon a finding by the City Clerk that any petition or amended petition
filed with him in accordance with this Act is sufficient, the City Clerk shall
submit the same to the City Council without delay. An initiative ordinance
so submitted shall be deemed to have had first reading, and provision shall
be made for a public hearing.
§ C-44 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-49
C:26
§ C-49. Submission of ordinance to voters; withdrawal of petition.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(119)
If within 60 days of the submission of a certified petition by the City Clerk
the City Council shall fail to pass an ordinance requested by an initiative
petition in substantially the form requested or to repeal an ordinance
as requested by a referendum petition, the City Clerk shall submit the
ordinance to the voters unless, within 10 days after final adverse action
by the City Council or after the expiration of the time allowed for such
action, as the case may be, a paper signed by at least four of the five
members of the Committee of the Petitioners shall be filed with the City
Clerk requesting that the petition be withdrawn. Upon the filing of such a
request, the original petition shall cease to have any force or effect.
§ C-50. Referendum election. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(120)
Any ordinance to be voted on by the voters in accordance with this article
shall be submitted at the next general election occurring not less than 60
days after the date of final action by the City Council or the expiration of the
time allowed for action by the City Council in this article, as the case may
be, provided that if no such election is to be held within 90 days the City
Council may in its discretion provide for a special election.
§ C-51. Number of proposed ordinances voted upon; time between
special elections. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(121)
Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election
in accordance with the provisions of this article, but there shall not be more
than one special election in any period of six months for such purpose.
§ C-52. Publication of ordinance. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(122)
Whenever an ordinance is to be submitted to the voters of the City at
any election in accordance with this article, the City Clerk shall cause the
ordinance to be publicized and advertised as hereinafter provided in this
Act.
§ C-53. Ballots. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(123)
The ballots to be used at such election shall be in substantially the following
form:
"To vote upon the public question printed below, if in favor thereof mark
a cross (X) or plus (+) or check ( ) in the square at the left of the word
'Yes,' and if opposed thereto mark a cross (X) or plus (+) or a check ( )
in the square to the left of the word 'No.'"
? Yes
? No
"Shall the ordinance (indicate whether submitted by the City
Council or initiative or referendum petition) providing for (here
state nature of proposed ordinance or proposition) be adopted?"
§ C-49 CHARTER § C-54
C:27
§ C-54. Results of election; conflicting measures. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(124)
If a majority of the qualified electors voting on the proposed ordinance
shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid
and binding ordinance of the City and be published as in the case of other
ordinances. If the provisions of two or more measures approved or adopted
at the same election conflict, then the measure receiving the greatest
affirmative vote shall control.
§ C-54 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-54
C:28
ARTICLE IX
Certain Election Procedures
§ C-55. Elections; publicizing and advertising in certain instances.
N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(125)
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all elections affecting the
government of the City shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the General Election Law of this state.
B. Any recall, referendum, initiative, public question or public proposition
relating to the government of the City shall be publicized and
advertised by the City Clerk who shall keep posted in a prominent
location in the City Clerk's office and in each of the official newspapers
of the City (but in no event in less than two newspapers circulated and
distributed in the City) on at least two occasions at least five days but
not more than 30 days prior to the date of election, the text of the
matter to be submitted, the date of election and the hours during which
the polls will be kept open.
§ C-55 CHARTER § C-55
C:29

ARTICLE X
Effective Date and Adoption
§ C-56. Operative in cities upon adoption by voters. N.J.S.A.
40:103-5(126)
This Act shall not become operative in any city unless and until the voters
thereof shall determine by referendum held in accordance with a resolution
adopted by the City Council or governing body pursuant to this Act that the
same shall apply thereto. The question shall be placed upon the ballot in
substantially the following form:
A. If this Act shall be adopted by any city governed at the time of its
adoption by Chapter 250 of the Laws of 1908, it shall operate in lieu
thereof, and any offices filled at the general election at which this Act
was adopted shall be for an initial term of four years if the election was
held at the same time the General Assembly was being elected,
otherwise for an initial term of three years, the term commencing 12:00
o'clock noon of January 1 next succeeding the election, notwithstanding
the fact that the term of office would have been for a different period if
the voters had not approved the revision. Any officials elected and in
office as of the time of the adoption of this Act as provided herein and
whose offices were not to be filled at the same general election as the
adoption hereof shall continue in office and their term shall be extended
to 12:00 o'clock noon of the January 1 following two years prior to the
expiration of the terms of the official elected simultaneously with the
adoption of this Act by any city. The term of any appointed official
whose appointment was made for a term commencing with the term of
the Mayor and coterminous therewith shall be extended so that it shall
remain coterminous with the term of the Mayor and expire at the same
time as the term of the Mayor.
B. If this Act shall be adopted by any city governed at the time of its
adoption by any state law other than said Chapter 250 of the Laws of
1908, such municipality shall continue under its present form of
government until 12:00 o'clock noon of the January 1 next following the
year in which the next succeeding General Assembly is to be elected,
and all persons appointed and elected in office at the time of adoption of
this Act shall continue in office until the said time. There shall be
nominated at the primary election at which candidates for the General
Assembly are to be nominated next following the adoption of this Act, a
§ C-56 CHARTER § C-56
C:31
Mayor and two Councilmen from each ward, one Councilman from each
ward to serve a term of two years from the date of commencement of
government under this Act and the Mayor and remaining Councilman
from each ward to serve a term of four years from the said date of
commencement. The ballot at the primary election for nomination and
at the general election for election to the office of Councilman shall
specify, in a manner provided by the County Clerk, the term for which
each candidate for Councilman seeks office during the initial election
therefor. Any subsequent elections after the initial election shall be for
a term of office as provided under Article II.
§ C-56 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-56
C:32
ARTICLE XI
Severability
§ C-57. Partial invalidity. N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(127)
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Act shall be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ C-57 CHARTER § C-57
C:33
The Code
Part II: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C-57 EAST ORANGE CODE § C-57
C:34
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by City Council
[Adopted 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of East Orange
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the
City of East Orange, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 264,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the City of East Orange." hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of East
Orange by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City,
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of East Orange" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 CHARTER § 1-6
C:35
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of East Orange, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the City. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of East
Orange to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 1-11
C:36
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
A. Except as provided in § 1-13, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of East Orange which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The City Council of the City of East
Orange has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in
effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Ordinance No. 22-2003, pertaining to peace and good order,
adopted November 24, 2003.
(2) Former Chapter 5, Article XI, Local Assistance Board, of the 1980
Code.
(3) Former Chapter 5, Article XXVII, Community Development
Advisory Council, of the 1980 Code.
(4) Former Chapter 5, Article XXXI, Mayor's Division of Neighborhood
Facilities, of the 1980 Code.
(5) Former Chapter 5, Article XXXVIII, Mayor's Division of Recreation,
of the 1980 Code.
(6) Former Chapter 42, Human Rights and Intergroup Relations
Commission, of the 1980 Code.
(7) Former Chapter 53, Mental Health Advisory Board, of the 1980
Code.
(8) Former Chapter 80, Telegraph Bureau, Fire and Police, of the 1980
Code.
(9) Former Chapter 110, Building Contractors, of the 1980 Code.
(10) Former Chapter 121, Checks, Fraudulent, of the 1980 Code.
(11) Former Chapter 176, Moving Permits, of the 1980 Code.
(12) Former Chapter 243, Sunday Activities, of the 1980 Code.
§ 1-11 CHARTER § 1-13
C:37
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 8, 2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the City's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
§ 1-13 EAST ORANGE CODE § 1-14
C:38
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. The following outdated terms have been changed where
they appeared in the prior Code:
(1) "City Counsel" to "Corporation Counsel."
(2) "City Comptroller" to "Director of Finance."
(3) "Zoning Ordinance" or "Chapter 268" to "Chapter 51, Land Use."
(4) "Collector of Taxes and Revenue" to "Tax Collector."
(5) "Water Department" to "Board of Water Commissioners."
(6) "Department of Property Maintenance and Property Revitalization"
to "Department of Property Maintenance."
(7) "City Engineer" to "Director of Public Works."
C. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)6
6. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14C, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-14 CHARTER § 1-14
C:39

ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. 43-1983]
§ 1-15. General penalty. [Amended 4-9-1984 by Ord. No. 12-1984]
A. Except as hereinafter provided, whenever in this Code or in any other
ordinance of the City, or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated
pursuant to such Code or other ordinance of the City, any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever in such Code or in such other City ordinance, rule, regulation
or order the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor,
the violation of any such provision of this Code or of any other
ordinance of the City or of any rule, regulation or order promulgated
pursuant to such Code or other City ordinance shall be punished by a
fine not less than $100 and not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. [Amended
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 9-2003; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 24-2006;
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
B. Whenever the provisions of the New Jersey statutes, including Title 2C,
the Code of Criminal Justice, provide a penalty of a lesser maximum fine
or term of imprisonment than set forth in this section for the violation of
a state statute proscribing the same offense as is set out in this Code or
any other City ordinance or any rule, regulation or order promulgated
pursuant thereto, then the maximum penalty for the violation of such
provision of this Code or other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall
not exceed that prescribed by such state statute.
C. Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or rule,
regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense unless otherwise provided.
D. Whenever any such fine is imposed upon any corporation, such fine and
costs and charges incident thereto may be collected in an action of debt
or in such other manner as may be provided by law.
E. In the construction and interpretation of this section, the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered as a recovery or penalty so
as to bar any other penalty being enforced, nor shall the imposition of
any penalty under this section be deemed to bar the revocation of a
license or permit.
§ 1-15 CHARTER § 1-16
C:41
§ 1-16. General penalties for traffic violations.7 [Added 2-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 1-1995; amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999; 4-10-2000
by Ord. No. 7-2000; 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 22-2010]
§ 20:1-5 Turns prohibited at certain locations (Uturns)
$85
§ 20:1-5A No truck on Park Avenue $85
§ 20:2-2 Parking prohibited between 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.
$54
§ 20:2-3 Illegal overnight parking for trucks, trailers
and the like between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(plus $10 for each additional axle)
$54 (minimum)
§ 20:2-4 Parking for certain purposes prohibited $54
§ 20:2-4B Repairs on street $54
§ 20:2-5 Failure to angle park; improper parking (left
to curb)
$54
§ 20:2-6 Parking, hazardous or congested $54
§ 20:2-10 Parking where prohibited at all times $54
§ 20:2-12 Stopping/standing between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m.; 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. (Main
Street)
$54
§ 20:2-13 Parking more than 15 minutes $54
§ 20:2-14 No parking over 2 hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m.
$54
§ 20:2-15 No parking over 2 hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. (except Sunday)
$54
§ 20:2-16 No parking over 2 hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m.
$54
§ 20:2-17 No parking over 2 hours between 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m.
$54
§ 20:2-18 No parking over 6 hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m.
$54
§ 20:2-19 No standing/stopping/parking on street
during snow emergency
$54
§ 20:3-2 Failure to deposit coin in meter $54
§ 20:3-4 Violations of markings/time limit $54
§ 21:1-4 Parking areas reserved for City $54
§ 21:1-5 Improper overnight parking/City lot $54
§ 21:1-7 Improper use of loading zone $54
§ 21:1-8 Impeding flow of traffic/lot $54
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 1-16 EAST ORANGE CODE § 1-16
C:42
§ 21:2-2 Failure to park within space $54
§ 21:2-5 Parking beyond meter time $54
§ 23:1-28 Parking on private property $54
§ 1-16 CHARTER § 1-16
C:43
Chapter 3
ABOLITION OF OFFICES AND EXTINGUISHMENT OF
POSITIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5. Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
§ 3-1. Authorization.
Without contravening any provision of the Charter, statute, rule or
regulation, the City Council of the City of East Orange be and the same is
hereby authorized to abolish any City office and extinguish the position of
the City officer appointed thereto whenever it is determined that for reasons
of economy, efficiency and best interest of the operations of the government
of the City it is deemed advisable to do so.
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abolition of offices — See Ch. 3.
Affirmative Action Program — See Ch. 8.
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control — See
Ch. 14A, Art. III.
Board of Education — See Ch. 14A, Art. VI.
Real Estate Commission — See Ch. 14A, Art.
VII.
Arts and Cultural Commission — See Ch. 14A,
Art. IX.
Business Development Authority — See Ch.
15.
Claims approval and payment — See Ch. 18.
Court — See Ch. 21.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 23.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 28.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 40.
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
Purchasing and contracting — See Ch. 68.
Records and information — See Ch. 74.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Mayor's Tax Exemption Review
Committee — See § 247-21.
§ 1-16 EAST ORANGE CODE § 3-1
C:44
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 5-1. Operation of City departments; chief administrative officer.
All departments of the City shall, to the extent authorized by law and unless
otherwise expressly provided therein or by this chapter or other ordinances
of the City, be operated pursuant to the ordinances and regulations
established herein for the City and under the general supervision of the
Mayor as the chief administrative officer of the City.
§ 5-2. Creation of boards, commissions and agencies.
The Mayor and City Council may create and, to the extent permitted by
law, thereafter abolish, modify or consolidate, from time to time, such
administrative, regulatory or advisory boards, commissions and agencies
as shall be necessary or desirable to assist in the performance of such
functions as shall be appropriate to the City or in its behalf. Such boards,
commissions or agencies shall be established by resolution, except where
an ordinance is required by law or where the City Council shall otherwise
determine, and such ordinances shall be incorporated as part of this
chapter.
§ 5-3. Promulgation of regulations by department heads.
§ 5-4. Terms of office of City officers.
Persons duly appointed to any office established by this chapter or other
office established by other ordinances of the City shall be deemed City
A. The department head responsible for the administration of any
provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the City is hereby
authorized to promulgate regulations relating thereto, provided that
the same shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk, the
Mayor and the City Council prior to the effective date thereof.
B. Regulations of subject matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
respective boards, commissions and agencies of the City shall not
become effective until approved by such board, commission or agency
and, where required by law, the Mayor.
C. No such rule or regulation as aforesaid shall be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of this City or any statute
of the state.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed as repealing any other
requirement for the promulgation of any regulation of the City
expressly set forth in this chapter or any other ordinance. Copies of
such regulations shall be available during normal business hours for
inspection by members of the public at the office of the department to
which the regulations relate and at the office of the City Clerk.
§ 5-1 CHARTER § 5-4
C:45
officers and, unless expressly provided to the contrary, shall serve for a
definite term, coterminous with the term of the Mayor.
§ 5-5. Use of public buildings and premises.
§ 5-6. Attendance at City Council meetings. [Added 12-4-1989 by
Ord. No. 43-1989]
Every department head shall attend City Council committee and regular
meetings. In the event that the department head is unable to attend these
meetings, he shall designate someone from his department to attend in his
absence.
A. Any public building or premises owned by the City which shall be
subject to the control of any board, commission or agency shall be
utilized only in conjunction with the work of such board, commission or
agency or such other proper purpose as such board, commission or
agency may authorize in accordance with regulations established
therefor. Any permit issued therefor shall be signed by the president or
chairman of the board, commission or agency or by such other official
designated by formal resolution of such board, commission or agency.
B. Any public building or premises owned or under the control of the City,
not otherwise entrusted by statute or ordinance to any board,
commission or agency, shall be utilized only by authorized City
personnel for City business, unless the Mayor shall issue a permit for
use thereof in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Mayor.
§ 5-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-6
C:46
ARTICLE II
Bonds of City Officers and Employees
§ 5-7. Bond requirements.
Every officer and employee of the City, as a condition of his office, shall
execute such applications or bond instruments as may be required by law
or by resolution of the City Council to the City in its corporate name, as
obligee, to the true and faithful performance of his duties. The City Council
shall, by resolution, establish officers, positions and employment for which
the City is to be protected by surety bonds and the limits of such bonds.
§ 5-8. Failure to execute.
If any officer or employee of the City shall neglect to execute and deliver his
bond as required by the City Council within 30 days after due notification
of his election or appointment, his office may be declared vacant by the City
Council.
§ 5-9. Approval of sureties and bonds. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 7-1986]
In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the state or
by any ordinance or resolution of the City to give a bond for the faithful
performance of his duties, such bond shall be that of a surety company
authorized to do business in the state. Every such bond shall be approved
as to form by the Corporation Counsel.
§ 5-10. Administration and custody of bonds. [Amended 5-12-1986
by Ord. No. 19-1986]
The administration of bonds of City officers and employees shall be under
the direction of the Director of Finance. The City Clerk shall keep custody
of such bonds.
§ 5-7 CHARTER § 5-10
C:47

ARTICLE III
City Clerk; Deputy Clerk
§ 5-11. Duties generally.
The City Clerk shall perform the duties required by law or ordinance.
Any enumeration or specification of duties in this article shall be for the
purposes of classification and not by way of exclusion of any duties
prescribed elsewhere by this chapter or other City ordinance.
§ 5-12. Preparation of ordinances for codification and printing.
[Added 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 25-2012]
The City Clerk is hereby authorized:
§ 5-13. Preparation of certified copies of records.
The City Clerk shall, pursuant to law, prepare at the request of the Mayor,
City Council or any department certified copies of records which may be
utilized as evidence in any court or administrative proceeding or as may be
needed to document any study, submission or application prepared in behalf
of the City.
§ 5-14. Assistance to Mayor and Council.
A. To correct in the text of any ordinance such errors in references to
other ordinances and laws and in punctuation and spelling and other
obvious errors in form which will not affect the substance of the
ordinance, as shall be concurred in by the Corporation Counsel, and
shall make such corrections in preparing the ordinance for codification
and printing.
B. To correct errors caused when two or more amendments to the same
section of an ordinance are enacted, but such amendments omit
provisions of and fail to refer to one another. Only amendments that
may be put into simultaneous operation may be reconciled. Corrections
shall be with the concurrence of the Corporation Counsel and,
thereafter, the office shall prepare the ordinance for codification and
printing.
A. The City Clerk shall attend all public meetings of the City Council and
transcribe and keep accurate minutes thereof. He shall also attend such
meetings of the committees of the City Council as may be requested of
him.
B. He shall perform such tasks, make such studies and submit such
reports as the Mayor and City Council may request of him from time to
time to aid them in the performance of their duties.
C. He shall dispatch such official notices or communications as the Mayor
and City Council may direct him to do in behalf of the City.
§ 5-11 CHARTER § 5-15
C:49
§ 5-15. Custodian of records.
§ 5-16. Deputy City Clerk: office created.
There is hereby established the office of Deputy City Clerk.
§ 5-17. Appointment of Deputy City Clerk.
The Deputy City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council.
A. The City Clerk shall have general custody of all records and documents
of the City where no other custodian is expressly designated. He shall
file and keep safely:
(1) All ordinances of the City, including ordinances of all boards,
commissions and agencies except the Board of Education.
(2) Resolutions of the City Council and such resolutions of the boards,
commissions and agencies of the City as are not otherwise retained
by the respective boards, commissions or agencies as part of their
official records.
(3) Copies of all written regulations issued by the Mayor or by any
department, board, commission or agency pursuant to any law of
the state, this chapter or any other ordinance of the City.
(4) The minutes of all public meetings of the City Council and such
other written minutes of the committees of the City Council and
other meetings of the City Council as shall be reduced to written
form.
(5) All maps and official papers which by law or ordinance are required
to be placed on file with the City Clerk.
(6) All abstracts of title, leases, deeds, contracts or other legal
documents to which the City is a party.
(7) All surety bonds and contracts of insurance of the City.
(8) A list of oaths of office, terms of office and expiration dates of all
appointees to any board, commission or agency.
(9) All personnel records.
B. The City Clerk shall make such arrangements for the safekeeping,
classification and indexing of all such records and documents in
accordance with state law, provided that no such records and
documents shall be destroyed or disposed of unless at least 15 days'
notice has been given to the Mayor and City Council.
§ 5-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-18
C:50
§ 5-18. Powers and duties of Deputy City Clerk.
The Deputy City Clerk shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the
City Clerk. He shall have all the powers and duties of the City Clerk during
such times and for such periods as the City Clerk shall be absent or in case
of vacancy in the office of City Clerk.
§ 5-19. Access to government records.8 [Added 9-24-2012 by Ord.
No. 24-2012]
A. Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of East Orange
to recognize the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open
Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
B. Right to inspect, examine, copy government records. The public shall,
in accordance with the terms set forth in this section, have the right to
inspect, examine or copy any government record maintained by public
agencies, with the exception of those records to which public access
would violate an individual's reasonable expectation of privacy and
those records specifically exempt by law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq.
C. Custodian and deputy custodians of records. Except as provided in
Subsection M of this section:
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the City Clerk shall be the
Custodian of Records for all government records of the City.
(2) The Custodian of Records shall adopt a form for the use of any
person who requests access to a government record.
(3) The Clerk hereby designates Deputy Custodians within each
division or department, set forth specifically in Subsection M, who
shall assist the Custodian of Records to respond efficiently to any
request for government records not maintained within the office of
the City Clerk. Each Deputy Custodian shall submit to the Clerk's
office a bimonthly report. Said report shall be in a form and contain
information to be determined by the City Clerk.
D. Inspection, examination and copying of public records.
(1) Any requestor seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record
shall make application in writing to the Custodian of Records
during regular business hours; faxed and e-mailed requests are
prohibited. All requests shall be on a form provided and shall
specify in detail the type of record requested and, if known, the
date created.
(2) If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt the operation of City government, the Custodian of Records
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 74, Records and Information.
§ 5-18 CHARTER § 5-19
C:51
may deny access to the record after attempting to reach a
reasonable solution with the requestor that accommodates the
interests of the requestor and the City.
E. Time limits for compliance.
(1) Unless a shorter period is required by statute, regulation or
executive order, the Custodian of Record shall grant access to a
public record or deny such access in writing within a period of
seven business days after he or she receives the request, if
possible. If the Custodian of Record is unable to comply with a
request for access, he or she shall indicate on the request form the
specific basis for such inability and shall promptly return it to the
requestor. The custodian shall sign and date the form and provide
the requestor with a copy thereof. Failure to respond within seven
business days shall be deemed a denial of the request.
F. Fees.
(1) The Custodian of Record shall impose fees for copies of public
records in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 et seq.
(2) The Custodian of Record shall require a deposit prior to
reproducing a public record or records where the cost of
reproduction will exceed $25. The amount of the deposit shall equal
the total estimated cost of reproducing the public record or
records.
(3) Special service charge.
(a) Notwithstanding Subsection F(1), in addition to the actual cost
of duplication, the Custodian of Records may impose a special
service charge:
[1] Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation or
volume of a government record embodied in the form of
printed matter to be inspected, examined or copied is such
that the record cannot be produced by ordinary documentcopying
equipment in ordinary business size or involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to
accommodate the request, including, but not limited to,
retrieval of documents from storage or which have been
archived;
[2] When the request is for a government record in a medium
not routinely developed or maintained by the City; or
[3] When a request for a government record requires a
substantial amount of manipulation or programming of
information technology by the City, and the cost of such
manipulation or programming is not otherwise included in
the fee.
§ 5-19 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-19
C:52
(b) The special service charge shall consist of the following:
[1] A service charge of $45 per hour for each hour deemed
necessary to respond to the request.
(c) The Custodian of Records shall advise the requester of the
estimate of charges, which shall include the actual cost of
duplicating the records and a special service charge that shall
be reasonable and shall be based on the actual direct cost of
providing the copy or copies. If the requestor objects to the
charge after having reviewed the same, the Custodian of
Records shall not incur said charges until an agreement is
reached between the requestor and the Custodian of Records.
(4) There will be a minimum mailing charge of $0.50 whenever copies
of a document are requested to be mailed. The Custodian of
Records shall assess additional mailing charges where the size and
weight of the requested documents so requires. Where a recording
of a public meeting is requested, there will be a postage and
handling fee of $2 per tape or disk.
G. Exceptions to OPRA. All government records are subject to public
access unless specifically exempt under OPRA (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1 et
seq.) or any other law, statute, regulation or executive order.
H. Certain documents not deemed public record until in final form. The
following documents shall not be considered government records until
put into final form:
(1) Unapproved minutes of open sessions of the City Council and of the
boards, commissions and agencies of the City.
(2) Unapproved minutes of executive sessions of the City Council and
of the boards, commissions and agencies of the City and any
reports or documents or other materials used by City Council or
any board, commission or agency of the City relating to issues
discussed in executive session so long as executive session minutes
have not been approved.
(3) Reports prepared for review by the Mayor or City Council or any
board, commission or agency of the City prior to the expiration of
seven calendar days after the receipt of the report by the Mayor or
City Council or any board, commission or agency of the City.
(4) If a government record is not in final form, the custodian shall
notify the requestor within seven business days after the custodian
receives the request. The custodian shall also notify the requestor
when the record can be made available.
I. Opinion of attorney in questionable cases. In instances where the
Custodian of Record harbors doubt as to whether or not a document is a
public record or is a public record exempt from disclosure, the
§ 5-19 CHARTER § 5-19
C:53
Custodian of Record shall request an opinion from the Corporation
Counsel. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded to the
Corporation Counsel, who after review shall issue an opinion. The
Corporation Counsel shall note his or her opinion on the request form
and shall promptly return said form to the Custodian of Record.
J. Partial production of government records. If any part of a particular
record is exempt from public access under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the
Custodian of Records shall delete, redact or excise that portion which is
exempt from access and shall promptly permit access to the remainder
of the public record.
K. Large volume requests. If the Custodian of Record determines that a
request for access to a public record would substantially disrupt the
operation of City government, he or she may deny access to the public
record after an attempt to reach a reasonable solution with the
requestor has failed.
L. Posting of appeals procedure. The City Clerk shall post prominently in
public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's Office, a statement that sets
forth in clear, concise and specific language the right to appeal a denial
or failure to provide access to a public record and the procedure by
which the appeal may be filed.
M. Department heads and division managers. Each department head in
his/her absence thereof division manager, the Chief of Police, Fire Chief
and secretaries to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
are hereby designated as Deputy Custodians for the purpose of fulfilling
requests for records from their respective departments.
(1) All requests for public records shall be given to the City Clerk on a
form provided by the City Clerk.
(2) The City Clerk, in his/her discretion, shall assign the requests to
the Deputy Custodian to administer the request.
(3) The Deputy Custodians shall adhere to the time limits for
compliance set forth in Subsection E of this section and notify the
City Clerk of the production of documents.
(4) The Deputy Custodians shall provide the Clerk with dates of
compliance to all requests for access to public records.
§ 5-19 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-19
C:54
ARTICLE IV
Corporation Counsel's Office
[Amended 9-25-1972 by Ord. No. 41-1972; 6-14-1978 by Ord. No.
8-1978; 8-20-1984 by Ord. No. 36-1984; 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
7-1986]
§ 5-20. Office established; duties of Corporation Counsel. [Amended
7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 16-1996]
A. There is hereby established the Corporation Counsel's office. The
Corporation Counsel shall be a City officer appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council.
B. The Assistant Corporation Counsel(s) shall be appointed as at-will
employees and will serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
C. The Corporation Counsel shall perform the duties required by law or
ordinance and, as legal advisor to the Mayor, City Council and all
boards and commissions, perform all the duties prescribed herein
where independent counsel is not designated or required.
D. He/she shall have general charge and direction of the legal affairs of the
City and shall prosecute and defend all actions affecting the interests of
the City which shall be brought by or against the City or any officer,
board or commission thereof.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Corporation Counsel
from delegating any of the duties contained herein to the Assistant
Corporation Counsel(s) or other members of the Corporation Counsel's
office, provided that the responsibility for supervision thereof shall
continue to be vested in the Corporation Counsel, except as expressly
provided in § 5-23, or from employing other counsel when the
Corporation Counsel is unable to perform any of the duties set forth
herein by reason of any conflict of interest or incompatibility of the
other requirements of his/her office.
F. The duties of the Corporation Counsel shall include review of all legal
documents, contracts, bonds, deeds, leases and stipulations entered
into by the City or to which the City is a party or has an interest.
G. He/she shall attend all regular and special meetings of the City Council
and also, when requested to do so, meetings of the various boards,
commissions, agencies and committees of the City.
H. He/she shall render opinions at the request of the Mayor, City Council
or any of the boards, commissions, agencies or committees of the City
which he/she serves.
I. He/she shall oversee the drafting of all ordinances and resolutions of
the City Council and such other resolutions of the boards, commissions,
agencies and committees as may be submitted to him/her for his/her
review.
§ 5-20 CHARTER § 5-20
C:55
§ 5-21. Limitations of actions; records. [Amended 7-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 16-1996]
§ 5-22. Substitution of successor in actions. [Amended 7-15-1996 by
Ord. No. 16-1996]
Upon expiration of his term of office or his/her resignation thereof or
removal therefrom, the Corporation Counsel shall forthwith deliver to his/
her successor in office a written consent to substitution of his/her successor
in all such actions then pending and undetermined.
J. He/she shall draft proposed legislation on behalf of the City at the
direction of the Mayor or City Council.
K. He/she shall, at the direction of the Mayor or City Council, appear on
behalf of the City at hearings, conferences or other administrative
proceedings and shall also so appear on behalf of any board,
commission, agency or committee directly involved in and party to any
such hearing or proceeding.
L. He/she shall make all tax foreclosures and searches of title required by
the City or by any board, commission, agency or committee thereof and
shall certify to the same, provided that he/she shall be compensated in
accordance with prevailing fee schedules for such services pertaining
to title searches.
M. Any and all references to the "City Counsel" and "Assistant City
Counsel(s)" in the Code of the City of East Orange shall hereinafter be
designated "Corporation Counsel" and "Assistant Corporation
Counsel(s)" unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
A. The Corporation Counsel shall not undertake any court appeal or like
action except by the direction of the Mayor or City Council, unless
immediate action is required in order, in his/her opinion, to preserve the
rights of the City, whereupon the same shall be reported to the Mayor
and City Council.
B. He/she shall not compromise, settle or adjust any rights, claims,
demands or causes of action in favor of or against the City, nor permit,
offer or confess judgment against the City, without authorization from
the Mayor or City Council or the board, commission, agency, committee
or City official having jurisdiction over the subject matter, provided that
this section shall not operate to limit or abridge the discretion of the
Corporation Counsel with regard to the proper conduct of any trial or
proceedings or to deprive him/her of the powers and privileges
automatically exercised in judicial and administrative proceedings by
counsel acting for private clients.
C. He/she shall keep records of all actions prosecuted or defended by him/
her and all proceedings had by him/her.
§ 5-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-23
C:56
§ 5-23. Conflicts of interest. [Amended 7-15-1996 by Ord. No.
16-1996]
§ 5-24. Assistant Corporation Counsels. [Amended 11-13-1989 by
Ord. No. 26-1989; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 26-2005; 5-29-2007 by
Ord. No. 11-2007]
There are hereby established the positions of eight Assistant Corporation
Counsels.
§ 5-25. Duties of Assistant Corporation Counsels. [Amended
7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 16-1996]
The Assistant Corporation Counsels shall perform such duties as may be
assigned by the Corporation Counsel, and where the Corporation Counsel is
absent or unavailable, such other duties as the Mayor and/or City Council
may from time to time prescribe. Such duties shall include but not be
limited to disposition of the general legal affairs of the City and prosecution
of Municipal Court matters. In the absence of the Corporation Counsel,
the Mayor may appoint an Acting Corporation Counsel from among the
Assistant Corporation Counsels to act in the Corporation Counsel's absence.
§ 5-26. Establishment of Municipal Prosecutor. [Added 10-10-2000
by Ord. No. 19-2000; amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 26-2005;
5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
There is hereby established the Office of the Municipal Prosecutor. The
Municipal Court shall have a Chief Municipal Prosecutor and two Municipal
Prosecutors, one of whom may be part-time.
§ 5-27. Appointment of Municipal Prosecutors and Chief Municipal
Prosecutor. [Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 19-2000; amended
11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 26-2005; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
A. Where a statement reporting a possible conflict of interest, as required
under the City Charter, by a member of the Corporation Counsel's office
other than the Corporation Counsel, has been filed with the Mayor, a
copy thereof shall also be filed with the Corporation Counsel, who shall
thereupon delegate the responsibility of performing duties pertaining
to that matter to members of the Corporation Counsel's office who shall
have no conflicting relationship or responsibility.
B. Where the Corporation Counsel files with the Mayor such a statement
of conflict, the Mayor and City Council may provide for special counsel
or, in the alternative, an Assistant Corporation Counsel shall be Acting
Corporation Counsel, pursuant to the directions of the Mayor or City
Council, on all phases of the work in which the conflict of interest may
bear, the responsibility for supervision of the personnel of the office and
all determinations to be made on behalf of the office shall thereupon
vest in the special counsel or an Assistant Corporation Counsel, as
circumstances warrant.
§ 5-23 CHARTER § 5-27
C:57
§ 5-28. Duties of Chief Municipal Prosecutor and Municipal
Prosecutor. [Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 19-2000]
The duties of the Chief Municipal Prosecutor, who shall have authority over
the Municipal Prosecutor concerning the performance of his duties, and
the Municipal Prosecutor shall be consistent with the applicable statutes,
ordinances and court rules. Duties of the Chief Municipal Prosecutor and
Municipal Prosecutor are defined with specificity by N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1 et seq.,
and are applicable hereto. The Chief Municipal Prosecutor may receive, at
the Mayor's discretion, a stipend for the position's additional duties.
§ 5-29. Supervision of Chief Municipal Prosecutor and Municipal
Prosecutor. [Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 19-2000]
Supervision of the Chief Municipal Prosecutor and Municipal Prosecutor
shall be consistent with the applicable statutes, ordinances and court rules.
§ 5-30. First Assistant Corporation Counsel. [Added 5-12-1986 by
Ord. No. 8-1986; amended 7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 15-1996]
A. The Mayor may appoint three Assistant Corporation Counsels for a
term of one year to serve as Municipal Prosecutors, one of whom shall
be designated as Chief Municipal Prosecutor. The Chief Municipal
Prosecutor shall continue in office pending reappointment or the
appointment of a successor.
B. Notwithstanding § 5-26 and Subsection A of this section, the Mayor
shall appoint additional Municipal Prosecutors on a per-diem basis as
the need shall arise. This appointment authority shall include but not be
limited to prosecutors to prosecute those matters where the Chief
Municipal Prosecutor has determined that a conflict exists which
prevents his office from prosecuting the offense.
A. There is hereby established the office of First Assistant Corporation
Counsel. The First Assistant Corporation Counsel shall be a City official
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
B. The First Assistant Corporation Counsel, under the supervision of the
Corporation Counsel, shall perform such duties as may be assigned by
the Corporation Counsel, where the Corporation Counsel is absent or
unavailable, and perform such other duties as the Mayor and/or City
Council may from time to time prescribe.
C. The First Assistant Corporation Counsel shall assist the Corporation
Counsel in the administrative handling of all matters concerning all
legal affairs pertaining to the City of East Orange. These matters may
include the review and drafting of all legal documents, ordinances,
resolutions, proclamations, contracts, bonds, deeds, leases and
stipulations entered into by the City of East Orange or for which it has
an interest.
§ 5-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-30
C:58
D. The First Assistant Corporation Counsel may, at the direction of the
Corporation Counsel, engage in any duties of the Assistant Corporation
Counsel(s). The Mayor may, in the absence of the Corporation Counsel,
appoint the First Assistant Corporation Counsel as Acting Corporation
Counsel.9
9. Editor's Note: Former § 5-32, Labor Relations - Paralegal Specialist, of the 1980 City Code,
which previously followed this section, added 6-23-1986 by Ord. No. 27-1986, was repealed
11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 26-1989.
§ 5-30 CHARTER § 5-30
C:59

ARTICLE V
Office of City Administrator
[Added 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 7-1991]
§ 5-31. Establishment of office, qualifications.
There is hereby established the office of the City Administrator. The City
Administrator shall be a City officer appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by City Council. The City Administrator shall serve for a term coterminous
with that of the Mayor. The City Administrator shall, by education,
experience and ability, be qualified to perform the duties established for him
or her.
§ 5-32. Duties.
A. The City Administrator, under supervision of the Mayor, shall be
responsible for the daily operation of City government. The City
Administrator shall serve as liaison between the Mayor, department
heads, excluding the Corporation Counsel's office, and the City Council.
Other duties shall include direct supervision of department heads,
excluding the Corporation Counsel's office, primary business advisor to
the Mayor and organizational developer of management and budget
policies and procedures that effect the daily operation of City business.
B. All management functions of the City Administrator will be performed
through regularly scheduled meetings with all department and division
heads and through meetings with individual department and division
heads as necessary to effectuate the functions of this office. The City
Administrator shall meet regularly with the Mayor to advise regarding
general municipal issues, specific management items, personnel
matters and City Council agenda.
C. The City Administrator shall not be involved with operational functions
of boards, commissions and authorities, except to the extent that
management of said agencies effects the budget policies promulgated
by this office.
D. The City Administrator shall be the Chief Personnel Officer.10
E. Within the office of the City Administrator, there shall be a Procurement
Division. The Procurement Division shall be responsible for those
duties, policies and activities set forth in Chapter 68 of the Code of the
City of East Orange, entitled "Purchasing and Contracting." All
references in Chapter 68 of the Code of the City of East Orange to
"Purchasing Department" shall hereinafter be designated as
"Procurement Division." [Added 1-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
10.Editor's Note: Former § 5-242E of the 1980 City Code, pertaining to the Procurement
Division, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 7-16-2007 by Ord. No.
18-2007.
§ 5-31 CHARTER § 5-32
C:61
§ 5-33. Additional personnel.
The Office shall have additional personnel as may be provided for by the
budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said personnel
shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the duties assigned
by the City Administrator.
§ 5-34. Establishment of Division of Information Technology;
Director's qualifications. [Added 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]
There is hereby established the Division of Information Technology within
the Office of the City Administrator. The Information Technology Director,
hereinafter referred to as "IT Director," shall be an employee appointed by
the Mayor. The IT Director shall, by education, experience and ability, be
qualified to perform the duties established by this office.
§ 5-35. Duties of IT Director. [Added 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]
§ 5-36. Additional IT Division personnel. [Added 4-22-2002 by Ord.
No. 3-2002]
The Division shall have additional personnel as may be necessary. Said
personnel shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the
duties assigned by the IT Director.
F. Within the Office of the City Administrator shall be the Personnel
Management Division. The Personnel Management Division shall be
responsible for those duties, policies and activities as set forth in
Chapter 60 of Code of the City of East Orange, entitled "Personnel
Policies."
A. The IT Director, under the supervision of the City Administrator, shall
be responsible for the daily maintenance of the City's information
systems and all other necessary computer-related functions as they may
arise.
B. The IT Director shall utilize the best cost-effective means in maintaining
the computer systems. He or she shall regularly advise the City
Administrator of any necessary changes or enhancements required to
efficiently maintain the information systems and their effective use.
C. The IT Director shall provide training or instruction of various
computer systems to City employees as needed.
D. The IT Director shall prepare and facilitate the adoption of standards
for computer hardware and software acquisition and standard
computer maintenance procedures for each City department.
E. The IT Director shall have oversight of the City's website development
and maintenance.
§ 5-32 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-36
C:62
ARTICLE VI
Division of Finance
[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1-201511]
§ 5-37. Division established. [Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No.
28-2015]
Under the oversight, supervision and direction of the City Administrator;
there is hereby established the Division of Finance, which shall oversee the
financial operations of the City and coordinate financial data and reports
generated by the Account and Controls Unit and the Treasury Unit.
§ 5-38. Chief Financial Officer; Treasurer; Manager of Accounts and
Controls; Manager, Abatements and Special Taxes. [Amended
5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 28-2015; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
A. There is hereby established the office of Chief Financial Officer within
the Division of Finance. The Chief Financial Officer shall be a City
officer appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The
Chief Financial Officer shall be a certified municipal finance officer,
holding a certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1971, c.
39, and P.L. 1988, c. 110 (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.). The Chief
Financial Officer shall also perform the duties and responsibilities set
forth under these provisions and N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq. Any and all
references to the "City Comptroller" or "Comptroller" in the Code shall
hereinafter be designated "Chief Financial Officer" unless otherwise
provided by law or ordinance.
B. There shall also be the position of Treasurer within the Division of
Finance. The Treasurer shall be a City officer appointed and confirmed
in the same manner as the Chief Financial Officer and shall be qualified
by experience and training under applicable law to perform the duties
of his/her unit within the Division of Finance.
C. There shall also be the position of Manager of Accounts and Controls
within the Division of Finance. The Manager of Accounts and Controls
shall be a City officer appointed and confirmed in the same manner as
the Chief Financial Officer and shall be qualified bv experience and
training under applicable law to perform the duties of his/her unit
within the Division of Finance.
D. There shall also be the position of Manager, Abatements and Special
Taxes (also referred to throughout the Code as "Manager of Abatements
and Special Taxes") within the Division of Finance. The person holding
this position shall be a confidential employee appointed by the Mayor,
without the need for confirmation by the City Council, and shall be
qualified by experience and training under applicable law to perform
the duties of his/her unit within the Division of Finance.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VI, Department of Finance, added
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986, as amended.
§ 5-37 CHARTER § 5-39
C:63
§ 5-39. Duties of officers. [Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 28-2015;
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall oversee and direct the fiscal affairs of
the City and be responsible for the maintenance of a uniform system of
accounting and a complete set of records and for maintaining a system
of internal controls to assure that all vouchers and payments approved
by the Division of Finance shall be in accordance with law and within
appropriations made therefor, except as may be provided in
emergencies pursuant to any ordinance or resolution adopted by the
City.
B. The Manager of Accounts and Controls shall perform those duties as
assigned and designated by the City Administrator and the Chief
Financial Officer and aid the Chief Financial Officer in effectuating the
duties of the Division of Finance as set forth in Article VI of this chapter.
The Manager of Accounts and Controls shall be responsible for the
recording of all financial transactions as well as rendering reports to
the Chief Financial Officer and City Administrator on a monthly basis.
The Manager of Accounts and Controls shall supervise the Accounts
and Controls Unit within the Division of Finance.
C. The Treasurer shall perform those duties as assigned and designated by
the City Administrator and aid the Chief Financial Officer in
effectuating the duties of the Division of Finance as set forth in Articles
VI and VII of this chapter. The Treasurer shall be responsible for the
custody of all City funds and for the disbursement of the same upon
proper certification within the Division of Finance. The Treasurer shall
also be responsible for the reconciliation of all bank accounts as well as
coupon accounts and the rendering of monthly activity reports to the
Chief Financial Officer. The Treasurer shall be the Unit Manager for the
Treasury Unit within the Division of Finance.
D. The Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall perform those
duties as assigned and designated by the City Administrator and the
Chief Financial Officer in effectuating the duties of the Division of
Finance as set forth in Articles VI and VII of this chapter as they may
relate to tax-abated/exempt projects within the City. The Manager of
Abatements and Special Taxes shall specifically perform the following
duties:
(1) Assist in the process of evaluating and making recommendations
regarding tax abatement/exemption applications and preparing
financial agreements related thereto;
(2) Supervise and oversee development and implementation of rules,
regulations and procedures necessary to promote standardization,
administrative and cost efficiency, accountability, and integrity in
collection of revenues, arrearages, and delinquencies due to the
City with respect to tax-abated/exempt projects;
§ 5-39 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-39
C:64
§ 5-40. Units of Division; unit managers. [Amended 5-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 28-2015; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
§ 5-41. Uniform system of accounting and maintaining records.
(3) Supervise and oversee fiscal administration of tax-abated/exempt
projects, including calculation of property taxes, service charges
and fees, as well as invoice review and processing, financial
analysis, quality assurance and resolution of disputes;
(4) Maintain an ongoing revenue reporting system relating to taxabated/
exempt projects and conduct continuous cost-analysis
studies of revenue collection relating to tax-abated/exempt
properties;
(5) Ensure timely collection of all revenue due from tax-abated/exempt
projects;
(6) Develop administrative procedures to increase collection rates and
reduce delinquency rates with respect to financial aspects of taxabated/
exempt projects;
(7) Review and process reports, financial statements and documents
associated with tax-abated/exempt projects;
(8) Oversee enforcement of financial agreements relating to taxabated/
exempt projects; and
(9) Act as liaison between departments, divisions and units within the
City on matters pertaining to tax-abated/exempt projects.
E. The Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall be the Unit
Manager for the Abatements and Special Taxes Unit within the Division
of Finance.
A. The Accounts and Controls Unit shall be supervised by the Manager of
Accounts and Controls, who shall administer the provisions of § 5-39B
of Article VI of Chapter 5 of the Code.
B. The Treasury Unit shall be supervised by the Treasurer, who shall
administer the provisions of § 5-39C of Article VI and the provisions of
Chapter 5 of the Code.
C. The Abatements and Special Taxes Unit shall be supervised by the
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes, who shall administer the
provisions of § 5-39D of Article VI of the Code.
A. The Manager of Accounts and Controls, under the supervision of the
City Administrator and Chief Financial Officer, shall develop, maintain
and enforce a uniform system of accounts, including forms, standards
and procedures, for all departments of the City government. He shall
maintain records of all fiscal transactions of the City through a central
bookkeeping system operated according to sound accounting
§ 5-39 CHARTER § 5-41
C:65
§ 5-42. Examinations, inspections and reports by Chief Financial
Officer.
principles. In addition, he shall maintain such records as may be
prescribed by the Mayor or by resolution of the City Council for the
determination of performance of any functions, program or activity of
the City measured in such unit as may be appropriate thereto.
B. The Manager of Accounts and Controls, under the supervision of the
City Administrator and Chief Financial Officer, shall file and keep
vouchers of checks audited by him and copies of ordinances and
resolutions authorizing the appropriation of moneys and local
improvements. All such records and vouchers shall be kept in such form
and manner and for such period of time as may be required by law and
applicable regulations of the agencies of the state having jurisdiction
thereof, and before destroying or disposing of any of the aforesaid, at
least 15 days prior thereto, he shall advise the Mayor and City Council
of the records and vouchers scheduled for destruction or disposition.
C. The City Administrator and Chief Financial Officer shall advise the
Mayor and City Council promptly of any inconsistencies between
ordinances and procedures of the City and the requirements imposed
by the state and its agencies relating to the fiscal affairs of the City, and
recommend the ways and means of eliminating such inconsistencies.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall make examinations and render reports
as required by law or as requested by the Mayor or the City Council or
by any board, commission, agency or officer for whom the Chief
Financial Officer has jurisdiction of the books and other fiscal records.
He shall notify the Mayor, City Council, commission, board, agency or
officer in case an appropriation is about to be exhausted or in case any
obligation is incurred for which no appropriation has been made. He
may compel, by subpoena where necessary, any City officer or employee
of the City to submit to examination under oath on any matter
pertaining to the fiscal affairs of the City. He shall have the right at any
time to examine any of the books, records and accounts of the City and
every board, body, commission or officer pertaining to the fiscal affairs
of the City. He may request any City officer, employee or other person
under the jurisdiction of the City to submit to an examination by him
under oath pertaining to the fiscal affairs of the City. He shall make
available to the independent accountant retained by the City Council to
audit the books and records of the City any information or data
requested and facilitate any examination, investigation, study or report
of such accountant as authorized by the City Council.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall render monthly reports to the Mayor
and City Council, which reports shall set forth in summary fashion the
information secured from the respective departments as to the receipt
of moneys by the City and disbursements by the City, any changes in
investments and such other pertinent financial data as will enable the
Mayor and City Council to be current on the financial affairs of the City.
§ 5-41 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-43
C:66
§ 5-43. Bonds, insurance policies and claims against City.
§ 5-44. Payrolls, employee benefits and pensions.
§ 5-45. Assignment of further duties to Chief Financial Officer.
The Chief Financial Officer shall undertake and perform such other and
further duties pursuant to the directive of the Mayor or resolution of the
Mayor and City Council.
A. The City Administrator or his designee shall maintain complete records
as to surety bonds secured and filed on behalf of City officers and
employees and shall review annually the limits of such bonds and the
nature of the coverage and advise and recommend any changes therein
to comply with state laws and regulations and to ensure protection to
the City and its departments.
B. The City Administrator or his designee shall further secure from the
respective officers and employees of the City who are required by
ordinance or resolution to do so surety bonds to the City, as obligee, in
its corporate name, for the true and faithful performance of such duties
of the respective officers and employees as may be required pursuant to
this chapter.
C. The City Administrator or his designee shall arrange and attend to
prompt payment of all premiums and shall serve as the City's agent in
the reporting of claims and of the administration relating to the City's
bonds and insurance policies.
D. The City Administrator or his designee shall keep records of all the
expiration dates and premium payments on all policies of insurance of
the City and surety bonds on file with the City Clerk and make sure that
coverage is maintained on all such policies and surety bonds and timely
renewals are made thereon. He shall serve as liaison with the various
carriers in behalf of the City, and all information on existing or potential
claims shall be made to the City Administrator or his designee by the
various City departments and officials of the City. He shall advise the
Corporation Counsel of all such claims or potential claims and other
matters requiring the attention of the Corporation Counsel.
A. The Manager of Accounts and Controls, under the supervision of the
City Administrator and Chief Financial Officer, shall install, operate and
maintain a central payroll system and all social security, hospitalization,
pension and insurance records for personnel of all departments.
B. The Manager of Accounts and Controls, under the supervision of the
City Administrator and his designee, shall serve as certifying agent and
City representative for all public pension funds, medical plans and
other fund systems or plans in which the City employee shall be
enrolled by official action of the City.
§ 5-43 CHARTER § 5-46
C:67
§ 5-46. Chief Financial Officer's attendance at meetings.
The Chief Financial Officer and/or his designee shall attend all regular
meetings of the City Council and, when specifically requested, special
meetings thereof or meetings of committees of the City Council or meetings
of any commission, board or agency for which he serves.
§ 5-46 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-46
C:68
ARTICLE VII
Division of Tax Collection and Revenue
[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1-201512; amended 5-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 28-2015]
§ 5-47. Division established; Tax Collector to be Division Manager.
Under the oversight, supervision and direction of the City Administrator;
there is hereby established the Division of Tax Collection and Revenue. The
Tax Collector shall be the Division Manager of the Division of Tax Collection
and Revenue. The Tax Collector shall perform those duties as assigned and
designated by the City Administrator and aid the Chief Financial Officer in
effectuating the duties of this Division as set forth in this chapter. The Tax
Collector shall be responsible for the collection of taxes and miscellaneous
revenues as well as making the required daily bank deposits.
§ 5-48. Power to collect taxes and assessments.
The Tax Collector and the persons in the Division of Tax Collection and
Revenue so designated by him shall have the power to collect all taxes, real
and personal, and assessments levied by and on behalf of the City by all
means permitted by law.
§ 5-49. Duties of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall undertake such other and further duties for
collection of money on behalf of the City as may be designated by the City
Administrator or by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. Among other
duties, the Tax Collector shall:
A. Provide and file with the City Clerk the bond or bonds required by
N.J.S.A. 54:4-122.4.
B. Establish standard procedures and regulations for the preparation and
mailing of tax bills annually or as provided by law, receipting of tax bills,
utilizing tax bill receipting machines where supplied by the City, and
supervise the operation thereof.
C. Establish procedures for and supervise the recording, verifying and
reporting of all money collected, and alert immediately the Mayor, City
Council and the City Administrator or his designee of any default,
delinquency, discrepancy or other indication of misconduct in the
receipt, collection or depositing of money on behalf of the City.
D. Render monthly reports as required by the City Administrator or his
designee on all receipts.
E. Take all steps necessary to collect taxes and assessments owing the City
with interest and penalties as provided by law and ordinance, including
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VII, Division of Tax Collection and
Revenue, added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986, as amended.
§ 5-47 CHARTER § 5-49
C:69
§ 5-50. Tax Collector to issue licenses; Licensing Subdivision.
reporting on and prosecuting tax foreclosures, as well as assertions of
liens and claims in all pending proceedings about which he knows or is
advised.
F. Collect such other money, fees, claims or liens on behalf of the City as
the Mayor or Mayor and City Council may designate.
G. Upon approval of apportionment of liens for tax purposes, as provided
in § 5-61I, implement the same in conjunction with the Director of the
Department of Property Taxation for purposes of assessment.
H. Prepare and, upon payment of requisite fees, supply certificates of
searches for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-11.
I. Require the names and addresses of the proposed seller and purchaser
of real estate and deliver notice of such application for search to the
Director of Property Maintenance and Revitalization under Chapter
159, Housing Standards; Property Maintenance.
A. Unless otherwise expressly provided by law or ordinance, the Tax
Collector shall be the issuing officer for all licenses pursuant to Chapter
170, Licenses and Fees.
B. There shall be a Licensing Subdivision within the Division of Tax
Collection and Revenue to enable the Tax Collector to effectuate his
duties under this section. The Subdivision of Licensing shall have the
following duties:
(1) Issue licenses. The Subdivision of Licensing shall collect all license
fees and issue licenses and renewal of licenses in the name of the
City to all persons qualified under the provisions of the Code of the
City of East Orange and shall:
(a) Make rules: promulgate all reasonable rules and regulations
necessary to the operation and enforcement of this section,
subject to approval of said rules and regulations by the City
Administrator or his designee, Tax Collector and Mayor.
(b) Require affidavits: require applicants to submit all affidavits
and oaths necessary to the administration of the licensing
provisions of the Code of the City of East Orange.
(c) Obtain endorsement: submit all applications, in a proper case,
to interested City officials and departments for their
endorsements thereon as to compliance by the applicant with
all City ordinances and regulations.
(d) Investigate: investigate and determine the eligibility of any
applicant for a license as prescribed herein.
§ 5-49 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-50
C:70
§ 5-51. Collection and disposition of moneys.
Unless otherwise expressly provided by law or ordinance, the Tax Collector
shall receive all money for licenses, permits or other privileges authorized
by the City Council by ordinance or resolution, and he shall maintain a
complete record of the money received, from whom received and the license
or permit issued therefor. All such money shall be delivered to the Treasurer
for deposit within one day in a duly established bank account in the name
of the City, and a receipt from the City Treasurer and report thereon duly
rendered to the City Administrator or his designee.
§ 5-52. through § 5-57. (Reserved)
§ 5-58. Position of Auctioneer established.
There shall be and there is hereby established the unclassified position of
Auctioneer for a term of one year under and within the Division of Finance.
§ 5-58.1. Duties of Auctioneer.
The duties of the Auctioneer shall be to conduct and administer sales to
the highest bidder of all publicly owned lands, the auction of buildings,
automobiles, personality and chattels and other City-owned property by the
City of East Orange, which sales to the highest bidder are held pursuant to
the provision of N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq.
§ 5-58.2. Qualifications of Auctioneer.
The person so appointed may be a presently existing officer, employee of the
City of East Orange, and/or new hire whose duties as Auctioneer shall be
in addition of such person's official duties, and such person's compensation
hereunder shall be in addition to any other compensation received for any
other office held.
(e) Examine records: examine the books and records of any
applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(f) Give notice: notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection
of his application and upon the refusal of any license or permit,
at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor
and deliver them to the applicant.
(2) Information confidential. The Subdivision of Licensing shall keep
all information furnished or secured under the authority of this
Code in strict confidence. Such information shall not be the subject
of public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof
shall not become known except to the persons charged with the
administration of the chapter unless otherwise provided by law or
authorized by the Corporation Counsel.
§ 5-50 CHARTER § 5-58.3
C:71
§ 5-58.3. Compensation of Auctioneer.
The salary for the Auctioneer shall be set forth in the Salary Ordinance,
irrespective of the number of auctions held during said one-year period.
§ 5-58.4. Term of Auctioneer.
The Auctioneer shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City
Council for a term of one year.
§ 5-58.5. Revenue collected from auctions.
All revenue collected from auctions shall be collected and maintained
pursuant to the provisions of § 5-47 et seq. of this article.
§ 5-58.3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-58.5
C:72
ARTICLE VIII
Director of Department of Property Taxation
§ 5-59. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Director of the Department of Property
Taxation.
§ 5-60. Qualifications of Director. [Amended 4-5-1971 by Ord. No.
9-1971]
The qualifications of the Director of the Department of Property Taxation
shall include:
§ 5-61. Duties of Director.
It shall be the duty of the Director of the Department of Property Taxation
to:
A. Formal and other education and training in fields related to the
economics of or valuation of real and personal property, with a tax
assessor's certificate evidencing knowledge in the appraising of real
estate and assessment principles and practices.
B. At least five years of experience in real and personal property
appraisals or assessments, such experience being related to all types of
real property, inclusive of residential, commercial and industrial
properties.
C. Thorough knowledge of the accepted procedures used in assessing real
and personal property and of the laws, rules, regulations, practices and
policies relating to tax assessments and of the forms required for tax
purposes and of supervising the establishment and maintenance of
needed records and files.
D. Ability to develop a suitable work program to apply existing laws, rules
and regulations to tax assessing work.
E. Ability to supervise the varied clerical functions in the office, to give
suitable assignments and instructions to clerical employees and field
investigators, and to supervise their work.
A. Value and certify annually assessments for all property, real and
personal, within the City, except such property as may be exempted
from taxation or expressly excluded from taxation by law.
B. File appeals from judgments of the State Division of Tax Appeals when
authorized by a duly approved resolution.
C. Administer, supervise and direct the operations in the Department of
Property Taxation and keep such records as may be required by law or
for the efficient operation of the Department.
§ 5-59 CHARTER § 5-61
C:73
§ 5-62. Assistants to Director: qualifications and duties.
D. Attend meetings of the City Council when requested by the Council to
do so.
E. Review all judgments of the County Board of Taxation, take such
appeals therefrom as he believes are justified on the merits with
respect to such determination, and direct all such appeals to the New
Jersey State Division of Tax Appeals in accordance with law. [Amended
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]
F. Advise the Mayor and City Council of all action by the County Board of
Taxation and the State Division of Tax Appeals on all matters pertaining
to apportionment, equalization, establishment of county taxes, school
taxes and other similar matters, and recommend to the Mayor and City
Council, when appropriate, the taking of appeals from any such action
by the county and state agencies to protect the interests of the City.
G. Review and contest, where appropriate, classifications, inclusions and
exclusions by the local property tax bureau which affect the ratios
applicable to the City provisions.
H. Perform such other duties as are or may be required of a tax assessor by
the laws of the state and the applicable provisions of this chapter and
other ordinances of the City.
I. Recommend to the City Council apportionment of liens for tax purposes
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:7-1 et seq., and in a manner consistent with this
chapter and other ordinances of the City or upon approval by the City
Council implement the same in conjunction with the Collector of Taxes
for purposes of assessment.
A. The qualifications of the Assistants to the Director of the Department of
Property Taxation shall include:
(1) Education equivalent to that represented by graduation from a
standard high school.
(2) Courses in real property appraising or assessing.
(3) At least two years of experience in assessing or appraising real
property.
(4) A knowledge of state laws, statutes and local ordinances pertaining
to assessing and taxation.
(5) Accuracy in clerical work and arithmetic and supervisory ability.
B. The Assistants to the Director of the Department of Property Taxation
shall serve under the direct supervision of the Director and shall
perform such duties as the Director may assign to enable him to
discharge the duties of his office and of the Department.
§ 5-61 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-63
C:74
§ 5-63. Deputy Assessor appointment, term of office. [Amended
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the City Council, one
of the Assistants to the Director of the Department of Property Taxation as
Deputy Assessor. The term of office for the Deputy Assessor shall be the
same as his current appointment as Assistant.
§ 5-64. Deputy Assessor qualifications. [Amended 11-10-1980 by
Ord. No. 15-1980]
The qualifications of the Deputy Assessor of the Department of Property
Taxation shall be the same as those listed under § 5-62 for Assistants to the
Director, and in addition, the Deputy Assessor shall have served at least one
year as Assistant to the Director.
§ 5-65. Deputy Assessor duties. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980]
A. The Deputy Assessor of the Department of Property Taxation shall serve
under the direct supervision of the Director and shall perform such
duties as the Director may assign to enable him to discharge the duties
of his office and of the Department.
B. In the absence of the Director, the Deputy Assessor shall act in his place
and stead.
§ 5-63 CHARTER § 5-65
C:75

ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Works
[Added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 17-1986;13 amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986; 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 9-1989; 6-17-1996 by Ord.
No. 14-1996; 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 8-2003; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015; 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 17-2015]
§ 5-66. Department established.
There is hereby established the Department of Public Works.
§ 5-67. Director of Public Works; Assistant Director; City Engineer;
Assistant Municipal Engineer.
§ 5-68. Duties of officers; "City Engineer" to be designated "Director
of Public Works."
A. There is hereby established the office of Director of Public Works. The
Director shall be a City officer appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the City Council. The Director shall be a person qualified by
experience and training to perform the duties of this Department.
B. There may be an Assistant Director of Public Works who shall be a City
employee appointed by the Mayor. The Assistant Director shall be an
engineer licensed by the state in professional engineering and land
surveying and qualified by experience and training to perform the
duties of this Department.
C. There shall be a City Engineer appointed and confirmed in the same
manner as the Director. The City Engineer shall be an engineer licensed
by the state in professional engineering and land surveying.
D. There may also be the position(s) of Assistant Municipal Engineer(s)
who shall be a City employee(s) in the civil service qualified for
appointment by the Department of Personnel of this state.
E. There shall be a Manager of the East Orange Golf Course who shall be a
City employee qualified by experience and training to perform the
duties required of the position. The manager shall also be an employee
in the civil service qualified for appointment by the New Jersey Civil
Services Commission as either a Golf Superintendent (Title Code
01924) or Golf Facilities Manager (Title Code 04588) unless otherwise
provided by law or ordinance.
A. The Director of Public Works shall have the following duties:
(1) He shall administer, supervise and direct the personnel and
functions of the Department as set forth in this article.
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 5, Art. IX, of the 1980 City Code,
Engineering Department and City Engineer, as amended.
§ 5-66 CHARTER § 5-68
C:77
(2) He shall manage and supervise the maintenance of streets,
municipally owned vehicles and equipment, sewers, parks, shade
trees, refuse collection, traffic control devices and maintenance of
public buildings and grounds.
(3) He shall coordinate and supervise City-wide traffic planning,
construction of municipal projects and the development of plans
and contracts for municipal improvements and capital planning
within the City.
(4) He shall coordinate the development of plans for long-range
municipal improvements in cooperation with the Mayor, City
Council and public and private agencies.
B. The Assistant Director of Public Works shall have the following duties:
(1) He shall assist the Director in developing, planning, organizing and
implementing the maintenance of streets, municipally owned
vehicles and equipment, sewers, parks, shade trees, refuse
collection, traffic control devices and maintenance of public
buildings and grounds.
(2) He shall manage work operations and/or functional programs and
has responsibility for employee evaluations for effectively
recommending the hiring, firing, promoting, demoting and/or
disciplining of employees.
(3) He shall prepare, inspect and approve plans and specifications,
consult with general contractors on construction projects,
supervise the use of equipment, prepare reports and maintain
records and files.
(4) He shall perform any other duties as assigned and designated by
the Director of Public Works.
C. The City Engineer and Assistant Municipal Engineer(s) shall perform
those duties as assigned and designated by the Director of Public
Works.
D. Any and all references to the "City Engineer" in the Code of the City of
East Orange shall hereinafter be designated "Director of Public Works"
unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
E. The manager of the East Orange Golf Course shall have the following
duties:
(1) Supervise the operation, maintenance, repair, construction and
cleaning of the East Orange Golf Course and its facilities.
(2) Supervise all employees within the Division of the East Orange Golf
Course.
§ 5-68 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-68
C:78
§ 5-69. Divisions of Department.
The Public Works Department shall have the following divisions:
§ 5-70. Duties of divisions; division managers; additional personnel.
(3) Manage the collection and accounting for all fees generated at the
East Orange Golf Course.
(4) Administer the golf course in a manner that reflects sound
budgetary practices.
(5) Participate in the preparation of plans and specifications for the
construction of any improvements to the golf course.
(6) Participate in periodically evaluating the programs of the division
and determine the needs of the public relative to providing services
at the golf course.
(7) Participate in the development and implementation of programs
and activities aimed at meeting the needs of the community at the
golf course.
(8) Implement programs developed by the Mayor and City Council
designed to promote the use of the golf course.
(9) Coordinate with citizen groups interested in participating in
programs and activities promulgated by the division or other City
departments.
(10) Coordinate with other City departments for the use of resources of
public and private agencies for programs and activities developed
by the division or other City departments.
A. Plans and Construction Division.
B. Streets and Drains Division.
C. Sanitation Division.
D. Traffic Engineering Division.
E. Administration and Clerical Division.
F. Shade Tree Division.
G. Garage Division.
H. Parks Maintenance Division.
I. Public Buildings and Grounds Division.
J. Division of the East Orange Golf Course.
A. The Plans and Construction Division shall be responsible for:
§ 5-68 CHARTER § 5-70
C:79
(1) The preparation of initial sketches and estimates and drafting of all
plans, specifications and drawings for all contemplated public
works undertaken by the City.
(2) Supervision of all public works undertaken by the City to assure
completion pursuant to this Code, other approved City ordinances
and contracts undertaken by the City.
(3) The responsibility of the Public Works Department under
Subsection A(1) and (2) above shall be limited where:
(a) Such public works are within the jurisdiction of one of the
boards, commissions or agencies of the City and other
provisions have been made therefor; or
(b) The City Council has appropriated funds for consulting
services whereupon the responsibility of the Director of Public
Works shall be to assist in the preparation of an appropriate
contract setting forth in full the scope of services to be
performed and to determine on behalf of the City whether such
contract is being performed in a proper and professional
manner.
(4) The preparation of searches certifying to municipal improvement
approved by ordinance, upon request therefor and payment of the
fee provided by law.
(5) The preparation and maintenance of an Official Tax Map under the
direction of a licensed land surveyor on behalf of the City, if such
map is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., and noting
of any changes therein due to transfers of title or subdivision
approval, including report of any purported subdivision which does
not comply with this Code or other ordinances of the City.
(6) The approval for payment of all vouchers of contractors or
consultants and certifying to partial completion or full completion
of any contract with the City which the Department has the
responsibility of overseeing.
(7) Maintaining a house-numbering map and the assignment of new
house numbers.
(8) Assisting various City departments in the coordination of
architectural services, including preliminary discussions, City
architect agreements and the preparation of plans and
specifications for structures and facilities.
(9) The review of architectural submissions for the various
departments in coordination with the Building Division.
(10) Serving as the Clerk of the Works for the construction of municipal
structures and facilities.
§ 5-70 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-70
C:80
B. The Streets and Drains Division shall:
(1) Maintain, clean, plow and remove snow and improve, in
accordance with funds available to the Public Works Department,
streets, bridges, walks, sidewalks, parking lots and other public
areas owned by the City or for which the City is responsible
pursuant to law.
(2) Review and approve (or disapprove), as provided by law, this Code
and other ordinances of the City, any application for construction or
use in any public area owned by the City as provided in Subsection
B(1) above by any person or party other than the City.
(3) Maintain and repair all real property acquired by the City of East
Orange through in rem foreclosure proceedings.
(4) Be responsible for the maintenance, repair, improvement and
construction of storm drains and open river channels within the
City. The City shall be responsible for the capital improvement and
construction of the sanitary sewer system.
C. The Sanitation Division shall:
(1) Supervise the performance of the contract between the City and
the scavenger responsible for collection and disposal of refuse.
(2) In conjunction with the public health officer and the Director of
Property Maintenance and Revitalization, enforce codes and
ordinances with respect to litter, refuse and improper disposition of
refuse within the City by all persons.
(3) Conduct a continuing cleanup, paint-up and fix-up program.
(4) Advise City representatives on matters pertaining to any joint
meeting in which the City participates for solid waste disposal.
D. The Traffic Engineering Division shall:
(1) Administer the provisions of Chapter 260, Vehicles and Traffic, and
other traffic ordinances of the City, except to the extent that
general enforcement thereof is vested in the Police Department,
including traffic planning, programming and control, marking of
streets, posting of signs, locating and maintaining meters and
meter collections, assigning, maintaining and constructing traffic
signals and recommending, from time to time, such amendments as
may be indicated or required in the interest of public safety and
convenience, and changing traffic patterns.
(2) Operate the municipal parking lots of the City.
(3) Recommend provisions for improving the handling and routing of
traffic on municipally owned streets but also in conjunction with
county and state and interstate highways, the Garden State
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:81
Parkway and the East-West Freeway, including service roads,
ramps and other parts of the foregoing systems.
(4) Review and advise on any proposed changes in public
transportation affecting the City, including matters pending before
the Public Utility Commission and Interstate Commerce
Commission, and maintain a current map of all routes utilized by
public conveyances within the City.
E. The Administrative and Clerical Division shall:
(1) Keep books and records on all permits relating to streets, sewers
and other public facilities in its jurisdiction, report promptly to the
Chief Financial Officer and Tax Collector on all money collected for
such permits and arrange for deposit thereof through the City
Treasurer as of the day of collection.
(2) Keep all other books and records of the Public Works Department.
F. The Shade Tree Division shall administer the provisions of § 51-193,
Landscaping.
G. The Garage Division shall operate a City garage for the repair and
maintenance of City-owned vehicles and equipment, subject to such
further arrangements as the Director of Public Works shall enter into
with any other City department or agency operating or utilizing Cityowned
vehicles and equipment.
H. The Parks Maintenance Division shall maintain all City-owned parks
and swimming pools within those parks, as well as any other parks
which the City is required to maintain by contract, agreement or by law.
I. The Public Buildings and Grounds Division shall:
(1) Operate and maintain public buildings owned by the City or for
which the City has assumed responsibility, except where the same
are under the direction and control of other departments or
agencies of the City.
(2) Provide custodian and janitorial services through its own staff or by
contract for all buildings under the direction and care of the
Department.
J. The divisions hereinabove shall have the following additional duties:
(1) To represent the City in the changing of streetlighting supplied by
the Public Service Electric and Gas Company.
(2) To perform such other engineering and technical services as may
be required for the physical development of the City upon its own
initiative or upon the request of the Mayor or City Council, and
advise and recommend such programs, ordinances or regulations
§ 5-70 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-70
C:82
as may be necessary to assure the proper physical functioning of
the City.
K. The divisions shall be supervised by a Division Manager under the
direction of the Director of Public Works. The Division Managers shall
be City employees in the classified civil service qualified for
appointment by the Civil Service Commission of this state.
(1) The Plans and Construction Division shall be supervised by a
Project Coordinator, Construction.
(2) The Street Division shall be supervised by a Street Superintendent.
(3) The Sewer Division shall be supervised by a Sewer Superintendent.
(4) The Sanitation Division shall be supervised by a Sanitation
Superintendent.
(5) The Traffic Engineering Division shall be supervised by a Traffic
Engineer.
(6) The Administration and Clerical Division shall be supervised by a
Chief Clerk, Engineering.
(7) The Shade Tree Division shall be supervised by a Tree
Superintendent.
(8) The Garage Division shall be supervised by a Garage
Superintendent.
(9) The Parks Maintenance Division shall be supervised by a
Recreation Maintenance Superintendent.
(10) The Public Buildings and Grounds Division shall be supervised by a
Buildings Superintendent.
L. This Department shall have additional personnel as may be provided for
by the budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said
personnel shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the
duties assigned by the Director.
M. The Division of the East Orange Golf Course shall:
(1) Be responsible for the development and implementation of golfing
and other community-oriented activities and programs at the East
Orange Golf Course.
(2) Be responsible for the sound and fiscally responsible management
and operation of the East Orange Golf Course.
(3) Charge the following fees in connection with the East Orange Golf
Course: [Added 12-28-2015 by Ord. No. 56-2015; amended
6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 24-2016; 2-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2-2018]
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-70
C:83
Greens Fees Cardholder Noncardholder Card Fee
Adult weekday $27 $43 $60
Adult weekend/
holiday
$32 $45 $60
Senior/junior
weekday
$20 $25
Senior/junior
weekend
$22 $35
Twilight weekdays $20 $22
Twilight weekends $22 $25
East Orange
resident/employee
weekday
$18
East Orange
resident/employee
weekend
$20
Cart Fees
18-hole adult (per
golfer)
$12
18-hole senior (per
golfer)
$8
9-hole cart fee (per
golfer)
$10
Pull carts (per
golfer)
$5
East Orange
resident/employee
(per golfer)
$10
Season Pass
Single unlimited
(tee times
preferred)
$1,500
Senior unlimited
(tee times
preferred)
$1,000
Single weekday (MTh)
(tee times
preferred)
$1,200
Junior $500
(a) East Orange residents/employees receive a twenty-five-percent
discount on season passes.
§ 5-70 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-70
C:84
§ 5-71. Work on behalf of private persons prohibited.
Neither the Director of Public Works nor his personnel shall participate
in behalf of any private person for compensation in the preparation of
any plan, drawing, survey or otherwise on any matter which is subject
to approval by the Public Works Department or shall be subject to any
hearing before any board, commission or agency of the City. Any other work
performed within the City for any private person shall not be undertaken
without the express permission of the Director, and then only if the same
shall not constitute a conflict of interest with the responsibilities of the
Department.
(b) All season passes are through tee times.
(c) All season pass holders must pay the nine-hole cart fee for the
use of carts.
(d) League membership must be pre-approved by the submission
of an application prepared by the golf course manager of the
City of East Orange for up to 40 golfers whose names must be
submitted with the original application, along with a fee of
$8,780. For each additional golfer over 40 in number, there
shall be an additional charge of $210.
(e) Tournament fees. There must be a minimum of 80 players. The
cost per player, which includes a golf cart, is $60 per player,
Memorial Day through Labor Day, and $40 per player after
Labor Day. Also, a nonrefundable deposit of $500 is required to
schedule and book the date.
(f) Upon the consent of the Department of Public Works (DPW)
Director and City Administrator, the East Orange Golf Course
Superintendent may reduce green fees to run special
promotions or events for the East Orange Golf Course.
§ 5-70 CHARTER § 5-71
C:85

ARTICLE X
Department of Electronic Data Processing
§ 5-72. Department established; duties.
There is hereby established a Department of Electronic Data Processing,
which Department shall be in charge of the collation, processing, storing
and dispensing, as requested by other departments and officials, of
information and data relating to various City operations, functions and
services.
§ 5-73. Department Director. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980]
The Department shall be under the general direction and supervision of
the Mayor and shall be under the immediate charge of a director whose
title shall be "Director of Data Processing." The Director shall be a person
qualified by experience and training in the operation of such data
processing equipment as the City shall own, utilize or lease and the
necessary programming and administration attendant thereto.
§ 5-74. Transfer of recordkeeping and operations to Department.
The Mayor shall by regulation from time to time designate such phases of
the City's operation and the data, information and recordkeeping attendant
thereto as shall be transferred from manual to automatic operation;
provided, however, to allow for orderly transition, that certain phases
thereof may be operated on both a manual and automatic basis. Such
phases as are designated for automatic processing shall thereafter, until
otherwise changed and to that extent, be under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Electronic Data Processing.
§ 5-75. Personnel.
The Department shall have such additional personnel as may be provided
for by budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City.
§ 5-76. Director to establish Department regulations. [Amended
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]
The Director, with the approval of the Mayor, may establish such regulations
for the Department as may be necessary to permit the accumulation of data,
assemblage of records and programming of the same and the dispensing
and distribution of payrolls, notices or other information, data, documents
or instruments as required in the performance of its duties.
§ 5-77. Power to deal with independent agencies.
The Department, with the approval of the Mayor, may enter into such
agreements as may be required with independent or autonomous agencies
of the City to perform data processing functions, and the terms thereof
§ 5-72 CHARTER § 5-77
C:87
and method of compensation therefor shall be incorporated in any such
agreement.
§ 5-77 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-77
C:88
ARTICLE XI
Department of Grants and Aid
[Added 10-9-1973 by Ord. No. 62-1973]
§ 5-78. Department established.
There is hereby established in the City a Department of Grants and Aid.
§ 5-79. Coordinator.
The Department of Grants and Aid shall be under the general direction
and supervision of the Mayor and shall be under the immediate charge
of a director whose title shall be "Coordinator of Grants and Aid." The
Coordinator of Grants and Aid shall be a person qualified by experience
and training and eligible under the rules and regulations of the New Jersey
Division of Civil Service to carry out the duties assigned to the Department
of Grants and Aid.
§ 5-80. Personnel.
The Department shall have such additional personnel as may be provided
for by budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City.
§ 5-81. Duties.
The Department of Grants and Aid shall have the following duties:
A. Compile, correlate and review information regarding federal, state and
private foundation funds that are available in order to obtain the
maximum aid available consistent with the needs and programs of the
City.
B. Identify programs available for existing and proposed projects.
C. Outline major provisions and requirements of proposed projects and
their funding grants.
D. Act as point of contact with state, regional, federal and foundation
officials.
E. Establish active liaison with City department or division heads, boards
and commissions as well as with appropriate officials of governing
agencies and private foundations.
F. Make studies, surveys and reports recommending uses of federal, state
or private foundation aid.
G. As directed, prepare and process applications for aid on behalf of the
governing body.
H. Expedite and follow up on funding of projects already approved and in
progress.
§ 5-78 CHARTER § 5-81
C:89
I. Establish and maintain needed or required records and files.
§ 5-81 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-81
C:90
ARTICLE XII
Department of Property Maintenance
[Added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 18-1986;14 amended 6-26-1989 by
Ord. No. 8-1989]
§ 5-82. Department established.
There is hereby established the Department of Property Maintenance.
§ 5-83. Director; Assistant Director.
§ 5-84. Duties of Director and Assistant Director.
A. There is hereby established the office of the Director of the Department
of Property Maintenance. The Director shall be a City officer appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
B. There shall be an Assistant Director, who shall be a City officer
appointed and confirmed in the same manner as the Director.
C. The Director and Assistant Director shall be qualified by experience and
training to perform the duties of the Department.
A. The Director shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) He shall administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of
the Department as set forth in this article.
(2) He shall coordinate and execute all inspections and Code
enforcement, including the administration of the provisions of
Chapter 159 of the Code of the City of East Orange, entitled
"Housing Standards; Property Maintenance."
(3) He shall coordinate and direct rehabilitation, conservation,
property maintenance and neighborhood improvement programs in
the City in conjunction with other departments or divisions within
the City having similar responsibilities and duties.
(4) He shall establish internal Department controls and procedures as
may be necessary to coordinate all code enforcement functions
within the City as directed by the Mayor.
(5) He shall establish and develop a community improvement program
implementing the community renewal program of the City in
various neighborhoods of the City and, as part thereof, develop and
coordinate municipal functions with the community action program
under the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 or other federal or
state legislation as applicable established for the City and other
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 5, Art. XXII, of the 1980 City Code,
Department of Inspection and Licensing, added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 5-1975, as
amended.
§ 5-82 CHARTER § 5-84
C:91
§ 5-85. Divisions of Department; duties of divisions; division
managers. [Amended 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003; 4-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 19-2015]
community organizations, which can assist and facilitate
community improvement on behalf of the residents of the City.
(6) He shall administer community improvement and code
enforcement programs undertaken pursuant to the National
Housing Act and other federal and state legislation and keep such
records and make such reports as may be required pursuant
thereto and by the Mayor and City Council.
(7) He shall perform, in conjunction with the Housing Authority and
the Mayor's Office of Planning and Development of the City,
conservation and rehabilitation activities in those areas which have
been designated for urban renewal in order to preserve, maintain
and improve neighborhoods not designated for clearance.
(8) He shall report as least once annually to the Mayor and City
Council on the overall code enforcement and community
improvement programs administered by the Department and more
specifically by the Division of Inspection and Code Enforcement
and the Division of Real Property, and to make such
recommendation for amendments to existing ordinances, for
implementation of existing programs and for initiating of further
programs as may be desired to accomplish the objectives of
community improvement.
(9) He shall perform such other duties as the Mayor may direct.
(10)He shall maintain and regulate all rent roll records and require all
landlords to register and update rent rolls annually on September 1
of every year. [Added 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 18-2005]
B. The Assistant Director shall aid the Director in effectuating the duties
of this Department.
A. The Department of Property Maintenance and Revitalization shall have
the following divisions:
(1) The Division of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall be
responsible for property maintenance inspections, code
enforcement, including the administration of the provisions of
Chapter 159 of the Code of the City of East Orange entitled
"Housing Standards; Property Maintenance." The Division shall be
responsible for the enforcement of federal and state codes as
applicable to this Department.
(2) The Division of Vacant and Abandoned Property shall be
responsible for ensuring maintenance requirements of vacant and
abandoned property and implementing the procedures established
§ 5-84 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-85
C:92
§ 5-86. Additional personnel.
The Department shall have additional personnel as may be provided for by
the budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said personnel
shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the duties assigned
by the Director.
in Articles XXIV and XXV of Chapter 159 of the East Orange City
Code. The Division of Vacant and Abandoned Property shall be
supervised by the Public Officer as defined in § 159-8 of the East
Orange City Code. The Public Officer may appoint tasks to one or
more designees.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) The Building Division shall be responsible for the administration
and supervision of the Building Code and approval of all
applications for construction, alterations and renovations of
buildings within the City; the enforcement of Chapter 51, Land
Use, of the Code of the City of East Orange and compliance
therewith; and the Building Division is designated as a State
Uniform Construction Code Enforcement Agency.
B. Division managers.
(1) The Division of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall be
supervised by a division manager who shall be a City officer
qualified by experience and training to perform the duties of this
division and appointed and confirmed in the same manner as the
Director.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) (Reserved)
(4) The Building Division shall be supervised by a division manager
who shall be a licensed construction official and a City employee in
the classified civil service qualified for appointment by the Civil
Service Commission of this state.
§ 5-85 CHARTER § 5-86
C:93

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Economic Development
[Added 4-23-1979 by Ord. No. 19-1979]
§ 5-87. Department established.
There is hereby established a Department of Economic Development which
shall be under the direction and supervision of the Director of Economic
Development.
§ 5-88. Director: office established, term and qualifications.
The office of Director of Economic Development is hereby established. The
Director of Economic Development shall be a City officer appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Director shall serve a term
coterminous with the term of the office of the Mayor. The Director shall be a
person who, by experience, education and training, is qualified to carry out
the duties assigned to the Department of Economic Development.
§ 5-89. Duties of Director and Department.
The Department of Economic Development under the direction of the
Director of Economic Development shall have the following duties,
generally:
§ 5-90. Additional personnel.
The Department of Economic Development shall have such additional
personnel as may be provided for by its financial resources and set forth
A. To administratively operate and oversee all programs and projects
relating to economic development and all other development projects
and programs as directed by the Mayor and City Council.
B. To serve as an ombudsman to business and community organizations
through ongoing liaison with those said organizations which are
deemed essential to the success of the various programs, projects and
policies of the Department.
C. To facilitate all appropriate public and private agencies in focusing
their resources on specific projects and programs under the
Department's jurisdiction in an effort to attain maximum leverage of
public investment.
D. To undertake technical research and to recommend Citywide
development policies to the Mayor, City Council and Business
Development Authority; further, to effectuate projects and programs to
implement said policies.
E. To coordinate programs and projects aimed at the retention of existing
businesses as well as at the attraction of new or expanded business
opportunities within the City.
§ 5-87 CHARTER § 5-90
C:95
in the Salary Ordinance of the City of East Orange. Said positions are
to be under the jurisdiction and supervision of the Director of Economic
Development and filled by persons who by training or experience are
qualified to carry out the duties assigned to them by the Director of
Economic Development.
§ 5-90 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-90
C:96
ARTICLE XIV
Department of Policy, Planning and Economic Development
[Added 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
§ 5-91. Establishment of office; qualifications.
There is hereby established the Department of Policy, Planning and
Economic Development. The Department shall operate under the direction
of the Director of Policy, Planning and Economic Development, who shall be
an officer of the City appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by City
Council. The Director shall serve for a term coterminous with that of the
Mayor. The Director of Policy, Planning and Economic Development shall,
by education, experience and ability, be qualified to perform the duties
established for him or her.
§ 5-92. Duties.
The Director of Policy, Planning and Economic Development shall perform
the duties required by law and/or ordinance. The office shall have the
following duties as they relate to the divisions set forth in § 5-93. The office
shall:
A. Compile, correlate and review information regarding federal, state and
private foundation funds that are available in order to obtain the
maximum aid available consistent with the needs and programs of the
City.
B. Identify programs available for existing and proposed projects.
C. Outline major provisions and requirements of proposed projects and
their funding grants.
D. Act as point of contact with state, regional, federal and foundation
officials.
E. Establish active liaison with City department or division heads, boards
and commissions as well as with appropriate officials of governing
agencies and private foundations.
F. Make studies, surveys and reports recommending uses of federal, state
or private foundation aid.
G. As directed, prepare and process applications for aid on behalf of the
City.
H. Expedite and follow up on funding of projects already approved and in
progress.
I. Establish and maintain needed or required records and files.
J. Administer such programs emanating from grants to the City as may be
assigned to it.
§ 5-91 CHARTER § 5-93
C:97
§ 5-93. Divisions.
The Office of Policy, Planning and Economic Development shall have the
following divisions:
A. In the Department of Policy, Planning and Economic Development there
shall be the Division of Grants and Community Development.
(1) The Division of Grants and Community Development shall be
supervised by a City employee in the classified civil service,
qualified by experience and training to execute the duties and
responsibilities of the Division.
B. In the Department of Policy, Planning and Economic Development there
shall be a Division of Public Information and Consumer Services. The
Public Information and Consumer Services office shall be responsible
for handling citizens' questions, concerns and complaints related to the
delivery of municipal services and aid in the protection of the public
against fraud and unfair business practices. The office shall also serve
as a public information resource for each department within the City
and be responsible for the dissemination of information to the public
about the City.
C. In the Department of Policy, Planning and Economic Development there
shall be a Division of Comprehensive Planning. The Director shall
employ the services of a licensed professional planner pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:14A-1 et seq., as necessary, either by contract
or appointment, for comprehensive land use planning.15
D. In the Department of Policy, Planning and Economic Development there
shall be a Division of Economic and Business Development. The Division
shall implement the following responsibilities:
(1) Administratively operate and oversee all programs and projects
relating to economic development and all other development
projects and programs as directed by the Mayor and City Council.
(2) Serve as an ombudsman to business and community organizations
through ongoing liaison with those organizations which are
deemed essential to the success of the various programs, projects
and policies of the Department.
(3) Facilitate all appropriate public and private agencies in focusing
their resources on specific City projects and programs in an effort
to attain maximum leverage of public investment.
(4) Undertake technical research, recommend Citywide development
policies to the Mayor and City Council and Business Development
Authority; further, to effectuate projects and programs to
implement said policies.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-93 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-93
C:98
(5) Coordinate programs and projects aimed at the retention of
existing businesses as well as the attraction of new or expanded
business opportunities within the City.
(6) Schedule or attend meetings for the Mayor with federal, state,
county and private officials and develop related entities and serve
as liaison between the City and other officials of government
agencies.
(7) Assume responsibility for the implementation and development of
employment training programs within the City of East Orange. The
Department shall also perform the following duties:
(a) Act as liaison to federal, state, county, local and private sector
agencies to ascertain the availability of funding for
employment training and improvement programs within the
City.
(b) Act as informational resource person to employees, employers,
community groups and other citizens for career improvement
services which may be available within the City.
(c) Conduct and/or arrange courses, services or other
informational programs for departments, boards and
commissions to enable employees to develop better work
habits and skills in the workplace.
(d) Provide intake services to compile a listing of individuals
seeking employment and assist them in applying for
employment.
(e) Develop and identify jobs in private industry and refer
appropriate applicants to them.
(f) Coordinate all related educational training and social services
to assist citizens who are seeking employment.
(g) Perform any other duties that the Mayor or his designee may
assign in furtherance of the aforesaid objectives.
(8) The Department of Policy, Planning and Development shall have
additional personnel as may be provided for by the budget and set
forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said personnel shall be
qualified by experience and training to perform the duties assigned
by the Director.
§ 5-93 CHARTER § 5-93
C:99

ARTICLE XV
Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs
[Added 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 6-1991]
§ 5-94. Establishment of office; qualifications.
There is hereby established the Department of Recreation and Cultural
Affairs, which shall be responsible for the development and implementation
of recreational and cultural activities and programs throughout the City.
The Department shall operate under the Direction of the Director of
Recreation and Cultural Affairs, who shall be a City officer appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Director shall be qualified by
education, experience and training to perform the duties of this office.
§ 5-95. Duties.
The Director shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
A. Administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of this
Department as set forth in this article.
B. Periodically evaluate the programs of the Department and determine
the needs of the public relative to providing recreation and cultural
activities.
C. Assume responsibility for the development and implementation of
programs and activities aimed at meeting the needs of the community.
D. Implement programs developed by the Mayor and City Council
designed to promote recreational and cultural services.
E. Maintain liaison with citizen groups interested in participating in
programs and activities promulgated by the Department.
F. Maintain liaison with citizen programs interested in participating in
programs and activities promulgated by the department.
G. Coordinate public and private agencies and use their resources for
programs and activities developed by the department.
H. Coordinate public and private agencies and use their resources for
programs and activities developed by the department and act as liaison
to the East Orange Arts and Cultural Commission.
I. Act as liaison to federal, state, county, local and private sector agencies
to ascertain the availability of funding for arts and cultural programs
within the City.
J. Ascertain the cultural needs of the City and implement programs to
meet them.
K. Act as an informal resource person for federal, state and local arts
organizations.
§ 5-94 CHARTER § 5-95
C:101
§ 5-96. Divisions; managers. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No.
17-2015]
In the Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs shall be:
L. Coordinate volunteer programs within the City for arts and cultural
activities.
M. Assist local educational, cultural and charitable institutions through
cooperative programs to enhance membership, funding and publicity.
N. Develop programs to enhance ethnic, racial, historic and social
traditions germane to the citizens of East Orange.
O. Periodically evaluate the programs of the Department and determine
the needs of the public relative to providing services at the Civic Center.
P. Assume responsibility for the development and implementation of
programs and activities aimed at meeting the needs of the community
at the Civic Center.
Q. Implement programs developed by the Mayor and City Council
designed to promote the use of the Civic Center.
R. Ensure compliance with § 5-97 of this chapter by requiring the
submission and performance of criminal history record background
checks of all employees and volunteers provided with supervised or
unsupervised access to persons under the age of 18. [Added
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
A. In the Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs shall be the
Division of Neighborhood Facilities, which shall be responsible for the
operation of the Fellowship Civic Center in the City of East Orange.
(1) The Director of the Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs
shall have the following duties and responsibilities as it pertains to
the Division of Neighborhood Facilities:
(a) Administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of this
Division as set forth in this article.
(b) Periodically evaluate the programs of the Division and
determine the needs of the public relative to providing services
at the Civic Center.
(c) Assume responsibility for the development and implementation
of programs and activities aimed at meeting the needs of the
community at the Civic Center.
(d) Implement programs developed by the Mayor and City Council
designed to promote the use of the Civic Center.
(e) Maintain liaison with citizen groups interested in participating
in programs and activities promulgated by the Division.
§ 5-95 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-96
C:102
§ 5-97. Additional personnel. [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
(f) Coordinate public and private agencies and use their resources
for programs and activities developed by the Division.
A. The Department shall have additional personnel as may be provided for
by the budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said
personnel shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the
duties assigned by the Director of Recreation and Cultural Affairs.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A
determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the
New Jersey State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police.
MUNICIPAL-SPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any program
sponsored by the City of East Orange, including any municipal
employees, volunteer organizations created by the municipality, and all
leagues, boards, committees and commissions affiliated with, falling
within the purview of, or acting for or on behalf of, the City and having
contact with persons under the age of 18 years.
MUNICIPALITY/TOWNSHIP/BOROUGH/TOWN/CITY or MUNICIPAL
— The City of East Orange, in the County of Essex, State of New Jersey.
NONSPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAM — Any youth program not
sponsored by the City of East Orange, but that utilizes municipal
facilities or has affiliation with a municipal-sponsored youth program
and having contact with persons under the age of 18 years.
YOUTH PROGRAM — Any program that allows for participation in
activities by those persons under 18 years of age. Activities may
include, but are not limited to, sporting or athletic activities, recreation
groups, clubs or camps and trips or other activities whereby some
control and responsibility for children is assigned to some person acting
for or on behalf of a municipal-sponsored youth program or
nonsponsored youth program, other than a parent or caregiver.
C. Nonsponsored youth programs: criminal background checks required
for use of municipal facilities.
(1) Prior to any club or organization not defined as a municipalsponsored
youth program being authorized to use municipal-owned
facilities for functions participated in by children, all adults (those
persons 18 years of age or older) in any way assisting in the
function, including but not limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or
similar positions, must provide the municipal Chief of Police or
designee, or other chief law enforcement officer of the municipality,
§ 5-96 CHARTER § 5-97
C:103
with findings of a criminal history background check obtained from
the State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police.
(2) The submission of background check findings must be based upon
a check performed within three years of the start of use of the
municipal-owned facility. In the case of coaches performing duties
as employees of a school district, the policy of background checks
adopted by the individual school district shall be used to establish
eligibility for use of municipal-owned facilities. In all cases the
background check must comply with the provisions of any
applicable laws regarding same, but not less detailed than those
performed by the municipality for individuals involved in
administering municipal-sponsored youth programs. All fees for
individuals administering a non-municipal-sponsored program shall
be borne by the individual or program with which they are
participating.
D. Municipal-sponsored youth programs: background checks.
(1) All adults (those persons 18 years of age or older), including but not
limited to present employees, coaches, assistant coaches, or similar
positions involved in educating, directing or supervising youth, and
in any way assisting in a municipal-sponsored function participated
in by children, shall submit sufficient information on forms supplied
by the municipal Police Department or other enforcement authority
from the New Jersey State Police, for the purpose of obtaining a
criminal history background check with the State Bureau of
Identification in the New Jersey State Police. Applications for
background checks shall be processed by the municipal Chief of
Police or other chief law enforcement authority of the municipality.
(2) Based upon a memorandum of understanding to be executed
between the City of East Orange and the New Jersey State Police,
the individual applying for the background check shall authorize
the municipal Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement officer
of the municipality to be the recipient of the response from the
State Police based upon the findings of the background check.
Individuals involved in a municipal-sponsored youth function, and
who are required to undergo background checks based upon this
section, shall not be responsible for the costs involved with
obtaining the criminal background check. The municipality shall
bear the costs for the background checks for individuals qualified
under this section.
(3) All league officers and/or those individuals in charge of each
recreation program are required to ensure compliance with this
section for that league or program. The president or leader of each
recreation program shall file an annual roster of individuals that
are required to participate in the background check procedures of
this section. The roster shall be on forms supplied by the
municipality and shall contain a certification as to the accuracy and
§ 5-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-97
C:104
completeness of the roster and individual names. Any person who
knowingly certifies a background check roster that excludes an
individual required to be checked shall be in violation of this
section and laws regarding false swearing.
E. ID card. Individuals engaged in providing recreation opportunities for,
or on behalf of, the City shall be issued identification cards with
appropriate expirations based upon the date of their individual
background check. Individuals issued identification cards are required
to display their card while in performance of their duty involving youth
programs.
F. Disqualification from employment and termination of employment.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the
State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the
municipal Chief of Police or designee, or other chief law
enforcement officer of the municipality shall notify the applicant,
the Law Department and the appropriate director, administrator or
department head of affirmative or negative results.
(2) The positive or negative determination of the municipal Chief of
Police or other chief law enforcement officer shall be based upon
Subsection F(1). Details in the background check that result in a
negative determination by the State Police shall not be afforded to
the municipal Chief of Police and will only be made available to the
applicant upon making a formal request to the State Bureau of
Investigation.
(3) In the event the criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses which may negatively impact the
health, safety and welfare of children, said applicant shall not be
qualified to be an employee or volunteer, in any capacity, for the
City of East Orange, with regards to any program or event that
would include the unsupervised or supervised interaction with
persons under the age of 18 years of age. An applicant's
employment with the City shall be immediately terminated, and
said applicant shall be barred from any and all future employment
positions involving persons under the age of 18 years old in the
event that:
(a) The applicant began employment for the City prior to the
effective date of this section and/or failed to submit to a
criminal history record background check prior to the start of
his or her employment; and
(b) Said applicant receives a negative result from and/or fails the
required background check.
(4) Those crimes or offenses that shall be deemed to negatively impact
the health, safety and welfare of children, thereby disqualifying an
§ 5-97 CHARTER § 5-97
C:105
applicant from employment within the City, shall include, but not
be limited to:
(a) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
[1] Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses, including but not limited to
criminal homicide (N.J.S.A. 2C:11-2 et seq.), assault
(N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq.), threats (N.J.S.A. 2C:12-3),
stalking (N.J.S.A. 2C:12-10 et seq.), kidnapping (N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1 et seq.), robbery (N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.) and all
offenses enumerated in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
[2] Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning
those crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4 et seq., such as endangering the welfare
of a child;
[3] Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes;
[4] Involving any controlled dangerous substance or
controlled substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of
Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes except the offense of
possessing under 50 grams of marijuana as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10a(4).
[5] Of the fourth degree or higher.
[6] Requiring the applicant to register as a sex offender within
the meaning of N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2 et seq.
(b) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed
in New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described outlined in this section and/or any
offense outlined in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2 et seq.
(5) The list of crimes and violations contained in this section is for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as a limitation
on those criminal activities or violations that would be grounds to
disqualify a person from assisting with youth-related activities as
indicated herein.
(6) Refusal by individuals required to submit to background checks
will result in an immediate dismissal of the individual from any
municipal-sponsored activities or employment requiring
background checks. In addition, refusal to comply with this section
by any individual falling within the scope of requirements for
nonsponsored youth programs will forfeit that individual's ability to
participate with the respective program. Refusal of a nonmunicipal-
sponsored youth program to subscribe to the
§ 5-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-97
C:106
requirements of this section shall forfeit that program's ability to
use municipal facilities.
G. Frequency of background checks.
(1) All nonsponsored youth programs that have individuals subject to
this section shall supply background checks for all of their
participants prior to the individual being able to participate at any
function at a municipal-owned facility to the extent covered by this
section. Thereafter, every three years a new background check
shall be submitted to the Chief of Police, Municipal Administrator
or Municipal Solicitor.
(2) All municipal-sponsored youth programs that have individuals
subject to this section shall ensure the performance of criminal
history record background checks prior to the individual being able
to participate at any function sponsored by the City. Thereafter,
every three years a new background check shall be submitted to
the municipal Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement officer.
(3) Individuals involved in municipal-sponsored youth programs who
are required to undergo background checks shall be given an
interim approval for participation only after submission to the
Division of State Police for a background check. Interim approvals
shall only be valid for the period of time that it takes to receive
background checks results. Such interim approval shall not be valid
for a period of time exceeding 45 days. Only one interim approval
may be granted per individual. During this interim approval the
affected applicants shall not be given unsupervised access to
minors.
H. Appeals.
(1) Any person whose criminal history record background check
disqualifies that person from employment or from volunteering may
appeal his or her disqualification.
(2) Appeal regarding accuracy of record. A person may challenge the
accuracy of the criminal history record. A challenge to the accuracy
of the report shall be filed with the municipal Chief of Police or
other chief law enforcement officer, who shall coordinate the
challenge with the New Jersey State Police.
(3) Appeal alleging rehabilitation. A person may claim to be
rehabilitated; however:
(a) No person may appeal a disqualification on the grounds of
rehabilitation, if convicted of a fourth degree offense or higher,
if the person has been disqualified because that person has
been convicted, adjudicated delinquent or acquitted by reason
of insanity of aggravated sexual assault; sexual assault;
aggravated criminal sexual contact; kidnapping pursuant to
§ 5-97 CHARTER § 5-97
C:107
paragraph (2) of Subsection c of N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1; endangering
the welfare of a child by engaging in sexual conduct which
would impair or debauch the morals of the child pursuant to
subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; endangering the welfare of
a child pursuant to paragraph (4) of Subsection b of N.J.S.A.
2C:24-4; luring or enticing pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1993,
c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6); criminal sexual contact pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b if the victim is a minor; kidnapping pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:13-3 if the victim is a minor and the offender is not the
parent of the victim; knowingly promoting prostitution of a
child pursuant to paragraph (3) of Subsection b of N.J.S.A.
2C:34-1; or an attempt to commit any of these enumerated
offenses.
(b) An appeal based on rehabilitation shall be made to an Appeals
Committee, which shall consist of the Chief of Police, the
president or administrator of the municipal recreation
program and Municipal Attorney. Any such appeal must be
made within 30 days of receipt of the notice of disqualification.
(4) Rehabilitation criteria. In determining whether a person has
affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, the Appeals Committee
shall consider the following factors:
(a) The nature and responsibility of the position which the
convicted person would hold or has held, as the case may be:
(b) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(c) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(d) The date of the offense;
(e) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(f) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(g) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the
offense; and
(h) Any other evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment
received, acquisition of additional academic or vocational
schooling, successful participation in correctional work release
programs, or the recommendation of those who have had the
person under their supervision.
(5) If the Appeals Committee determines that the disqualified person
has been successfully rehabilitated, it shall enter that person's
name on the list of qualified employees and volunteers maintained
by the municipal Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement
officer of the municipality.
§ 5-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-97
C:108
I. Privacy and confidentiality.
(1) Any and all criminal background checks supplied to the municipal
Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement officer shall be filed
and maintained in a secure and locked cabinet or room and shall
not be available to the public. The Chief of Police or other chief law
enforcement officer of the municipality shall take appropriate steps
to safeguard such records. The records shall be exempt from public
disclosure under the common law or the New Jersey Right to Know
Law.16 The records shall only be retained for such period of time as
is necessary to serve their intended and authorized purpose, and
thereafter shall be destroyed.
(2) Access to criminal history record information for non-criminaljustice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted
to the members of the review committee, as authorized by federal
or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order, local ordinance
or resolution regarding obtaining and disseminating of criminal
history record information obtained under this section.
(3) The review committee shall limit its use of criminal history record
information solely to the individual for which it was obtained, and
the criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive
the records for authorized purposes. This information shall be
limited solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and
it shall not be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any
person violating federal or state regulations governing access to
criminal history records information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
J. Penalties.
(1) Failure to comply with this section may result in the municipality
withholding funding for the nonprofit youth-serving organization,
prohibiting the use of facilities, or withholding funding for facility
maintenance.
(2) Fines.
(a) Any individual who has been advised, verbally or in writing, of
his/her disqualification to participate and continues to
participate upon conviction thereof in a proceeding before a
court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to the following
fine:
[1] A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $2,500.
[a] Each continuing violation of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 5-97 CHARTER § 5-98
C:109
§ 5-98. East Orange Golf Course Advisory Committee. [Added
3-26-2007 by Ord. No. 7-2007]
A. There is hereby established the East Orange Golf Course Advisory
Committee. It consists of two members of City Council who shall be
appointed by the City Council Chairperson and five citizens of East
Orange, two of whom shall be appointed by resolution of City Council,
two of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and one of whom shall be
appointed by resolution of the East Orange Board of Water
Commissioners. The term of office for each City Council member shall
be one year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each
calendar year. The term of office for each citizen member shall be two
years with the term beginning on the date of appointment. The Mayor
and City Council Chairperson shall be ex officio members of the Golf
Course Advisory Committee.
B. The East Orange Golf Course Advisory Committee shall review and
study the management, operation and maintenance of the golf course
and make policy recommendations to the Mayor, City Council and the
Board of Water Commissioners.
§ 5-98 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-98
C:110
ARTICLE XVI
Department of Health and Human Services
[Added 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 13-201517]
§ 5-99. Establishment of Department.
§ 5-100. Duties of Director of Health and Human Services.
§ 5-101. Establishment of divisions.
The Department of Health and Human Services shall consist of the divisions
set forth in this section. The divisions shall be separately administered by
Managers who shall serve under the supervision of the Director:
A. There is hereby established the Department of Health and Human
Services.
B. The Department of Health and Human Services shall consist of separate
divisions that are specifically designed to address distinct health and
human services needs through the implementation of programs. The
authority to remove, transfer, or add any program under this
Department shall be vested in the Mayor.
A. The Department of Health and Human Services shall be administered
by a Director who shall be a City official appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by City Council. The Director's responsibilities shall be to
ensure compliance with all federal, state, and local program initiatives;
to identify resources to provide quality health and human services in
East Orange; and to supervise all Department personnel. The Director
shall also consult with the Community Health and Human Services
Board on matters within the Department. The duties of the Director of
Health and Human Services as set forth by statute and N.J.A.C.
10:90-12, P.L. 1990, c. 66, and P.L. 1997, c. 37, are incorporated within
Subsection A of this section.
A. Health Services Division.
(1) This Division shall be managed by a Health Officer who shall be a
full-time City employee. The Health Officer shall be responsible for
insuring that quality health initiatives will mitigate conditions and
personal health situations for the citizens of East Orange. The
Health Officer shall also specifically recommend local public health
policies, coordinate and direct the programs and services of the
Health Division, and direct the enforcement of public health
initiatives within the municipality as mandated by the state.
(2) The following programs and services may be established and
provided for within the Health Services Division:
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XVI, Department of Health and
Human Services, added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 23-2000, as amended.
§ 5-99 CHARTER § 5-101
C:111
(a) Women, Infants and Children (WIC). This program is dedicated
to reducing morbidity and mortality among women and
children by achieving the specified nutritional objective of
providing supplemental foods, nutrition education and referral
to ongoing health care to eligible pregnant or breast-feeding
women, infants and children under five years of age who are at
risk.
(b) Vital Statistics. This service registers and coordinates all
births, civil unions, deaths, domestic partnerships and
marriages of the municipality.
[1] Certificates of marriage, civil union and domestic
partnership fees. Certified copy fees for the certificates of
marriage and domestic partnership shall be $15; the
affidavit or application fee in relation to said documents
shall be $28 pursuant to the New Jersey Statutes.
[2] Certificates of birth and death. Certified copy fees for the
certificates of birth and death shall be $10.
(c) Public Health Nursing. This service promotes physical and
mental health and prevents disease, injury and disability in the
general public by monitoring health status and diagnosing and
investigating health problems.
(d) HIV Counseling. This service promotes risk reduction of HIV/
AIDS transmission through pre- and post-test counseling, as
well as HIV testing and individual case management.
(e) Lead Poisoning and Prevention Program. This program is
committed to the clinical case management and environmental
remediation in cases of lead-poisoned children.
(f) Environmental Inspection. This service promotes good public
health in the community through monitoring inspections and
enforcement of all state and local sanitary codes, by inspecting
restaurants, nursing homes, schools, day-cares, swimming
pools and nuisance complaints.
(g) Substance Abuse. This service is to provide quality care to all
individuals who come to the facility seeking substance abuse
treatment, to include intensive counseling, methadone
maintenance and various other treatments.
(h) Dental Services. This program develops awareness, provides
preventive measures and provides comprehensive dental
treatment to school-age children whose parents/guardians are
not financially able to handle the cost of dental treatment.
(i) Emergency Medical Transportation Services. This service
provides ambulance and emergency ambulatory transportation
§ 5-101 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-101
C:112
for residents in the City to appropriate hospital or medical
facilities.
B. Senior Services Division.
(1) This Division shall service all older adults to enhance the quality of
life of these residents of East Orange through the Division's six
major components: outreach and referrals; home and home friends;
transportation; special Events; trips; and educational workshops.
(2) The Division of Senior Services shall be supervised by a manager
who shall be a City employee in the classified civil service qualified
for appointment by the Civil Service Commission of this state. The
manager shall act under the supervision of the Director of Health
and Human Services and shall be responsible for:
(a) Administering, supervising and directing the personnel and
work of this division as set forth in this article.
(b) Periodically evaluating the programs of the division and
determining the needs of the public relative to providing
services for senior citizens.
C. Weights and Measures Division.
(1) This Division shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of those provisions and duties as set forth in N.J.S.A.
51:1-1 et seq., any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto and all applicable sections of the Code of the City of East
Orange. The Division shall be responsible for the acquisition and
purchase of standards and equipment necessary and proper for the
operation of the Division pursuant to its duties under any
applicable laws and ordinances. Said purchases shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law
and applicable City ordinances.
(2) The Division of Weights and Measures shall be supervised by a
manager who shall be the Superintendent of Weights and
Measures, a City employee in the classified civil service qualified
for appointment by the Civil Service Commission of this state. The
Superintendent of Weights and Measures shall act under the
supervision of the Director of Health and Human Services to the
extent permitted by N.J.S.A. 51:1-1 et seq. In addition, he shall be
responsible for inspections, certifications and reports required by
this Code, the provisions of N.J.S.A. 51:1-1 et seq., regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto and any other statute or law.
D. Employment and Training Division. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No.
12-2017]
(1) The Employment and Training Division shall be supervised by a
manager who shall be a City employee in the classified civil service
§ 5-101 CHARTER § 5-101
C:113
§ 5-102. Establishment of Advisory Board of Health and Human
Services.
There shall be established an Advisory Board to the Department of Health
and Human Services consisting of nine residents of the City of East Orange.
Each member shall serve three-year terms on a staggered, rotating basis.
§ 5-103. Appointment of Advisory Board members; Chairperson;
quorum.
qualified for appointment by the Civil Service Commission of this
state. The Manager of Employment and Training shall be
responsible for the implementation and development of
employment training programs within the City of East Orange. The
manager shall act under the supervision of the Director of Health
and Human Services.
(2) The Manager of Employment and Training shall also perform the
following duties:
(a) Act as a liaison to federal, state, county, local and private
sector agencies to ascertain the availability of funding for
employment training and improvement programs within the
City.
(b) Act as an informational resource person to employees,
employers, community groups and other citizens for career
improvement services which may be available within the City.
(c) Conduct and/or arrange courses, services or other
informational programs for departments, boards and
commissions to enable employees to develop better work
habits and skills in the workplace.
(d) Provide intake services to compile a listing of individuals
seeking employment and assist them in applying for
employment.
(e) Develop and identify jobs in private industry and refer
appropriate applicants to them.
(f) Coordinate all related educational training and social services
to assist citizens who are seeking employment.
(g) Perform any other duties that the Mayor or his designee may
assign in furtherance of the aforesaid objectives.
A. Five members shall be appointed by members of City Council, one from
each ward. The Mayor shall appoint all other members.
B. Members of the Board shall annually elect a Chairperson. A quorum of
the Board shall consist of five members.
§ 5-101 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-104
C:114
§ 5-104. Personnel.
The Department shall have such additional personnel as may be necessary.
§ 5-104 CHARTER § 5-104
C:115

ARTICLE XVII
Department of Human Resource Services
[Added 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
§ 5-105. Department established.
There is hereby established a Department of Human Resource Services
which shall be under the direction and supervision of the Director of Human
Resource Services.
§ 5-106. Office of Director established; term; qualifications.
The office of Director of Human Resource Services is hereby established.
The Director of Human Resource Services shall be a City officer appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Director shall serve a
term coterminous with the term of the office of the Mayor. The Director shall
be a person who, by experience, education and training, is qualified to carry
out the duties assigned to the Department of Human Resource Services.
§ 5-107. Duties of Director and Department.
The Department of Human Resource Services, under the direction of the
Director of Human Resource Services, shall have the following duties,
generally:
§ 5-108. Additional personnel.
The Department of Human Resource Services shall have such additional
personnel as may be necessary, which shall be supported by the municipal
budget. The positions are to be under the jurisdiction and supervision of the
Director of Human Resource Services and filled by persons who by training
or experience are qualified to carry out the duties assigned to them by the
Director of Human Resource Services.
A. To administratively oversee employment matters, including
recruitment, hiring, employee orientation, civil service classification
and/or certification.
B. To administer employee benefits, including health insurance, pension,
short- and long-term disability and leaves.
C. To support the City Administrator and department heads in the
handling of progressive disciplinary matters.
D. To coordinate employee programs and services aimed at the retention
and professional development of existing personnel, including
counseling, wellness and other employee assistance programs, as
needed.
E. To develop, maintain and provide updated personnel policies and
procedures to align with the City Code, labor contracts and applicable
laws.
§ 5-105 CHARTER § 5-108
C:117

ARTICLE XVIII
Office of Emergency Management
[Added 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 3-1988]
§ 5-109. Establishment of Office.
There is hereby established in the municipal government of the City of East
Orange the Office of Emergency Management (hereinafter "Office").
§ 5-110. System of management procedures.
The Office will maintain a system of management procedures to be used by
the Mayor in the event of a civil or natural disaster.
§ 5-111. Composition.18
The Office shall be composed of 15 members. The composition of the Office
shall be as follows:
A. An Emergency Management Coordinator, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor from among the residents of the City of East Orange for a term of
three years.
B. A First Deputy Coordinator and a Second Deputy Coordinator, who shall
be appointed by the Emergency Management Coordinator with the
approval of the Mayor.
C. A representative of the City Council to be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of City Council.
D. One representative appointed by the Mayor from each of the following
City departments:
(1) Administrative Services.
(2) Health Department.
(3) Fire Department.
(4) Police Department.
(5) Department of Policy, Planning and Economic Development.19
(6) Public Works Department.
E. One representative from each of the following community agencies:
(1) American Red Cross.
(2) East Orange School District.
18.Editor's Note: This section was originally numbered as § 28-7 of the 1980 Code and moved
to this article at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-109 CHARTER § 5-111
C:119
(3) East Orange Community Development Corp.
(4) Essex Valley Health Care.
(5) Salvation Army.
§ 5-111 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-111
C:120
ARTICLE XIX
Secretary to Mayor
§ 5-112. Office created.
There is hereby established the office of Secretary to the Mayor.
§ 5-113. Duties.
The Secretary to the Mayor shall act as private secretary and stenographer
to the Mayor and perform such other duties as the Mayor may prescribe.20
20.Editor's Note: Former § 5-78 of the 1980 Code, Executive Assistant to the Mayor: office
created, duties and qualifications, which previously followed this section and which was
added 2-14-1978 by Ord. No. 3-1978, was repealed 8-20-1984 by Ord. No. 35-1984 and
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 11-1986.
§ 5-112 CHARTER § 5-113
C:121

ARTICLE XX
Mayor's Office of Planning and Development
[Added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 15-198621]
§ 5-114. Office established; purpose. [Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 7-1989]
There is hereby established the Mayor's Office of Planning and
Development, which shall have the general responsibilities and duties for
planning as related to land use, fiscal management, public service,
redevelopment and the administration of applications for federal, state and
other grants-in-aid. The Office shall also function as the technical staff for
the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment and as otherwise directed
by the Mayor and City Council.
§ 5-115. Director; Assistant Director. [Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 7-1989]
§ 5-116. Duties of Director and Assistant Director.
A. There is hereby established the office of Director of the Mayor's Office
of Planning and Development. The Director shall be a City officer
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The
Director shall be a person qualified by experience and training to
perform the duties of the office.
B. There shall be an Assistant Director, who shall be an employee of the
City in the classified civil service qualified for appointment by the Civil
Service Commission of this state.
A. The Director shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of the
Office as set forth in this article.
(2) Serve as clerk of the Planning Board, providing the Board with
assistance to enable it to conduct its work and discharge its duties
as provided by law.
(3) Provide assistance, information and counsel to the Mayor and City
Council as it relates to this Office.
(4) Represent the City in matters pertaining to planning, community
development and grants-in-aid as directed by the Mayor and City
Council.
(5) Supervise and develop research relating to planning, including the
Master Plan, community redevelopment and renewal, capital
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 5, Art. XV, of the 1980 Code,
Department of Planning and Grants Administration, added 5-13-1974 by Ord. No. 29-1974,
as amended.
§ 5-114 CHARTER § 5-116
C:123
§ 5-117. Divisions; division managers. [Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 7-1989]
The Mayor's Office of Planning and Development shall have the following
divisions:
budgeting, community surveys, human services and other social
programs developed by the Mayor, City Council or the Planning
Board and as approved by the Mayor and City Council.
(6) In conjunction with the Mayor, City Council, Planning Board,
Corporation Counsel and Zoning Officer, assist in the revision and
updating of the Zoning Ordinance22 and such other ordinances
which relate to planning, community development and grants-inaid
within the City.
B. The Assistant Director shall aid the Director in effectuating the duties
of this office.
A. The Division of Grantsmanship shall be supervised by a Division
Manager, who shall be a City employee in the classified civil service,
qualified by experience and training to execute the duties and
responsibilities of the Division.
B. The Division of Comprehensive Planning and Development shall be
supervised by a Division Manager, who shall be the City Planning
Officer, a City employee in the classified civil service qualified for
appointment by the Civil Service Commission of this state. The City
Planning Officer shall also be a New Jersey licensed professional
planner pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:14A-1 et seq.
C. The Division of Neighborhood/Housing Revitalization shall be
supervised by a Division Manager, who shall be a City employee in the
classified civil service qualified by experience and training to perform
the duties and responsibilities of the Division. The Division shall be
responsible for the administration and revitalization of all City-owned
real property, unless such responsibility is otherwise designated by
ordinance or custom and practice to other City departments, divisions,
boards and commissions. The Division shall be responsible for the
administration of the Self-Help Housing Rehabilitation Program or
similar programs assigned to it, programs emanating from grants to the
City and any other grant program that may be deemed appropriate by
the Mayor or City Council in a manner required by law. The Division
shall also be responsible for the collection of all rental income from
City-owned properties and perform such other duties as designated by
the Director.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Land Use.
§ 5-116 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-118
C:124
§ 5-118. Duties of Office.
The Mayor's Office of Planning and Community Development shall have the
following duties as they relate to the Divisions set forth in § 5-117. The
Office shall:
§ 5-119. Personnel.
The Office shall have additional personnel as may be provided for by the
budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said personnel
shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the duties assigned
by the Director.
A. Compile, correlate and review information regarding federal, state and
private foundation funds that are available to obtain maximum aid to
meet the needs of programs within the City.
B. Identify programs available for existing and proposed projects.
C. Outline major provisions and requirements of proposed projects and
their funding grants.
D. Act as liaison with federal, state and county foundation officials
concerning all aspects of planning, community development and grantsin-
aid.
E. Coordinate official programs which directly impact upon the functions
of this Office with department or division heads, boards and
commissions.
F. Develop studies, surveys and reports recommending uses of federal,
state and private foundation aid.
G. Prepare, process and coordinate applications for aid on behalf of the
Mayor and City Council.
H. Expedite and follow up on funding of projects approved and in progress.
I. Establish and maintain needed or required records and files.
§ 5-118 CHARTER § 5-119
C:125

ARTICLE XXI
Mayor's Division of the East Orange Golf Course
[Added 12-26-1989 by Ord. No. 54-1989]
§ 5-120. Division established.
There is hereby established the Mayor's Division of the East Orange Golf
Course, which shall be responsible for the development and implementation
of golfing and other community-oriented activities and programs at the East
Orange Golf Course.
§ 5-121. Manager.
The Manager shall be a City officer appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the City Council.
§ 5-122. Duties of Manager.
The Manager of the Mayor's Division of the East Orange Golf Course,
under the direction of the Mayor, shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
§ 5-123. Additional personnel.
The Mayor's Division of the East Orange Golf Course shall have such
personnel as may be provided for by the budget and set forth in the Salary
Ordinance of the City. Said personnel shall be qualified by experience and
training to perform the duties assigned by the Manager.
A. Administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of this Division
as set forth in this article.
B. Periodically evaluate the programs of the Division and determine the
needs of the public relative to providing services at the golf course.
C. Assume responsibility for the development and implementation of
programs and activities aimed at meeting the needs of the community
at the golf course.
D. Implement programs developed by the Mayor and City Council
designed to promote the use of the golf course.
E. Maintain liaison with citizen groups interested in participating in
programs and activities promulgated by the Division.
F. Coordinate public and private agencies and use their resources for
programs and activities developed by the Division.
§ 5-120 CHARTER § 5-123
C:127

ARTICLE XXII
Mayor's Division of Senior Citizens
[Added 12-26-1989 by Ord. No. 51-1989]
§ 5-124. Division established.
There is hereby established the Mayor's Division of Senior Citizens, which
shall be responsible for the development and implementation of activities
and programs for senior citizens throughout the City.
§ 5-125. Manager.
The Manager shall be a City officer appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the City Council.
§ 5-126. Duties of Manager.
The Manager of the Mayor's Division of Senior Citizens, under the direction
of the Mayor, shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
§ 5-127. Additional personnel.
The Mayor's Division of Senior Citizens shall have such personnel as may be
provided for by the budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City.
Said personnel shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the
duties assigned by the Manager.
A. Administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of this Division
as set forth in this article.
B. Periodically evaluate the programs of the Division and determine the
needs of the public relative to providing services for senior citizens.
C. Assume responsibility for the development and implementation of
programs and activities aimed at meeting the needs of senior citizens.
D. Implement programs developed by the Mayor and City Council
designed to promote senior citizens services.
E. Maintain liaison with citizen groups interested in participating in
programs and activities promulgated by the Division.
F. Coordinate public and private agencies and use their resources for
programs and activities developed by the Division.
§ 5-124 CHARTER § 5-127
C:129

ARTICLE XXIII
Mayor's Office of Administrative Services
[Added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 12-1986]
§ 5-128. Office established.
There is hereby established the Mayor's Office of Administrative Services.23
§ 5-129. Divisions; division managers. [Amended 12-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 34-1989; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
§ 5-130. Additional personnel.
The Office shall have additional personnel as may be provided for by the
budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said personnel
shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the duties assigned
by the Director.
A. The Mayor's Office of Administrative Services shall have the following
divisions:
(1) The Compliance Division shall be responsible for those duties,
policies and activities as set forth in Chapter 8 of the Code of the
City of East Orange, entitled "Affirmative Action Program."
(2) The Public Information Division shall serve as an information and
public relations resource for each department within the City. This
Division shall also be responsible for the dissemination of
information to the public about the City.
(3) The Consumer Services and Complaints Division shall be
responsible for handling citizens' questions, concerns and
complaints related to the delivery of municipal services and aid in
the protection of the public against fraud and unfair business
practices.
B. The Public Information and Consumer Services and Complaints
Divisions shall be supervised by Division Managers, who shall be City
employees in the classified civil service qualified by experience and
training to execute the duties and responsibilities of the respective
divisions. The Compliance Division shall be supervised by a Division
Manager, who shall be the Compliance Officer pursuant to Chapter 8 of
the Code of the City of East Orange.
23.Editor's Note: Former §§ 5-212 and 5-213 of the 1980 City Code, regarding the positions of
Director and Assistant Director, which previously followed this section, were repealed
11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 26-1989.
§ 5-128 CHARTER § 5-130
C:131

ARTICLE XXIV
(Reserved)24
§ 5-131. through § 5-132. (Reserved)
24.Editor’s Note: Former Art. XXIV, Mayor’s Office of Employment and Training Activities,
added 11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 47-1986, as amended, was repealed 3-27-2017 by Ord. No.
12-2017. See now § 5-101D, Employment and Training Division.
§ 5-131 CHARTER § 5-131
C:133

ARTICLE XXV
Boards, Commissions and Authorities: Appointees
[Added 2-28-1977 by Ord. No. 12-1977]
§ 5-133. Appointment of employees to boards.
No person shall be appointed to any municipal board, commission or
authority of the City of East Orange who at the time of the appointment is
an employee of the City of East Orange.
§ 5-134. Employment by City of board members.
No person shall be employed by the City of East Orange who at the time
of his employment is a member of any municipal board, commission or
authority of the City of East Orange.
§ 5-135. Personal election as to employment or membership.
§ 5-136. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Includes all personnel of the City who receive their
compensation from City funds or any federal, state or county grant or
program administered by the City of East Orange.
MEMBERSHIP ON ANY BOARD, COMMISSION OR AUTHORITY —
Includes all persons on any board, commission or authority nominated by
the Mayor and confirmed by City Council, or those nominated by the Mayor
without required confirmation by City Council, or those nominated by City
Council without need of confirmation.
§ 5-137. Nonapplicability.
A. Any employee of the City of East Orange, after acceptance of
membership on any board, commission or authority of the City of East
Orange, shall make election as to continuance of employment or
membership on any board, commission or authority, and upon failure to
make such election, membership on any board, commission or authority
shall be null and void.
B. Any member of a board, commission or authority of the City of East
Orange who shall be employed by the City of East Orange shall make
election as to continuance of membership on such board, commission or
authority or employment, and upon failure to make such election,
employment by the City of East Orange shall be null and void.
A. This article shall not apply to those City employees who presently serve
upon any board, commission or authority, but shall be effective upon
termination of their appointment to any board, commission or authority.
§ 5-133 CHARTER § 5-137
C:135
B. This article shall not apply to simultaneous employment and
membership upon any board, commission or authority as permitted by
law.
§ 5-137 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-137
C:136
ARTICLE XXVI
Municipal Court Administrator25
[Added 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 27-1982]
§ 5-138. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Court Administrator. The
Administrator shall serve a term coterminous with the Mayor.
§ 5-139. Duties.
The duties of the Municipal Court Administrator are as follows:
§ 5-140. Qualifications.
Qualifications for the position of Municipal Court Administrator are as
follows:
A. To supervise and have charge of office procedures and administrative
functions of the court.
B. To supervise the work performed by the nonjudicial staff.
C. To plan and oversee the in-service training of staff members.
D. To supervise the collection of fines and disbursement of funds.
E. To direct the preparation of or prepare a variety of statistical, financial
and progress reports related to the work of the court.
F. To give suitable assignments and instructions to subordinate
employees.
G. To prepare the budget for court operations.
H. To direct the establishment and maintenance of records and files.
I. To study and develop effective and improved methods of court
functioning, especially the mechanization and computerization of court
operations.
J. To procure supplies and services for the court.
K. Other related duties.
L. All powers designated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-13. [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
A. Graduation from a four-year course at an accredited college or
university, or additional work experience as described in Subsection B
on a year-for-year basis.
25.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Court.
§ 5-138 CHARTER § 5-140
C:137
B. Two years of responsible supervisory and/or administrative experience
in varied phases of business, industrial, governmental or military
service which shall have involved the organization, direction, planning,
coordination or control of significant programs or activities.
C. Thorough knowledge of court procedures and modern office methods
and practices; knowledge of the problems involved in the formulation of
effective policies and procedures; knowledge of the problems involved
in preparing and supervising the preparation of statistical and other
reports containing findings, conclusions and recommendations; and
knowledge of supervising the establishment and maintenance of
records and files.
D. Ability to analyze and interpret the laws, ordinances, rules, regulations
and procedures relating to the operation of a Municipal Court; to give
suitable assignments and instructions to others and supervise their
work; to prepare and supervise the preparation of correspondence; to
dispense information relating to court matters; to prepare
correspondence and other documents relevant to the work of a court; to
maintain financial records; to obtain, store, record, distribute and
supervise the use of needed equipment, materials and supplies; to
prepare clear, sound, accurate and informative reports; to establish and
maintain pertinent records and files.
E. Those specific qualifications required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-11.26
26.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-140 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-140
C:138
ARTICLE XXVII
Administrative Office of City Council
[Added 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 52-1986]
§ 5-141. Office established.
There is hereby established the Administrative Office of the City Council.
§ 5-142. Director; Principal Legislative Officer; Legislative
Information Officer.
§ 5-143. Duties of Director.
The Director, under the supervision of the Chairman of the City Council,
shall perform the following duties:
A. There is hereby established the office of Director of the Administrative
Office of the City Council. The Director shall be a City officer appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council for a term of one year.
B. There shall also be the positions of Principal Legislative Officer and
Legislative Information Officer, who shall be City officers appointed and
confirmed in the same manner as the Director.
C. The Director, Principal Legislative Officer and the Legislation
Information Officer shall be qualified by experience and training to
perform the duties as set forth in this article.
A. Administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of his office as
set forth in this article.
B. Attend all City Council meetings as designated by the Chairman of the
City Council.
C. Distribute minutes by City Council Committee meetings to the
appropriate departments within the City of East Orange.
D. Act as principal liaison to the City Clerk's office and department heads
regarding the business affairs of the Administrative Office of the City
Council.
E. Assist in the preparation of the budget for his Office.
F. Be responsible for bookkeeping and the preparation of purchase orders
and vouchers.
G. Maintain payroll and personnel records and other information
regarding the business affairs of the Office.
H. Perform such other duties as directed by the Chairman of the City
Council.
§ 5-141 CHARTER § 5-144
C:139
§ 5-144. Duties of Principal Legislative Officer.
The Principal Legislative Officer, under the supervision of the Director of
the Administrative Office of the City Council, shall perform the following
duties:
§ 5-145. Duties of Legislative Information Officer.
The Legislative Information Officer, under supervision of the Director of the
Administrative Office of the City Council, shall perform the following duties:
§ 5-146. Additional personnel.
The Office shall have additional personnel as may be provided for in the
budget and set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the City. Said personnel
A. Provide consultation assistance to citizens regarding complaints which
directly affect the legislative function of the City Council.
B. Review and assist in the dissemination of information of public interest
regarding City Council activities and other City agencies and
departments.
C. Represent the City Council at various community meetings and
activities.
D. Plan community programs for the City Council and act as the public
relations person for the City Council.
E. Perform such other duties as directed by the Director of the
Administrative Office of the City Council.
A. Schedule City Council ward meetings with the community and attend
them as required.
B. Conduct research regarding municipal, state and federal legislation
which affects the legislative function of the City Council.
C. Monitor citizen complaints and perform follow-up as necessary.
D. Prepare City Council press releases.
E. Perform as principal file clerk and maintain all records and files of the
office.
F. Prepare files for City Council meetings for all Council members,
department heads and members of the press.
G. Attend all regular City Council meetings and other meetings as
required by the Director.
H. Perform such other duties as directed by the Director of the
Administrative Office of the City Council.
§ 5-144 EAST ORANGE CODE § 5-146
C:140
shall be qualified by experience and training to perform the duties assigned
by the Director.
§ 5-146 CHARTER § 5-146
C:141
Chapter 8
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Project labor agreement — See Ch. 8A.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
Purchasing and contracting — See Ch. 68.
§ 8-1. Purpose.27
It is the public policy of the City of East Orange to provide equal
employment and business opportunity for all persons, partnerships,
companies and corporations and to prohibit discrimination in employment
and business practices because of race, color, religion, sex, ancestry or
national origin, and to promote the full realization of equal employment
and business opportunity through a positive and continuing program within
each department, division, agency or component of the City of East Orange.
This policy of equal employment and business opportunity shall apply to
every contractor, subcontractor or bidder holding or seeking a public
contract with the City of East Orange. It also is intended to provide minority
businesses in the City of East Orange equal opportunity to participate in the
filling of the City of East Orange's nonbid purchase orders up to the legal
nonbid limit of $17,500. The policy of equal employment opportunity applies
to every aspect of municipal employment policy and practice.
§ 8-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVANCED TRAINEE — A worker who has experience and skills used in
construction work, but lacks the skills to be qualified as a journeyman and is
classified by the Review Council or a subcommittee thereof as an "advanced
trainee."
BASIC TRAINEE — An applicant for employment who does not possess
the qualification for entrance into an apprenticeship program, but
demonstrates an interest in pursuing a craft in the construction industry
and is classified by the Review Council or a subcommittee thereof as a
"basic trainee."
BIDDER — Any person, partnership, corporation, association or joint
venture who has submitted prescribed bid documents to the City of East
Orange seeking award of a public contract.
CITY OF EAST ORANGE — The City of East Orange, a municipal
corporation.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-146 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-2
C:142
CITY OF EAST ORANGE PROJECTS — Construction approved by the City
Council and the Mayor, be it construction on tax-abated projects or any
construction within the City receiving state, federal or city funds.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — Any public contract for the construction,
rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension or repair of buildings,
sidewalks, grounds, parking lots, or other improvements to real property.
CONTRACTOR — Includes any person, partnership, corporation,
association or joint venture seeking to be awarded a City of East Orange
contract, and includes every subcontractor under such contract.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — An individual who is the head of any department,
division, agency or component of the City of East Orange.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — A public officer of a state or municipal
corporation charged with City duties in relation to the fiscal affairs of the
same. His principal duties are to examine and audit collections of the public
money, to complete records and report the financial situation from time to
time.28
DISCRIMINATION — Distinguishing, differentiating, separating on the
basis of race, color, religion, sex, ancestry or national origin.
EMPLOYEE — Shall not include any individual employed by his parents,
spouse or child, or in the domestic service of any person.
MINORITY — Any black, Spanish surname, Oriental, American Indian and
woman.
NONBID — Any public contract let for construction or purchase of material
without the taking of bids in accordance with law.
OFF-SITE TRAINING SOURCE — A public, private or nonprofit corporation
which supplies off-site training to minority individuals who are receiving onsite
training pursuant to the various affirmative action programs in Essex
County.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives and
other organized groups of persons.
PROJECT SITE REPORT — The statistical minority/nonminority man-hour
utilization in the trade classifications of the contractor and subcontractors.
PUBLIC CONTRACT — Any contract awarded by the City of East Orange for
work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of
the foregoing.
REVIEW COUNCIL — The Affirmative Action Review Council as constituted
under this chapter.
SUBCONTRACTOR — Includes any person, partnership, corporation,
association or joint venture which supplies any of the work, labor, services,
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 8-2 CHARTER § 8-2
C:143
supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing under a
contract with the contractor.
§ 8-3. Duty of department heads to establish programs.
The head of each department and agency in the City of East Orange shall
establish and maintain a positive program of equal employment opportunity
for all employees and applicants for employment within his/her jurisdiction
in accordance with the policy set forth in § 8-1.
§ 8-4. Compliance Officer.
There shall be and there is hereby established the position of Compliance
Officer with all personnel deemed necessary to effectively implement the
purpose of this chapter. The Compliance Office shall serve as Review
Council staff. The Compliance Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council for a term coterminous with the office of
Mayor. The Compliance Officer shall work under the direction of the Mayor
and shall administer the City's Affirmative Action Ordinance; establish
procedures to effectuate the ordinance; convene the Review Council, which
shall conduct hearings relative to violations of the ordinance; and
recommend to the Review Council determinations as to compliance with
said ordinance. He/she shall have at his/her disposal the resources of the
City's several departments and other independent agencies which may be
under contract with the City. The Compliance Officer must be consulted
in the review and evaluation of any contracts or documents submitted by
bidders before the award of any contract is made.
§ 8-5. Affirmative Action Review Council.
There is hereby created an Affirmative Action Review Council. The
Affirmative Action Review Council is to consist of not less than nine
members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
City Council. Members of the Review Council shall serve a two-year term
without pay or other financial compensation. Those appointed shall include
representatives from the following groups: the community at large;
construction trade unions; building contractors; City officials and the City
Compliance Officer. The majority of the members of the Review Council
shall be members of minority groups as defined herein.
§ 8-6. Duties of Review Council.
A. The Review Council may be consulted by the City Council in the
evaluation of documents submitted by bidders before the award of any
contract for the purpose of determining whether the bidder has met the
requirements of these conditions ("responsive"/"nonresponsive").
B. The Compliance Office/Review Council will receive referrals of
journeymen, trainees and laborers, primarily from the East Orange
Manpower Project and other agencies, and shall determine the
qualifications and classify persons as journeymen, advanced trainees
§ 8-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-6
C:144
§ 8-7. Submission of ordinance.29
The City shall submit to all contractors and subcontractors a copy of this
Affirmative Action Ordinance and shall make this chapter part of the project
specifications in all contracts in excess of $17,500. It shall be required
that when submitting a bid the contractor must certify that he will comply
with this chapter. Before the award of any subcontract or approval of any
subcontract being let by the contractor, said contractor will be required
to submit such statements of compliance for each potential subcontractor
and union statements from the union which have collective bargaining
agreements with each subcontractor as required by § 8-8 herein. If no such
statement is obtained, the contractor must submit documentation of his/her
efforts to obtain such statements whether they involve the unions that he/
she has contracts with or the unions having relationships with the potential
subcontractor.
§ 8-8. Construction contract mandatory language.
The following language shall be used in construction contracts:
"During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as
follows:
and basic trainees for the purpose of applying the provisions herein.
Individuals shall be determined qualified for employment as
journeymen, advanced trainees and basic trainees, solely on the basis
of experience, on-the-job evaluation and performance examination.
C. The Review Council will evaluate the contractor's performance as to
minority utilization, seek good faith compliance and, as necessary,
initiate proceedings independently or upon recommendation by the
Compliance Officer. Proceedings to secure good faith compliance shall
be as prescribed per § 8-18.
D. The Review Council shall periodically report to the City Council and
make such recommendations through its Council liaison as it deems
necessary, including recommendations with reference to bids.
E. The Review Council shall have such other duties in addition to those
described herein.
A. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, will not discriminate
against any employee or applicant for employment because of age,
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex. The
contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that minority
applicants are recruited and employed and that employees are treated
during employment without regard to their age, race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex. Such action shall include
but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 8-6 CHARTER § 8-8
C:145
§ 8-9. Advertisement and solicitation of construction contract bids.
In all advertisements or solicitations of construction contract bids, the
following language shall be used: "Bidders are required to comply with the
requirements of P.L. 1975, c. 127."
§ 8-10. Training funds for construction contracts.
On construction contracts of $2,500,000 or more, 1/2 of 1% of the total
construction cost shall be set aside for minority outreach and training. If
there are no compliance problems, this money need not be used and may
be reallocated as determined by the Compliance Officer/Review Council.
None of these funds, however, may be used to pay the salaries of trainees.
The funds should be for outreach, referrals and training of minorities. Also,
if this funding requirement threatens the feasibility of a project, the New
Jersey State Affirmative Action Office may waive some or all of this one-halfpercent
funding requirement.
§ 8-11. Contractors' hiring obligations.
All public contracts hereinafter entered into by the City of East Orange shall
incorporate an equal employment opportunity clause, which shall read as
follows:
or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or
termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection
for training, including apprenticeship. The contractor agrees to post
in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for
employment notices, to be provided by the Public Agency Compliance
Officer, setting forth provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
B. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, shall in all
solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of
the contractor state that all qualified applicants will receive
consideration for employment without regard to age, race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex.
C. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, shall send to each
labor union or representative of workers with which it has a collective
bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding a notice, to
be provided by the Public Agency Compliance Officer, advising the labor
union or workers' representative of the contractor's commitments
under this act and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places
available to employees and applicants for employment.
D. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, agrees to comply
with any regulations promulgated by the Treasurer pursuant to P.L.
1975, c. 127, as amended and supplemented from time to time."30
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:5-31 et seq.
§ 8-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-11
C:146
"Appendix A: Equal Employment Opportunity Affidavit
A. The contractor in hiring for each job shall provide maximum
opportunities for employment in all phases of the construction to
persons who reside in the City of East Orange. In addition, the
contractor in hiring for each job shall make every effort to employ
persons residing within the geographical jurisdiction of the appropriate
union in order to ensure that persons employed on the project will be
brought permanently into the construction industry labor force in the
area.
B. The contractor shall not discriminate against employees and applicants
for employment on the grounds of union membership, race, color,
religion, sex or national origin.
C. The contractor must make a good faith effort to meet the goal of
minority journeymen utilization in the performance of his/her contract,
whether or not the work is subcontracted.
D. The goals of this Affirmative Action Program in the trades listed below
shall be within the following ranges:
Trade Description
Minimum Goals of Minority
Journeymen Utilization and
Laborers
(percent)
Bricklayers 35% to 50%
Carpenters 35% to 50%
Cement finishers 35% to 50%
Electricians 35% to 50%
Elevator constructors 35% to 50%
Glaziers 35% to 50%
Insulators 35% to 50%
Ironworkers 35% to 50%
Lathers 35% to 50%
Operating engineers 35% to 50%
Painters 35% to 50%
Plasterers 35% to 50%
Plumbing/pipefitters 35% to 50%
Steamfitters 35% to 50%
Roofers 35% to 50%
Sheetmetal workers 35% to 50%
Sprinkler fitters 35% to 50%
§ 8-11 CHARTER § 8-11
C:147
Trade Description
Minimum Goals of Minority
Journeymen Utilization and
Laborers
(percent)
Laborers 35% to 50%
The contractor will submit with his/her bid, projection of minority
journeymen utilization in the trades and as laborers, specified above in
the performance manpower utilization program.
These goals shall be applicable whether or not the work is
subcontracted.
The above goals are to be expressed in terms of man-hours to be
worked by minority journeymen, trainees and laborers during the
performance of the contract and must be substantially uniform
throughout the duration of the contract.
E. The contractor will make every good faith effort to reach a goal of 50%
minority group apprentices on the job in each trade listed in this section
in which apprentices are employed and shall hold each of his/her
subcontractors to this requirement.
F. The contractor will cooperate with the Compliance Officer in providing
on-site training for persons employed on the construction site and will
provide on-site opportunities to basic, advanced trainees and laborers
referred to him/her by the Compliance Office. Each trainee will be
excused from work one day each week in order to receive off-site
training. The Review Council may retain outside training service for the
purpose of supplying off-site training to minority trainees referred to in
this chapter. The Review Council is also empowered to approve
equivalent training programs from any sources. The total cost of the onand
off-site training program, including fringe benefits, will be paid by
the contractor.
G. The contractor shall not be required to employ more trainees than the
number permissible under the apprentices-to-journeymen employment
ratio specified in the applicable collective bargaining agreement, the
established ratio in the trade, or by industry usage in the area, provided
that no ratio requiring the employment of more than five journeymen
for each apprentice shall be applicable where the employment of
minority group apprentices and trainees is necessary in order to permit
the contractor to meet obligations under these conditions.
H. Criteria for measuring good faith:
(1) The contractor will consider, for employment as journeymen, basic
trainees and advanced trainees, laborers and persons referred to
him/her primarily by the East Orange Manpower Project, and
secondarily the Minority Group Journeymen Referral Service, who
have been classified by the Review Council. If the contractor does
§ 8-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-11
C:148
not employ any person so referred, he/she shall submit a written
explanation by the close of the day to the City Compliance Officer.
(2) Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the contractor
from complying with the hiring hall or apprenticeship provisions in
any applicable collective bargaining agreement or hiring hall
arrangement, and where required by custom or agreement, he/she
shall send journeymen, trainees and laborers to the union for
referral, or to the apprenticeship program for admission, pursuant
to such agreement or arrangement. However, where the practices
of a union or apprenticeship program will result in the exclusion of
minority persons or the failure to refer minority group persons, as
such that the contractor will be unable to meet his obligations
under this chapter, the contractor shall consider for employment or
apprenticeship persons referred under this paragraph without
regard to such agreement or arrangement. Where required by
custom or agreement, the contractor shall send referrals from the
Review Council to the union registrar for referral or to the
apprenticeship program for admission, pursuant to such
agreement or arrangement. The unions will, however, have no right
of rejection over the Review Council referrals.
(3) The contractor will notify the City Compliance Officer and the
Review Council whenever he/she has reason to believe that a union
with which he/she has a hiring hall or referral arrangement or an
apprenticeship program engages in such referral, membership,
admission, or other practices as will substantially impede the
contractor in his/her efforts to meet his/her affirmative action
obligations under these conditions.
(4) A contractor shall not be deemed to have exercised good faith
under this chapter solely because of union opposition, even if the
unions threaten a work stoppage because of the implementation of
this chapter. It shall be incumbent upon the contractor as employer
to see to it that referrals under this chapter are treated fairly by the
unions and their members.
I. The contractors shall develop and submit a manning table. This
document shall identify estimated manpower requirements for the
duration of the job, broken down by trade and month. The manning of
the job shall be related to this document, which shall be brought up-todate
as required, but not less than once monthly.
J. The contractor shall submit copies of his/her collective bargaining
agreements covering workers to be employed on the project, and copies
of such bargaining agreements of each subcontractor.
K. The contractor shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to
§ 8-11 CHARTER § 8-11
C:149
§ 8-12. Union statement.
race, union membership, color, marital status, age, religion, sex,
ancestry or national origin.
L. The contractor shall send to each labor union or representative of
workers with which he/she has a collective bargaining agreement or
other contract or understanding a notice advising the labor union or
workers' representative of the contractor's commitments under the
Equal Employment Opportunity Ordinance of the City of East Orange
and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to
employees and applicants for employment and shall comply with § 8-12
with respect to union statement.
M. It shall be no excuse for noncompliance that the union with which the
contractor has a collective bargaining agreement providing for
exclusive referral failed to refer minority employees.
N. The prime contractor and subcontractor shall furnish all information
and reports required by the Affirmative Action Review Council and shall
keep and maintain records for trainees so that separate payroll
amounts and descriptions of payments, trainee progress, together with
all benefits, are recorded separately and shall permit inspection of his/
her books and records for purpose of investigation to ascertain
compliance with the program.
O. The contractor shall take such action with respect to any subcontractor
as the City may direct as a means of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, including penalties and sanctions for noncompliance.
P. The contractor shall designate a principal officer of his/her firm to be
the Affirmative Action Officer who shall be responsible for
administering the Affirmative Action Program detailed herein. This
Officer shall meet regularly, or as may be required, with all contractors,
the Review Council and the City to ensure attainment of the goals set
forth herein and the implementation of the training program.
A. The City shall require that, when the contractor or subcontractor has a
referral agreement or arrangements with a union covering workers to
be employed on this project, the contractor shall submit with his/her bid
a statement, signed by an authorized union official, in which the union
agrees as follows:
(1) The union will take such action as may be necessary with respect to
the referral and the employment of minority group persons in order
to enable the contractor to meet his obligations under this chapter.
(2) The union will cooperate with the Review Council in providing onsite
training on the construction site.
(3) Minority group journeymen, and if necessary laborers, employed by
the contractor shall be admitted to union membership within the
§ 8-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-12
C:150
§ 8-13. Responsibilities of contractors.
The City shall require that each prime contractor is responsible for the
performance of his/her subcontractors for the implementation of the
aforementioned equal employment requirements during the performance
of the contract. Whenever the contractor subcontracts a portion of the
work under contract, the subcontract shall bind the subcontractor to the
obligations contained in this chapter to the full extent as if he/she were
the contractor. Furthermore, the contractor must include a provision in all
contracts with subcontracts to ensure compliance with all other conditions
included herein, as well as with the New Jersey Executive Order No. 21, and
N.J.S.A. 10:2-1 et seq., and the President's Executive Order 11246 (30 F.R.
12319-25), and New Jersey P.L. 1975, c. 127.31
§ 8-14. Precontract award conference.
Following receipt and review of the Affirmative Action Plan and the
employment information submitted by the bidders, and prior to award of a
contract, the apparent lowest responsible bidder shall be required to attend
a pre-award conference called by the appropriate department head. At the
conference, the Compliance Officer shall reveal whether or not the apparent
lowest responsible bidder has complied with the policy of this chapter set
out in its various sections and shall report findings and recommendations of
the Review Council.
time limits contained in the applicable collective bargaining
agreements, union constitutions and bylaws.
B. The contractor or subcontractor shall promptly notify the Review
Council of any failure of the union to comply with its statement. If a
union has refused to sign the statements described above, the
contractor will document his/her efforts to obtain such statement,
including a description with the reason given by the union for not
signing such statement, and submit such documentation together with
his/her bid. A bid shall be unresponsive if unaccompanied either by an
acceptable union statement or by documentation as to why such
statement could not be obtained.
C. In addition, the award of a subcontract will not be approved if such
contractor has not submitted such an acceptable union statement or an
explanation of the failure to obtain such a statement.
D. The failure of the union to sign the statement described above does not
excuse the contractor from his obligation to comply with the conditions
and provisions of the Affirmative Action Program set forth herein.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:5-31 et seq.
§ 8-12 CHARTER § 8-15
C:151
§ 8-15. Monitoring construction contracts.
Where a construction contract exists, project site reports in a form defined
by the Affirmative Action Office shall be completed and submitted by the
contractor at intervals determined by the Compliance Office. The
Compliance Officer or designee shall conduct such periodic on-site reviews
as are deemed necessary. Such project site reports shall include such
information as to the employment practices and minority/nonminority
utilization statistics of the contractor and each subcontractor and shall
be in such form as the Compliance Office may prescribe. Subcontractors
shall complete and submit such project site reports to the contractor for
transmittal to the Compliance Officer. The Compliance Officer or his
designee shall be allowed to attend all project meetings and, with notice
and during normal business hours, enter the contractor's or subcontractor's
business facility for determining whether the contractor or subcontractor is
complying with the Affirmative Action Ordinance Program.
§ 8-16. Intergovernmental cooperation.
In the event that specific discriminatory practices are found to exist in
the administration and enforcement of this chapter, in addition to the
sanctions that may be imposed as provided by the terms of the contract, the
Compliance Officer shall forward all pertinent information to appropriate
federal, state and local agencies.
§ 8-17. Purpose of commitments not for discrimination.
The commitments required of the contractor hereunder are for the purpose
of satisfying his affirmative action obligations under this chapter and are
not intended, and shall not be used, to discriminate on the basis of race, sex,
color, age, marital status or national origin against any qualified applicant
or employee.
§ 8-18. Compliance.
In the event of failure by a contractor to meet his minority manpower
commitments under this chapter, he/she shall be given an opportunity
to demonstrate that he has made every good faith effort to meet his
commitments. In any proceeding in which such good faith is an issue, all of
the actions of the contractor in seeking to comply with this chapter shall
be reviewed and evaluated by the Review Council. Compliance with this
chapter shall be monitored by the Compliance Officer of the City of East
Orange in consultation with the Review Council of the City of East Orange.
A. The Compliance Officer will issue a written alert notice to a contractor
and appropriate unions whenever, in his opinion, a breach of this
chapter appears to be developing. Such notice shall require that
deficiencies be corrected within 72 hours.
B. If the alert notice is not removed by a correction of the deficiencies
within 72 hours, the Compliance Officer shall follow up the alert notice
§ 8-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-18
C:152
§ 8-19. Agreement by City to implement regulations.
The City of East Orange agrees to implement procurement and service
contract regulations as set forth in P.L. 1975, c. 127, and as such will work
in conjunction with the State Affirmative Action Office in order to ensure
compliance.
"Procurement and Service Contract Mandatory Language
During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows:
by issuing a written violation notice. Upon issuance of such notice,
the contractor will have four working days to remove the violation. If
the violation has not been removed within that period, the Compliance
Officer will inform the City Council, Mayor and Review Council.
C. Either or both notices may be removed if the contractor meets his/her
obligations under this chapter or if he/she presents a satisfactory
explanation in writing as to why such compliance is unpractical or
impossible.
D. Failure to satisfactorily remove a violation shall cause a hearing to be
held by the Review Council. If a determination by the Review Council is
made that the contractor is not in compliance with this chapter, there
shall result a recommendation of sanctions by the Review Council to the
City Council and the Mayor. Such sanctions may include any or all of the
following:
(1) The withholding of contract payments.
(2) The termination or suspension of the contract.
(3) Assessment of damages caused by noncompliance, actual or
liquidated. Liquidated damages shall be assessed by the City on
behalf of the minority individual injured by the noncompliance of
the contractor or subcontractor. It shall be assessed at a rate of
$500 per individual plus the full amount of back pay due to the
individual from the date of referral. This shall not be deemed to
exclude any other damages which the individual can demonstrate
as a result of the noncompliance.
(4) Enforcement by the City of its right under its contracts with
contractors and subcontractors, either by suit at law or in equity or
arbitration, whichever is appropriate.
(5) Commencement of an action at law or in equity or proceeding in
arbitration by the City as third-party beneficiary. Further, the
noncomplying contractor shall indemnify the City for any damages
it may be found liable for as the result of actions brought by other
contractors or subcontractors on the project or any other third
party because of the imposition of the above sanctions.
§ 8-18 CHARTER § 8-19
C:153
a. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, will not
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of age, race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital
status or sex. The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that
such applicants are recruited and employed, and that employees are
treated during employment, without regard to their age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex. Such action shall
include but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading,
demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or
termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection
for training, including apprenticeship. The contractor agrees to post
in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for
employment, notices to be provided by the Public Agency Compliance
Officer setting forth provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
b. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, will in all
solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf
of the contractor state that all qualified applicants will receive
consideration for employment without regard to age, race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex.
c. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, will send to each
labor union or representative of workers with which it has a collective
bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding a notice,
to be provided by the Public Agency Compliance Officer, advising the
labor union or workers' representative of the contractor's commitments
under this act and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places
available to employees and applicants for employment.
d. The contractor or subcontractor, where applicable, agrees to comply
with any regulations promulgated by the Treasurer pursuant to P.L.
1975, c. 127, as amended and supplemented from time to time.
e. The contractor or subcontractor agrees to attempt in good faith to
employ minority and female workers consistent with the applicable
county employment goals prescribed by Section 5.2 of the Regulations
promulgated by the Treasurer pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 127, as
amended and supplemented from time to time, or in accordance with
a binding determination of the applicable county employment goals
determined by the Affirmative Action Office pursuant to Section 5.2 of
the Regulations promulgated by the Treasurer pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.
127, as amended and supplemented from time to time.
f. The contractor or subcontractor agrees to inform in writing all
recruitment agencies, including employment agencies, placement
bureaus, colleges, universities and labor unions, that it does not
discriminate on the basis of age, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital status or sex, and that it will discontinue the use of any
recruitment agency which engages in direct or indirect discriminatory
practices.
§ 8-19 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-19
C:154
g. The contractor or subcontractor agrees to revise any of its testing
procedures, if necessary, to assure that all personnel testing conforms
to the principles of job-related testing, as established by the statutes
and court decisions of the State of New Jersey and as established by
applicable federal law and applicable federal court decisions.
h. The contractor or subcontractor agrees to review all procedures
relating to transfer, upgrading, downgrading and layoff to ensure that
all such actions are taken without regard to age, creed, color, national
origin, ancestry, marital status or sex and conform to the applicable
employment goals, consistent with the statutes and court decisions of
the State of New Jersey, and applicable federal law and applicable
federal court decisions.
Provisions d, e, f, g or h not required for subcontractors with four or
fewer employees or a contractor who has presented evidence of a federally
approved or sanctioned affirmative action program."
§ 8-20. Minority business enterprises.
§ 8-21. Amendments.
This chapter shall be amended from time to time in order to carry out
the intentions of the City Council. The City Council from time to time may
amend this chapter by resolution in the area of construction, procurement,
service purchasing and personnel practices.
§ 8-22. Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 federally
assisted contracts. [Added 11-16-1984 by Ord. No. 50-1984]
Any contract awarded by the City of East Orange on a project assisted
under a program providing direct federal financial assistance from the
Department of Housing and Urban Development and subject to the
A. It is the policy of the federal government to encourage meaningful
employment of minority business enterprises in construction and
capital contracts as evidenced by the contract for the Central Avenue
Semi-Mall as funded through the Economic Development
Administration and the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission contract
funded by the Environmental Protection Agency, the latter contract
requiring that at least 22% of the total dollar value of the contract be
subcontracted to minority business enterprises.
B. It is the policy of the City of East Orange to promote meaningful
utilization of minority business enterprises in construction and capital
contracts awarded East Orange, and such contracts must include a
requirement that at least 25% of the total dollar value of the contract be
performed by minority business enterprises. Each bidder must submit
with its bid the name of the minority subcontractor and the dollar
amount of the subcontract.
§ 8-19 CHARTER § 8-22
C:155
requirements of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of
1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. § 1701u, shall contain the following provisions:
A. The contractor hereunder will comply with Section 3 of the Housing
and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. § 1701u,
which provides that, to the greatest extent feasible, opportunities for
training and employment be given to lower-income residents of the
project area and contracts for work in connection with the project be
awarded to business concerns which are located in or owned in
substantial part by persons residing in the area of the project.
B. The parties to this contract will comply with the provisions of said
Section 3 and the regulations issued pursuant thereto by the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development set forth in 24 CFR 135, and all
applicable rules and orders of the Department issued thereunder, prior
to the execution of this contract. The parties to this contract shall
certify and agree that they are under no contractual or other disability
which would prevent them from complying with these requirements.
C. The contractor will send to each labor organization or representative of
workers with which he has a collective bargaining agreement or other
contract or understanding, if any, a notice advising said labor
organization or workers' representative of his commitments under this
Section 3 clause and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous
places available to employees and applicants for employment or
training.
(1) The contractor will include this Section 3 clause in every
subcontract for work in connection with the project and will, at the
direction of the applicant for or recipient of federal financial
assistance, take appropriate action pursuant to the subcontract
upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of regulations
issued by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 24
CFR 135. The contractor will not subcontract with any
subcontractor where it has notice or knowledge that the latter has
been found in violation of regulations under 24 CFR 135 and will
not let any subcontract unless the subcontractor has first provided
it with a preliminary statement of ability to comply with the
requirements of these regulations.
(2) Compliance with the provisions of Section 3, the regulations set
forth in 24 CFR 135 and all applicable rules and orders of the
Department issued thereunder prior to the execution of the
contract shall be a condition of the federal financial assistance
provided to the project, binding upon the applicant or recipient for
such assistance, its successors and assigns. Failure to fulfill these
requirements shall subject the applicant or recipient, its
contractors and subcontractors, its successors and assigns to those
sanctions specified by the grant or loan agreement or contract
through which federal assistance is provided and to such sanctions
as are specified by 24 CFR 135.
§ 8-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8-22
C:156
Chapter 8A
PROJECT LABOR AGREEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affirmative Action Program — See Ch. 8.
§ 8A-1. Purpose.
This chapter shall ensure that large construction projects with total costs
that exceed $15,000,000 excluding land acquisition costs and certain public
construction contracts with total costs that exceed $5,000,000 that the
municipality directly undertakes or for which it provides financial support
are performed promptly, at a reasonable cost and with the highest degree
of quality. This chapter also creates opportunities to employ a substantial
number of apprentices, thus ensuring that these projects will expand access
to living-wage careers in the construction trades for a new generation
of workers. Projects which exceed the five-million-dollar or fifteen-milliondollar
thresholds during the pendency of the project shall also be subject to
this chapter.
§ 8A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPRENTICE — A worker who participates in a federal apprenticeship
program or as an apprentice equivalent participates in a federally approved
training program, takes a construction apprenticeship test and receives
benefits and pay not less than those received by an apprentice.
APPRENTICE PROGRAM — An apprenticeship program operated by an
entity registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training of the
United States Department of Labor or registered by a federal
apprenticeship agency recognized by the Bureau.
CERTAIN PROJECTS — That the City in its sole discretion may exempt
projects which otherwise would fall within the purview of this chapter from
the requirements of same.
D. Failure to comply with the aforementioned provisions may also result in
rescission of this contract or withholding of revenue due and owing
hereunder upon written notice of noncompliance and until such time
compliance is found to be satisfactory by the City of East Orange
Affirmative Action Compliance Officer.
E. None of the provisions found hereinabove shall relieve the contractor of
any obligations he may have under the Affirmative Action Program of
the City of East Orange.
§ 8-22 CHARTER § 8A-2
C:157
CONTRACTOR — A person or entity awarded a public works or publicly
funded contract contemplated by this chapter.
CRAFT REQUEST FORM — A form which delineates the job or craft titles
and descriptions (for example, but not by way of limitation, plumbers,
glazers, carpenters, etc.) which are needed for a particular project, which
form may be the one customarily used by the relevant trade or craft unions
at that time and place.
DEVELOPER — The recipient of financial assistance for a financial
assistance project or the contractor for a public works project.
LABOR ORGANIZATION — An organization which represents, for purposes
of collective bargaining, employees involved in the performance of
construction contracts and eligible to be paid prevailing wages under the
New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act, P.L. 1963, c. 150 (N.J.S.A. 34:11-56.25 et
seq.), and has the present ability to refer, provide or represent sufficient
numbers of qualified employees to perform the contracted work and which
has an apprenticeship program registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship
and Training of the United States Department of Labor.
NOT FOR PROFIT — Any entity that is organized as a nonprofit or not-forprofit
entity, corporate or otherwise, or a governmental entity.
PRIVATE ENTITY — Any organization which conducts a profit-making
business and is not otherwise organized as a nonprofit or a not-for-profit
organization or governmental entity.
PROJECT LABOR AGREEMENT — A contract between a contractor/labor
organization, a developer and/or the City of East Orange that contains, at a
minimum, the requirements set forth in this chapter.
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS — Building, altering, repairing, improving or
demolishing any public structure or facility constructed, acquired or
otherwise owned by the City of East Orange to house local government
functions or provide water, waste disposal, power, transportation and other
public infrastructure.
PUBLICLY FUNDED PROJECTS — Includes certain public construction
contracts with total costs that exceed $5,000,000 that it directly undertakes
or large construction projects where the public entity estimates that the
total cost of the project, exclusive of any land acquisition costs, will equal
or exceed $15,000,000 to a private entity, expressly articulated or identified
in writing by the City of East Orange, including, but not limited to grants,
rent subsidies or reductions, loan forgiveness, approved bond financing,
contingent obligations taken on by the City of East Orange such as any
guaranty, fee reductions or fee waivers, density bonuses and tax abatements
awarded pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1
et seq.) and the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency Law,
N.J.S.A. 55:14k-1 et seq.
SUBCONTRACTOR — A person or entity that is engaged or performs work
or provides materials for a contractor or developer, as defined herein, which
§ 8A-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8A-2
C:158
person or entity may not be in privity of contract with the City of East
Orange.
TOTAL PROJECT COSTS — Shall be inclusive of environmental work,
demolition, preconstruction and construction costs.
§ 8A-3. Coverage.
The terms of this chapter, set forth in § 8A-5 below, are applicable to
covered projects. Covered projects include public works and publicly
funded projects.
§ 8A-4. Conflicts.
To the extent any of the provisions of this chapter are deemed to conflict
with N.J.S.A. 52:38-1 et seq. (P.L. 2202, c. 44), the statute shall control. To
the extent the provisions of this chapter conflict with Chapter 8, Affirmative
Action Program, this chapter shall prevail. To the extent this chapter
conflicts with any additional local ordinances, this chapter shall control.
§ 8A-5. Requirements for covered contracts.
A. Project labor agreement required. Certain public works projects and
publicly funded projects shall require the execution of a project labor
agreement that complies with the requirements of this chapter, unless
the Director of Public Works or his designee determines that it is in the
best interests of the City to waive this requirement. The agreement
shall either be directly entered into with a labor organization or the
award of the contract shall be made on the condition that the
construction manager for the contract shall negotiate a project labor
agreement in good faith with one or more labor organizations.
B. Project labor agreement requirements. Each project labor agreement
executed pursuant to this chapter shall be in conformity with N.J.S.A.
52:38-1 et seq. (P.L. 2202, c. 44), and:
(1) Advance the interests of the City of East Orange, including the
interests in the City of East Orange in cost, efficiency, quality,
timeliness, skilled labor force, and safety;
(2) Contain guarantees against strikes, lockouts, or other similar
actions;
(3) Set forth effective, immediate and mutually binding procedures for
resolving jurisdictional and labor disputes arising before the
completion of the work;
(4) Be made binding on all contractors and subcontractors on the
project in all relevant documents, including bid specifications;
(5) Require that each contractor and subcontractor working on the
project have an apprenticeship program as defined herein;
§ 8A-2 CHARTER § 8A-5
C:159
(6) Fully conform to all statutes, regulations and City of East Orange
ordinances regarding the implementation of goals for women- and
minority-owned businesses, the obligation to comply with which
shall be expressly provided for in the project labor agreement;
(7) Include a publicly available plan which is in full conformance with
the requirements of all applicable statutes, regulations and
executive orders regarding the share of employment and
apprenticeship positions in the project for minority group members
and women, and is mutually agreed upon by the participating labor
organizations and the public entity or the developer which will own
the facilities which are built, altered or repaired under the project,
provided that any shares mutually agreed upon pursuant to this
subsection shall equal or exceed the requirements of other
statutes, regulations, executive orders or local ordinances;
(8) State that contractors and subcontractors need not be a party to a
City of East Orange labor agreement with the applicable labor
organization other than for the project covered by the project labor
agreement;
(9) Require the City to monitor, or arrange to have a state agency
monitor, the amount and share of work done on the project by
minority group members and women and the progression of
minority group members and women into apprentice and journey
worker positions and require the City to make public, or have the
state agency make public, all records of monitoring conducted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:38-1 et seq. (P.L. 2002, c. 44), this chapter
and the project labor agreement;
(10) State that any and all residents who are already in any signatory
union or an apprenticeship program shall be referred to
contractors or subcontractors who request them, even if those
residents were not in line for referral under normal hiring hall
procedures;
(11) Require the contract for the public works project to provide
whatever resources may be needed to prepare for apprenticeship a
number of women and minority group members sufficient to enable
compliance with the plan agreed upon pursuant to this chapter and
provide that the use of those resources be administered jointly by
the participating labor organizations and the public entity;
(12) State that the terms of the project labor agreement shall prevail
over conflicting terms of any collective bargaining agreements;
(13) Require that the labor organization utilize members who are East
Orange residents as its first choice for staffing without regard to
any other preferential status; and
(14) Require that 20% of the labor hours required shall be performed by
the East Orange residents who are participating in the
§ 8A-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8A-5
C:160
§ 8A-6. Apprenticeship utilization goals.
On all covered projects, the minority and women employment goals for each
contractor and subcontractor for each trade shall be established by the New
Jersey Department of Labor in a manner that is consistent with N.J.A.C.
17:27-7.2; however, a contractor shall not be subject to enforcement actions
for violations of this provision if that contractor can demonstrate that it
made good faith efforts to comply with this section. For the purposes of
this section, good faith efforts for a developer shall at a minimum include
compliance with the following:
apprenticeship program and that 100% of the apprentices shall be
East Orange residents.
C. Advertisement. Not less than 60 days prior to the commencement of
construction, the labor organization will advertise in two newspapers
regularly published and distributed in the City and outreach via other
media, such as cable television, the Internet or radio. The
advertisement shall solicit apprenticeship applications for the labor
organization's apprenticeship program, describe the basic
requirements for admission, describe the job training and set forth the
range of salaries.
D. Preconstruction meeting. Not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of construction, the developer shall meet with the
appropriate City official, as the context makes relevant, or his or her
designee to present workforce needs, which will include the job
description of the positions to be filled and duration of the project. In
addition, the developer will provide the construction schedule to the
respective Director or his or her designee. The labor organization will
present the developer and the respective Director or his or her
designee with the names, addresses and trades of eligible apprentices
who are available to work on the project.
E. Job fairs. The developer and the labor organization will jointly
participate in a job fair to be held in the City in order to explain the
apprenticeship program and solicit applications from attendees.
A. Entry into a project labor agreement and obtaining letters of assent
from each contractor/subcontractor.
B. Convening prebid and preconstruction meetings to educate
construction manager and subcontractors about the apprenticeship
utilization goals.
C. Cooperating with representative. The contractor shall cooperate with
the representative appointed by the Mayor to ensure compliance with
this section. The representative shall provide services in support of the
contractor's apprentice hiring goals.
D. Establish a point of contact to provide information about
preapprenticeship or apprenticeship opportunities.
§ 8A-5 CHARTER § 8A-6
C:161
§ 8A-7. Local minority hiring goals.
For each contractor and subcontractor performing work on a covered
project, the project labor agreement shall contain female and minority
employment goals that are consistent with the guidelines set forth by the
Division of Public Contracts Equal Employment Opportunity Compliance
established in the State Department of the Treasury, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
17:27-7.2.
§ 8A-8. Enforcement.
E. Develop and maintain an up-to-date list of persons who have been
offered opportunities and those who are working on the project.
F. Facilitate relationships among approved apprenticeship programs and
contractors to enable prompt referrals.
G. Assist contractors with reporting by working with contractors and their
subcontractors where appropriate.32
H. Regularly contacting and documenting of contact with the
representative and providing certified payroll and other records on a
regular basis to the representative.
I. Use and documenting use of City-approved craft request forms sent to
both unions and City representative. Craft request form, as defined
herein, means a document through which contractors shall request
workers from unions.
J. Requesting apprentices that are City residents from union hiring halls.
K. Documenting reasons for not hiring referred candidates from target
populations, if applicable.
L. Allowing the City representative prompt and willing access to
documentation of all of the above activities and to the work site if
requested.
A. Monitoring and enforcement. Each contractor and subcontractor
subject to the provisions of this chapter shall submit the completed
certified declaration of compliance form prior to commencing work on
the covered project.
B. Contractors and subcontractors. All contractors on covered projects
shall require that their subcontractors comply with the provisions of
this chapter. Language indicating the subcontractor's agreement to
comply shall be included in the contract between the contractor and
subcontractor and shall contain a provision making such terms
enforceable by the City. Copies of such agreements shall be submitted
to the City.33
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 8A-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8A-8
C:162
C. Reports. All contractors and subcontractors shall report to the
respective Director or his or her designee on a quarterly basis
according to the following schedule (by March 31, June 30, September
30 and December 31 of each year) and shall provide the following
information, certified and notarized, for each covered contract for
which work was performed during the previous quarter:
(1) Manning report. The developer's/contractor's report, as the case
may be, will accurately reflect the total hours in each construction
trade or craft and the number of hours worked by City residents,
including a list of minority resident and women resident workers in
each trade or craft, and will list separately the work hours
performed by such employees of the contractor and each of its
subcontractors during the previous quarter.
(2) Certified payroll report. The developer's/contractor's report, as the
case may be, will specify the residence, gender and ethnic/racial
origin of each worker, work hours, and the rate of pay and benefits
provided.
(3) Equal employment opportunity reports. A copy of the labor
organization's Local Union Report (EEO-3) and Apprenticeship
Information Report (EEO-2), which are required to be filed with the
United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission by the
labor organization.
(4) Apprenticeship report. The report of the labor organization which
shall list the names, addresses and contact information of all
persons who were accepted into the apprenticeship program from
the target population. The report shall also list the names,
addresses and contact information of all persons from the target
population who were rejected for admission, with the reasons for
rejection, and for those from the target population who failed to
finish the program, and the reasons why they failed to complete the
program.
(5) Total cost report. In the event construction permits have been
issued and more than 12 months has expired from the date of the
adoption of the ordinance approving the tax abatement, the
developer shall be required to resubmit a current estimate of total
construction costs to ensure that the total construction costs do not
exceed $15,000, or it will be deemed that this chapter applies.
(6) Final cost report. No later than 90 days following project
completion, the developer shall submit a certification of actual total
construction costs. All total construction costs shall be certified to
the City by the project architect and engineer and are subject to
review by the City at the time of application for certificate of
occupancy and audit by the City.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 8A-8 CHARTER § 8A-8
C:163
(7) Other reports. The developer or the labor organization shall furnish
to the City such further information, documents or reports as shall
be requested.
D. Records. Contractors and subcontractors performing work on covered
contracts shall maintain certified payroll records for all employees and
shall preserve them for a period of three years after completion of the
covered contract, making such records available within three days of a
written request by the City or its designee and upon inspection without
notice.
E. Site and records access.
(1) All developers, contractors and subcontractors performing work on
covered contracts shall permit access for representatives of the
City or its designees to all work sites and to all applicable records
in order to monitor compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) In the event the City has good cause to believe that any contractor
or subcontractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, the contractor or subcontractor shall be given written
notice and afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the
appropriate City official prior to the imposition of the sanctions set
forth in this section. The decision of the respective Director(s) shall
be final.
F. City remedies. In the event the City has good cause to believe that any
contractor or subcontractor on either a publicly funded project or a
public works project has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, a contractor or subcontractor shall be given written notice of
his alleged noncompliance and afforded an opportunity to submit a
written response to the City. In the event the City determines any
contractor or subcontractor on either a publicly funded project or a
public works project has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, it shall have available all remedies available at law or equity,
which shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Suspending or terminating contract, grant, subsidy agreement, or
tax abatement agreement in question.
(2) Completing the public works project with a different contractor or
subcontractor and require the original contractor or subcontractor
to pay all damages and costs in utilizing a substitute contractor or
subcontractor and/or make claim on its performance bond.
(3) Debarring the developer, contractor or subcontractor from
eligibility for future City contracts and for financial assistance.
(4) Assessing liquidated damages in the amount of 5% of the value of
the contract or subsidy in question.
§ 8A-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 8A-8
C:164
§ 8A-9. Implementation.
Chapter 14
AUXILIARY POLICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Police citizens advisory council;
director — See Ch. 14A, Art. X.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 28.
§ 14-1. Creation of Unit.34
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq., there is hereby created within
the City of East Orange a Class One Volunteer Auxiliary Police Unit. The
City of East Orange may appoint auxiliary police for terms not to exceed
one year, and the appointments may be revoked by the City for cause after
adequate hearing, unless the appointment is for four months or less, in
which event the appointment may be revoked without cause or hearing.
Auxiliary police shall be under the control and supervision of the Chief of
Police of the City of East Orange.
§ 14-2. Appointment; qualifications.
(5) For late filing of any report or record or the prohibition of any
access required for same under Subsection C, D or E hereof, a
payment of $1,000 per day for each day that the report is late for up
to 15 days shall apply. After 15 days the failure to provide same
shall constitute a material breach and the above remedies shall
apply.
(6) Such other remedies available at law or in equity.
A. The City shall include language in all grant agreements or other
documents approved by the Municipal Council providing financial
assistance on covered projects, including financial agreements in
connection with long-term tax abatements, requiring compliance with
this chapter.
B. Any advertisement for a public works project published 60 days or more
following the effective date of the chapter shall contain provisions
conditioning the award of any contract to be in compliance with this
chapter.
C. The Mayor or his designees may promulgate regulations or policies
implementing this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 8A-8 CHARTER § 14-2
C:165
A. No person shall be appointed by the Board of Police Commissioners, or
appropriate authority established by law, as a member of the auxiliary
police unless:
(1) The appointee is a resident of the state during the term of
appointment.
(2) The appointee is a resident of the City of East Orange.
(3) The appointee is able to read, write and speak the English language
well and intelligently and has a high school diploma or its
equivalent.
(4) The appointee is sound in body and of good health.35
(5) The appointee is of good moral character.
(6) The appointee has not been convicted of any offense involving
dishonesty or which would make him unfit to perform the duties of
his office.
(7) The appointee has successfully undergone the same psychological
testing that is required of all full-time police officers in the
municipality or has successfully undergone a program of
psychological testing approved by the commission.
B. The auxiliary police shall not carry or be issued firearms or other
similar weapons.
C. Every applicant for the position of auxiliary police who is appointed
shall have fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall be filed with the
Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
D. Auxiliary police shall comply with the rules and regulations applicable
to the conduct and decorum of the regular police within the
municipality.
E. No person shall be appointed to serve as an auxiliary police officer in
more than one local unit at the same time, nor shall any permanent
regularly appointed full-time police officer of East Orange be appointed
as an auxiliary police officer in any local unit. No public official with
responsibility for setting law enforcement policy or exercising authority
over the budget of the municipality of East Orange or supervision of the
Police Department of East Orange shall be appointed as an auxiliary
police officer.
F. Before any auxiliary police officer is appointed, the Chief of Police or, in
the absence of the Chief, the designee of the Chief of Police shall
ascertain the eligibility and qualifications for the applicant and report
these determinations in writing to the appointing authority.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 14-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14-2
C:166
§ 14-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
15-1999]
The duties of the auxiliary police shall include, but not be limited to, service
to the City of East Orange with regard to special events or functions
and traffic control. Auxiliary police shall also have the power to issue
summonses for disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses,
violations of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes. In addition, duly appointed regular auxiliary police shall have all
the powers of on-duty regular police officers at the following times only:
§ 14-4. Training under Police Department.
The auxiliary police are hereby attached to the East Orange Police
Department for the purpose of training. During the period of time that the
auxiliary police are attached to the Police Department, they shall be under
the supervision of the Chief of Police.
Chapter 14A
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND COUNCILS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization, generally — See
Ch. 5.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 23.
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 25.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 28.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 40.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 100.
G. Any person who at any time prior to appointment had served as a duly
qualified, fully trained, full-time officer in any municipality of this state
and who was separated from that prior service in good standing shall be
eligible to serve as an auxiliary police officer.
A. During any emergency, as defined in N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq., as
amended and supplemented.
B. During any practice, drill or activity in preparation for such emergency
duly authorized by the State Civilian Defense Director.
C. While actually engaged in training while attached to the Police
Department.
§ 14-2 CHARTER § 14-4
C:167

ARTICLE I
Insurance Advisory Committee
[Adopted 3-25-1968 by Ord. No. 20-1968 as Ch. 2 of the 1968 Code
(Ch. 5, Art. XVI, of the 1980 City Code)]
§ 14A-1. Committee established.
There is hereby established an Insurance Advisory Committee.
§ 14A-2. Membership; appointments and term of office.
The Insurance Advisory Committee shall be composed of three members,
appointed by the Chairman of the City Council and confirmed by the City
Council for a term of three years, the term of office commencing January 1
of each calendar year. Such terms shall be staggered.
§ 14A-3. Organization.
The Insurance Advisory Committee shall, at its initial meeting in each
calendar year, designate a Chairman, who shall be responsible for calling
meetings and ensuring that the Committee performs its duties and
responsibilities.
§ 14A-4. Secretary.
The City Director of Finance shall serve as Secretary to the Insurance
Advisory Committee and shall provide it with such information as it needs
to perform its duties.
§ 14A-5. Duties.
The Insurance Advisory Committee shall review from time to time and
report at least once annually to the Mayor, the City Council and the City
Director of Finance as to recommendations affecting the coverage of the
City on all insurance and surety bonds, and the Committee shall seek to
make such recommendations as may assure that the City is adequately
protected against primary risks and exposures and that such bonds and
policies be written in a manner to achieve maximum economy
commensurate with the protection required in the public interest.
§ 14A-6. Conflicts of interest.
The members of the Insurance Advisory Committee shall promptly advise
the Mayor, City Council and City Director of Finance of any business
relationship that may relate to insurance and bonds and the carriers and
companies responsible for writing such insurance and bonds, or of any
business association that may reflect on the recommendations of the
Committee. No member of the Committee shall receive any commission
or other compensation by reason of the placement, administration or
processing of claims on any insurance or surety bonds of the City.
§ 14A-1 CHARTER § 14A-6
C:169

ARTICLE II
Board of Health
[Adopted 3-25-1968 by Ord. No. 20-1968 as Ch. 2, Art. XXIII, Secs.
2:23-1 through 2:23-5, of the 1968 Code (Ch. 36 of the 1980 City
Code)]
§ 14A-7. Board established; membership; appointment. [Amended
5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007]
There is hereby established in the City a Board of Health pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., consisting of five members, unless the Mayor shall,
in his discretion, enlarge the same as allowed by law. Such members shall
be appointed by the Mayor, one from each ward of the City, subject to
confirmation of the City Council.
§ 14A-8. Terms of office.
Each appointment to the Board of Health shall commence on January 1 of
each successive calendar year, and each member shall serve a term of three
years. The terms shall be established so that no more than two terms nor
less than one term shall expire as of January 1 of each year, unless and until
the number of members of the Board of Health shall have been increased by
direction of the Mayor, whereupon the terms of the members so appointed
shall be so established as to provide for the maximum feasible staggering of
terms.
§ 14A-9. Powers and duties.
The Board of Health shall exercise all the powers and shall have jurisdiction
as provided by the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
§ 14A-10. Appointment of Plumbing Inspectors.
Subject to civil service, the Board of Health shall appoint a Plumbing
Inspector or, if required, Plumbing Inspectors for the City, and such
Inspectors shall, as to their qualification, employment, duties and conduct,
be subject to the jurisdiction and direction of the Board of Health.
§ 14A-11. Fees for services performed.
A. The Board of Health is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
fees for the rendering of nursing or related services by its employees or
agents, including but not limited to therapeutic, bedside and restorative
nursing services and physical, speech and occupational therapy.
B. Such fees shall be computed on the basis of audited costs, including
estimated overhead, and the Board of Health is hereby authorized to
adopt an adjusted fee schedule for those persons who are unable to
afford the actual cost of fee for service.
§ 14A-7 CHARTER § 14A-11
C:171
C. All such fees shall be collected by the Board of Health and transmitted
to the Tax Collector and placed with the general funds of the City,
unless otherwise directed by resolution of the City Council.
§ 14A-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14A-11
C:172
ARTICLE III
Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control
[Adopted 3-25-1968 by Ord. No. 20-1968 as Ch. 2, Art. XXV, of the
1968 Code (Ch. 11 of the 1980 City Code)]
§ 14A-12. Board established.
There is hereby established in the City a Board of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
§ 14A-13. Membership; appointment.
The Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall consist of three members
appointed by the City Council.
§ 14A-14. Operation in accordance with state law.
The Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall be operated in accordance
with provisions contained in N.J.S.A. 33:1-5 to 33:1-8.
§ 14A-12 CHARTER § 14A-14
C:173

ARTICLE IV
Division of Fire
[Adopted 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2-201536]
§ 14A-15. through § 14A-16. (Reserved)
§ 14A-17. Abolishment of Board of Fire Commissioners.
The Board of Fire Commissioners is hereby abolished effective upon the
appointment of a Fire Director or December 31, 2008, whichever event
occurs first in time. The powers and duties of the Board of Fire
Commissioners shall be subsumed by the municipality as set forth in the
Charter, applicable statutes and this article. The Mayor shall serve as the
appointing authority for all fire personnel and the legislative authority shall
vest in the City Council.
§ 14A-18. through § 14A-23. (Reserved)
§ 14A-23.1. Creation of Division of Fire; Fire Chief in charge.
Subject to the provisions of Chapter 25 of this Code, and under the
authority, direction and supervision of the Department of Public Safety,
there shall be a Division of Fire, the head of which shall be the Fire Chief.
§ 14A-23.2. Powers and duties of Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall have control and general supervision and direction of
the Division of Fire for the fighting and extinguishment of fires and the
safeguarding of the citizens and property of the City of East Orange against
destruction by fire. The Fire Chief shall be directly responsible to the Public
Safety Director for the efficiency and day-to-day operations of the Division
of Fire.
§ 14A-23.3. Responsibilities of the Division of Fire.
Under direction and supervision of the Public Safety Director, the Division
of Fire shall:
A. Have exclusive jurisdiction over the control, fighting and extinguishing
of any conflagration which occurs within the City limits.
B. Provide the firefighting services and facilities for the protection of life
and property within the City and in accordance with such mutual aid
agreements as may be enforced.
C. Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report to
the County Prosecutor every case of suspicious arson.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Fire Citizens Advisory Council;
Fire Department, adopted 3-25-1968 by Ord. No. 20-1968 as Ch. 2, Art. XXVII, Secs. 2:27-1
and 2:27-2, of the 1968 Code, as amended.
§ 14A-15 CHARTER § 14A-23.3
C:175
D. Maintain and administer fire prevention and fire safety inspection
service for the City.
§ 14A-23.3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14A-23.3
C:176
ARTICLE V
Board of Water Commissioners
[Adopted 3-25-1968 by Ord. No. 20-1968 as Ch. 2, Art. XXIX, of the
1968 Code (Ch. 86 of the 1980 City Code)]
§ 14A-24. Board established; membership. [Amended 3-23-1998 by
Ord. No. 2-1998; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007]
There is hereby established in the City a Board of Water Commissioners,
consisting of five members, one from each ward of the City.
§ 14A-25. Terms of office of members. [Amended 11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 18-1997; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007]
Each appointment to the Board of Water Commissioners shall commence on
January 1. Each member shall serve a term of three years. The term shall
be established so that no more than two terms nor less than one term shall
expire as of January 1 of each year. Whereupon the terms of the members
so appointed shall be established as to provide for the maximum feasible
staggering of terms.
§ 14A-24 CHARTER § 14A-25
C:177

ARTICLE VI
Board of Education
[Adopted 3-9-1970 by Ord. No. 10-1970 (Ch. 25 of the 1980 City
Code)]
§ 14A-26. Composition; appointment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:12-6, the Board of Education of the City is hereby
enlarged from a board consisting of five members to a board consisting of
seven members. The seven members shall be appointed by the Mayor as
provided by law.
§ 14A-27. Terms of office.
§ 14A-28. Powers and duties.
The Board of Education shall exercise all the powers and shall have
jurisdiction as provided by the laws of New Jersey.
A. The members of the Board of Education shall be appointed during the
time periods prescribed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:12-8.37
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:12-9, the terms shall be staggered so that
three members shall be appointed in the first year and two members
shall be appointed in each of the two following years of each three-year
period.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 14A-26 CHARTER § 14A-28
C:179

ARTICLE VII
Real Estate Commission
[Adopted 9-27-1976 by Ord. No. 34-1976 (Ch. 71 of the 1980 City
Code)]
§ 14A-29. Commission established; purpose.
There is hereby established in the office of the Mayor a committee which
shall be known as the "Real Estate Commission of the City of East Orange,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Commission," for the purpose of advising the
City Council with respect to the sale or retention of property not required
for governmental purposes. The Commission's advice shall be in the form
of written recommendations, with supporting data, which may include but
shall not be limited to any of the following:
§ 14A-30. Composition of Commission.
The Commission shall be composed of the following persons:
§ 14A-31. Service without compensation.
All members of the Commission shall serve as such without compensation.
§ 14A-32. Chairman; organization; meetings.
The Commission shall select one of its members to be Chairman and shall
adopt such rules of procedure as are necessary to fulfill its purposes as
set forth in § 14A-29 above. The Commission shall hold meetings at regular
intervals and shall endeavor to advise the Municipal Council with respect to
A. Recommend the sale of City-owned land.
B. Recommend the leasing of City-owned land.
C. Recommend conditions for the sale or leasing of City-owned land.
D. Recommend the retention of land for future municipal use.
E. Recommend specific "upset" prices to facilitate the sale of City-owned
land.
A. A member of the Municipal Council, to be appointed by the Mayor.
B. The Tax Assessor.
C. The Director of Policy, Planning and Development.38
D. The Director of the East Orange Business Development Authority.
E. The Tax Collector.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 14A-29 CHARTER § 14A-32
C:181
all salable real estate and shall review its recommendations as it shall from
time to time deem necessary.
§ 14A-33. Cooperation of other departments and agencies.
All City departments and agencies shall cooperate with the Commission in
all respects, including providing the Commission with surveys, photographs
and such other documentations as the Commission shall require in the
performance of its function.
§ 14A-34. Powers and functions advisory in nature.
The powers and functions of the Commission shall be advisory only, and the
Commission shall have no power to make contracts on behalf of the City nor
to employ any persons as regular employees or as consultants.
§ 14A-35. Quorum; voting by proxy. [Added 2-23-1981 by Ord. No.
9-1981; amended 6-19-1982 by Ord. No. 38-1982]
A majority of the Commission as designated in § 14A-30 hereof shall
constitute a quorum of the Commission. In the absence of a Commission
member, for the purposes of both declaring a quorum and voting, said
absent Commission member may delegate by proxy to his designee, who
must be a member of his office, the authority to both sit as a temporary
Commission member and cast his vote by proxy as if said Commission
member himself was present. Said proxy must be delivered in writing to the
Commission Chairman and shall be deemed in force and effect until revoked
in writing.
§ 14A-32 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14A-35
C:182
ARTICLE VIII
Personnel Committee
[Adopted 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 8-1977 (Ch. 59 of the 1980 City
Code)]
§ 14A-36. Establishment; composition. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 19-1986; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
There is established a Personnel Committee for the City, which Committee
shall continue in permanent operation and shall consist of the Mayor,
Chairman of the City Council, Chairman of the City Council Finance
Committee, Director of Finance, Director of Public Works, Chairman of
the City Council Grants and Labor Negotiations Committee and the Chief
Personnel Officer.
§ 14A-37. Officers; meetings.
The Chief Personnel Officer or Assistant to the Chief Personnel Officer
as designated by the Chief Personnel Officer shall act as Secretary and
otherwise assist the Personnel Committee as directed by the Chairman.
The Chairman of the Committee shall be designated by the Mayor, and the
Personnel Committee shall meet once a month.
§ 14A-38. Duties.
The duties of the Personnel Committee shall be the following:
A. To meet once a month and to review the personnel policies of the City of
East Orange and to establish such personnel policies, or change
existing personnel policies, and to recommend to the City Council the
establishment of positions of employment within the City or the
elimination of positions of employment.
B. To conduct a continuing evaluation of the respective classes and salary
ranges for the purpose of recommending changes where necessary to
maintain a proper balance and relationship between the classes. The
Personnel Committee shall have no power to create, alter or change
ranges or classifications, but shall from time to time, and no less than
once annually, make a report to the Mayor and City Council embodying
recommendations for change.
§ 14A-36 CHARTER § 14A-38
C:183

ARTICLE IX
Arts and Cultural Commission
[Adopted 8-21-1978 by Ord. No. 20-1978 (Ch. 13 of the 1980 City
Code)]
§ 14A-39. Commission established.
There is hereby established in the office of the Mayor a commission which
shall be known as the "Arts and Cultural Commission of the City of East
Orange," hereafter referred to as the "Commission."
§ 14A-40. Membership; liaison; compensation.
§ 14A-41. Appointment and terms of members.
§ 14A-42. Organization.
A. The Commission will consist of 11 persons, all of whom must be
residents of the City of East Orange. Six will be appointed by the Mayor
and five by the City Council. The Council will ensure through its
appointments that there is always one resident of each of the City's five
wards serving on the Commission.
B. In addition, there shall be a liaison member appointed annually by the
City Council, which liaison member must be a member of the City
Council and shall serve without vote.
C. The Commission members will serve without compensation.
A. Initial appointments to the Commission will be for terms as follows:
(1) Three members for a period of one year.
(2) Four members for a period of two years.
(3) Four members for a period of three years, one of whom shall be
designated Chairman by the Mayor, and who shall serve as
Chairman at the pleasure of the Mayor.
(4) Liaison member on an annual basis, designated by the Council
Committee on Appointments.
B. The term of each of the members first appointed will be designated by
the Mayor.
C. After the initial appointments, all members will be appointed for terms
of three years. Appointments to fill vacancies will be for the unexpired
term of the member to be replaced. Each member will serve for the
duration of his term and until his successor has been duly appointed
and qualified.
§ 14A-39 CHARTER § 14A-42
C:185
§ 14A-43. Duties.
The duties of the Commission shall be:
§ 14A-44. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERFORMING AND CREATIVE ARTS — Includes, but is not limited to,
music, theater, dance, literature, painting, sculpture, architecture,
photography, film, art, handicrafts, graphic arts and design.
§ 14A-45. Powers.
The Commission shall be authorized and empowered to hold public and
private hearings and, within the limit of funds available to it and with
the expressed written approval of the Mayor, enter into contracts with
individuals, organizations and institutions for services or endeavors
furthering the objectives of the Commission's programs; with the expressed
written approval of the Mayor, to accept gifts, grants and bequests of
funds from individuals, foundations, corporations, governmental agencies
and other organizations or institutions; with the expressed written approval
of the Mayor, to make and sign any agreements and to do and perform any
acts that may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. The
Commission may request and will receive from any department or agency of
A. The Commission will, as soon as possible after the first day of each year,
select such officers, other than a Chairman, from among its members as
it deems necessary and will adopt bylaws to govern its procedural
operation. If the Mayor shall appoint some other officer as Chairman
during the duration of said officer's tenure in said other office, the
Commission will reorganize.
B. The Commission will have no power or authority to hire any employees,
and it may make expenditures from any financial resources available to
it in excess of $50 only with the express written approval of the Mayor.
A. To take such steps as may be deemed necessary and appropriate to
stimulate and encourage the study and presentation of the performing
and creative arts and to foster public interest in and public support of
the arts in our City.
B. To make such surveys, as may be deemed advisable, of public and
private institutions, wherever situate, engaged in the performing and
creative arts and to recommend to the Mayor appropriate action to
enlarge the City's financial and physical resources in and for the
performing and creative arts.
C. To encourage and assist freedom of expression in the performing and
creative arts and to recommend to the Mayor methods and events to
encourage the performing and creative arts.
§ 14A-42 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14A-45
C:186
the City government such assistance, information and advice as will enable
it to carry out its power and duties, but will not usurp any of the rights,
powers, duties or obligations of any other department or agency of the City
government.
§ 14A-46. Reports.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the Mayor and the City
Council concerning the status of the performing and cultural arts in East
Orange and such other matters as the Commission deems desirable.39
39.Editor's Note: Original § 13-9, Appropriation, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015.
§ 14A-45 CHARTER § 14A-46
C:187

ARTICLE X
Division of Police
[Adopted 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 4-201540]
§ 14A-47. through § 14A-48. (Reserved)
§ 14A-49. Abolishment of Board of Police Commissioners.
The Board of Police Commissioners is hereby abolished effective upon the
appointment of a Police Director. The powers and duties of the Board of
Police Commissioners shall be subsumed by the municipality as set forth in
the Charter, applicable statutes and this chapter.
§ 14A-50. through § 14A-53. (Reserved)
§ 14A-53.1. Creation of Division of Police; Chief of Police in charge;
Duties of Chief of Police.
A. Subject to the provisions of Chapter 25 of this Code, and under the
authority, direction and supervision of the Department of Public Safety,
there shall be a Division of Police, the head of which shall be the Chief
of Police.
B. The Chief of Police shall have control and general supervision and
direction of the Division of Police for the investigation, detection,
enforcement and prevention of Title 39 and Title 2C of the New Jersey
Statutes, as well as the provision of safe protection of the persons and
property of the City from criminal activity, as well any other authority
granted by this or any other applicable law of the State of New Jersey.
C. The Chief of Police shall be directly responsible to the Public Safety
Director for the efficiency and day-to-day operations of the Police
Division.
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. X, Police Citizens Advisory
Council; Police Director, adopted 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 11-2003 (Ch. 65 of the 1980 City
Code), as amended.
§ 14A-47 CHARTER § 14A-53.1
C:189

ARTICLE XI
Citizens Advisory Committee to Department of Recreation and
Cultural Affairs
[Adopted 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006 (Ch. 5, Art. XXIII, § 5-157,
of the 1980 City Code)]
§ 14A-54. Membership; appointment; term of office.
There shall be a Citizens Advisory Committee to the Department of
Recreation and Cultural Affairs, constituted of nine members, to be
appointed as follows:
§ 14A-55. Duties.
The duties of such Citizens Advisory Committee shall be those of advice and
recommendation only.
A. Three members to be appointed by the Mayor for a period of one year
initially and thereafter for a period of three years.
B. One member from each ward to be appointed by the City Council for a
period of one year initially and thereafter for a period of three years.
C. One member to serve at large, to be appointed by the City Council for a
period of three years.
§ 14A-54 CHARTER § 14A-55
C:191

ARTICLE XII
Youth Advisory Council
[Adopted 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009 (Ch. 5, Art. LI, of the 1980
City Code)]
§ 14A-56. Council established.
There is hereby established in the City a Youth Advisory Council.
§ 14A-57. Purpose.
It is hereby declared and recognized that the youth are the future of
our communities, and it is vitally important that they are vested with the
knowledge, skills and abilities to be the next generation of leaders by
providing them access and opportunity to be active and engage in civic
matters affecting their communities.
§ 14A-58. Membership; term of office; filling of vacancies.
§ 14A-59. Officers; procedures, technical assistance.
The Youth Advisory Committee shall, as soon as possible after the first day
of each year, select a Chairperson and such other officers as it may deem
necessary and shall adopt bylaws to govern its procedural operations. The
A. The membership of the Youth Advisory Council shall include persons
attending secondary schools in the City of East Orange between the
ages of 14 and 18 with a strong interest in local government, civic and
municipal matters. The number of student members shall be not less
than 13, and the number of adult members shall not be more than two.
Each City ward must be represented by at least two student members.
B. The Mayor shall make three student appointments and one adult
member appointment.
C. City Council shall make a total of 10 student appointments and one
adult member appointment: each Councilperson shall make two student
appointments and the City Council Chairperson shall additionally
appoint one adult member.
D. City Council shall have the power to expand the size of the Youth
Advisory Council and make all reasonable efforts to ensure that each
City ward is equally represented on the Youth Advisory Council.
E. All student and adult members shall serve for one-year terms and
without compensation. Such terms shall commence January 1 of each
calendar year.
F. In case of death, resignation or inability to serve, a successor shall be
appointed in the same manner as the appointment of the original
members to fill the unexpired term of such member. Each member shall
serve until his successor is duly appointed and qualified.
§ 14A-56 CHARTER § 14A-59
C:193
Youth Advisory Council shall have access to technical assistance by way of
the Mayor's office and City Council. The Youth Advisory Council shall be
administered under the office of City Council.
§ 14A-60. Duties and responsibilities.
The Youth Advisory Council shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
A. To solely act as advisory board and make recommendations to the
Mayor and the City Council on policy matters affecting the youth
community.
B. To establish its own bylaws to govern its procedural operations.
C. To plan, organize, coordinate and implement social, cultural,
recreational, educational and other activities in support of the youth
community.
D. To encourage and seek widespread citizen input regarding issues
concerning the youth community.
E. To assist in the dissemination of information regarding the Youth
Advisory Council's activities and information related to the Youth
Advisory Council's purpose.
F. To present the views of the youth community to the Mayor and City
Council.
G. To make recommendations relative to the issues facing the youth
community in the City of East Orange and to report not less than once a
year to the Mayor and City Council on policies, procedures and
programs related to the stated purposes of the Youth Advisory Council.
§ 14A-59 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14A-60
C:194
ARTICLE XIII
Municipal Recreation and Open Space Advisory Board
[Adopted 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 3-2013]
§ 14A-61. Purpose.
§ 14A-62. Advisory Board established.
In order to facilitate the goals of the aforesaid Trust Fund, a Municipal
Recreation and Open Space Advisory Board is hereby established, and said
Board will consist of 16 members, five of which will be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council, as follows:
A. A referendum was overwhelmingly approved by the citizens of the City
of East Orange on November 6, 2012, whereby the governing body of
the City of East Orange shall establish a Municipal Recreation and
Open Space Trust Fund pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7, which shall be
funded through the collection of property tax at a rate not to exceed
$0.04 per $100 of total municipal equalized real property valuation.
B. The Municipal Recreation and Open Space Trust Fund shall be used for
any or all of the following purposes, or any combination thereof, as
determined by the governing body:
(1) Acquisition of lands for recreation and conservation purposes;
(2) Preservation of historic properties, structures, facilities, sites,
areas or objects, and the acquisition of such properties, structures,
facilities, sites, areas or objects for historic preservation purposes;
(3) Maintenance of lands acquired for recreation and conservation
purposes;
(4) Acquisition of farmland for farmland preservation purposes; and
(5) Payment of debt service on indebtedness issued or incurred by the
City of East Orange for any of the above purposes, except for
Subsection B(3) above.
A. Director of Public Works.
B. City Council Chair.
C. Mayor or his/her designee.
D. Council Liaison to Public Works.
E. Director of Recreation.
F. Director of Parks Maintenance.
G. City Administrator.
H. Director of Planning.
§ 14A-61 CHARTER § 14A-62
C:195
§ 14A-63. Terms.
§ 14A-64. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 14A-65. Compensation; recreation.
I. Representative of Planning and Grants.
J. Representative from the Historical Society.
K. Representative from the YMCA.
L. Five East Orange residents.
A. The initial resident members of the Board shall serve as follows:
(1) One member shall serve for one year;
(2) Two members shall serve for two years; and
(3) Two member shall serve for three years.
B. Thereafter all resident members shall be appointed for three-year
terms.
A. Make recommendations to the Mayor regarding the overall
administration of the Municipal Recreation and Open Space Trust
Program pursuant to Public Law 1989, Chapter 30.
B. Develop and recommend to the Mayor and City Council a system to
prioritize the selection of open space areas for acquisitions.
C. Review or prepare the present or proposed parks, recreation and open
space master plan for the purpose of making recommendations to the
Mayor.
D. Identify and recommend to the City grants and other funding sources to
maintain, expand and promote the existing open space.
E. Make recommendations concerning the expenditure of funds as well as
personnel where applicable in regards to the maintenance and
preservation of said open spaces.
F. Make recommendations concerning the selection of land for acquisition
as part of the Municipal Recreation and Open Space Trust Fund.
G. Make recommendations as to historic preservation of historic
properties, structures, facilities, sites, areas or objects, and the
acquisition of such properties, structures, facilities, sites, areas or
objects for historic preservation purposes.
A. All Advisory Board members shall serve without compensation.
§ 14A-62 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14A-65
C:196
§ 14A-66. Administration.
The Municipal Recreation and Open Space Program shall be administered
by the Municipal Administrator as determined by the Mayor. The
Administrator is to provide staff support to the Board and shall publish an
annual report at the end of the fiscal year which shall be made available to
the general public.
B. This Board should not be construed as a Board of Recreation pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq.
§ 14A-65 CHARTER § 14A-66
C:197

ARTICLE XIV
Insurance Fund Commission
[Adopted 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
§ 14A-67. Findings and purpose.
The City Council has recognized that there is an insurance crisis within the
State of New Jersey with respect to municipal liability insurance coverage.
Such coverage can either not be obtained at all or only obtained at
prohibitive premium rates. In order to respond to the aforesaid crisis, the
City of East Orange Township desires to create a Municipal Insurance Fund
and an Insurance Fund Commission pursuant to authority granted it by the
laws of New Jersey.
§ 14A-68. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BROKER — The City of East Orange selected liability insurance broker.
CHAIRPERSON — The duly elected Chairperson of the City of East Orange
Municipal Insurance Fund Commission.
COMMISSION — The City of East Orange Insurance Fund Commission.
COMMISSIONER — Any properly chosen member of the City of East
Orange Municipal Insurance Fund Commission.
COUNCIL — The duly elected members of the City Council of the City of
East Orange.
FUND — The City of East Orange Municipal Insurance Fund.
MAYOR — The duly elected Mayor of the City of East Orange.
OFFICIAL — Any department head employed by the City of East Orange and
the Mayor and members of the City Council.
SECRETARY — The duly appointed Secretary to the City of East Orange
Municipal Insurance Fund Commission.
TPA — The City of East Orange selected third-party claims administrator.
§ 14A-69. Commission created; membership.
There is hereby created a Municipal Insurance Fund Commission within
the City, consisting of eight members; three of such members, who shall
be called "Commissioners," have voting authority. Nonvoting members shall
be a Secretary, the City's Chief Financial Officer or her designee, the
City's Corporation Counsel or her designee, a representative of the City's
third-party claims administrator and a representative of the City's liability
insurance broker.
§ 14A-67 CHARTER § 14A-70
C:199
§ 14A-70. Appointment of Commissioners; terms; vacancies;
compensation.
Commissioners of the Fund shall be appointed as follows:
§ 14A-71. Establishment of fund; purposes.
§ 14A-72. Secretary; broker, TPA.
A. Three Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council.
B. The first Commissioner shall hold office for a term of one year, the
second Commissioner for two years, and the third Commissioner for
three years. Thereafter, all terms shall be for periods of three years. A
calendar year shall be used to determine the terms of office for the
Commissioners.
C. Vacancies in the office of Commissioner caused by any reason other
than the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term.
D. Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
A. The Council shall establish within the municipal budget a fund or funds
for the payment of judgments or settlements and the payment of the
reasonable and necessary expenses of defending claims against the
City. The amounts of these funds shall be established yearly in each
municipal budget. All unused amounts in said funds from previous
budgets shall be carried over into the current municipal budget.
B. These funds shall be used for the following purposes:
(1) To self-insure against loss or damage caused to any property, motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by the township or owned
by or under the control of any township department, board, agency
or commission where no insurance coverage is in effect.
(2) To self-insure against liability resulting from the use or operation of
motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by or controlled by
the City or any City department, board, agency or commission
where no insurance coverage is in effect.
(3) To self-insure against liability for the City's negligence or that of its
officers, employees and servants, whether full- or part-time, who
are acting within the scope of their authority, but not including an
independent contractor, within the limitations of the New Jersey
Tort Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.), where no insurance
coverage is in effect, or prior to any excess liability coverage taking
effect. Nothing in this article shall obligate the City to pay any costs
if the factors established in § 23-1F have been determined to exist.
A. The Insurance Commission shall appoint a Secretary, who will serve as
Secretary to the Commission.
§ 14A-70 EAST ORANGE CODE § 14A-72
C:200
§ 14A-73. Chairperson and organization.
Immediately upon their appointment, the Commissioners shall organize for
the ensuing year and elect a Chairperson from their membership, who shall
serve for a term of one year.
§ 14A-74. Powers and authority of Commissioners.
Subject to consultation and review by the governing body and with the
consultation of the Corporation Counsel and the TPA, the Commissioners
shall have the following powers and authority:
§ 14A-75. Fund requirements; administration of claims and
payments.
Claims shall be administered and paid through the TPA in accordance with
the TPA administration contract.
§ 14A-76. Fund requirements; additional and excess coverage.
The City, directly or through the broker and TPA, shall arrange for the
purchase and maintenance of additional "stop loss" or "excess" liability
coverage in order to provide ascertainable limits to the liability of the Fund.
B. The Secretary shall be entrusted with the daily operations of the Fund
and shall submit a report to the Commissioners at least once a month.
C. The City's broker and TPA shall serve as advisors to the Commission.
A. To invest the Fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such
securities as they shall deem best to maintain the integrity of the Fund.
B. To adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the
Fund.
C. To keep on hand in the Fund sufficient cash or securities which can
immediately be converted to cash for the payment of losses.
D. The TPA shall assist the Commissioners in the proper design and
administration of the Fund.
§ 14A-72 CHARTER § 14A-76
C:201

ARTICLE XV
Committee on the Status of Men
[Adopted 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 57-2016]
§ 14A-77. Committee established.
There is hereby established a Committee on the Status of Men.
§ 14A-78. Membership; appointments and term of office.
This Committee shall be composed of 12 men. Ten shall be selected and
confirmed by the City Council, consisting of two members from each ward of
the City. Two members shall be appointed by the Mayor without City Council
approval. However, the Chairperson of the Health and Education Committee
may serve as a liaison between the Committee and the governing body.
Members shall serve for a two-year term. However, if any term shall
commence after the first of any year, that term shall be considered a fullyear
term at the end thereof.
§ 14A-79. Organization.
The Committee on the Status of Men shall, at its initial meeting in each
calendar year, designate a Chairman, who shall be responsible for calling
meetings and ensuring that the Committee performs its duties and
responsibilities, as well as a Vice Chair to ensure that the Committee
maintains continuity in the event the Chair is absent.
§ 14A-80. Duties.
The Committee on the Status of Men shall concern itself with policies
and matters relating, but not limited, to: criminality; social economics;
familial issues and community engagement; education; and employment.
The Committee shall work to improve the aforementioned with the intent of
fostering a prosperous communal environment for the men of East Orange
and the greater community as a whole. The Committee shall work to
improve relationships with the business community, civic and religious
organizations, academic institutions, government agencies, other
stakeholders, and the broader community. The Committee will be charged
with the responsibility to research, propose, and encourage community
partnerships to model effective programs and best practices to improve
conditions affecting East Orange males. The Committee will report to the
Mayor and East Orange City Council annually on its findings and
recommendations to carry out these goals.
§ 14A-77 CHARTER § 14A-80
C:203
Chapter 15
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 15-1. Authority established.
There is hereby established in the City a Business Development Authority.
§ 15-2. Purpose.
It is hereby declared that the future development of business and industry
within the City of East Orange is a matter of concern affecting the public
safety, health and welfare of the City and its inhabitants and that it shall
be the purpose of the Business Development Authority, in cooperation with
other city, county, state and federal agencies, as well as organizations and
individuals of the City, to seek to encourage the development of business
and industry in the City through the providing of information service to
prospective businesses, the active seeking of new business and industry to
locate in the City and the development of proposals for legislation in this
area to be submitted to City Council.
§ 15-3. Membership; terms of office; vacancies.
The Business Development Authority shall consist of nine members, five
to be appointed by the Mayor without approval of City Council and four
to be appointed by City Council on motion not requiring approval of the
Mayor. The term of office for all members shall be three years, except
that the initial appointments shall be staggered so that three members
shall be appointed as of the first day of January of each year, beginning
January 1, 1974. The initial appointments shall be as follows: two Mayor's
appointments and one Council appointment for a term ending December
31, 1974; two Mayor's appointments and one Council appointment for a
term ending December 31, 1975; and two Council appointments and one
Mayor's appointment for a term ending December 31, 1976. In addition,
there shall be a liaison member appointed annually by the City Council,
which liaison member shall serve without vote. In case of death, resignation
or inability to serve, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as
the appointment of the original members to fill the unexpired term of such
member. Each member shall serve until his successor is duly appointed and
qualified. Membership on this Authority shall not be limited to residents of
the City of East Orange, but all members must either be residents of the
City of East Orange or be directly involved in the business community within
the City of East Orange.
§ 15-4. Organization; employment of personnel; expenditures.
The Business Development Authority shall, as soon as possible after the first
day of each year, select a Chairman and such other officers as it may deem
necessary and shall adopt bylaws to govern its procedural operation. It shall
have the power and authority to hire, supervise and discharge such persons
§ 14A-80 EAST ORANGE CODE § 15-4
C:204
as may be authorized in its budget as approved by the City Council and
expend other money consistent with such budget appropriations.
§ 15-5. Powers and duties.
The Business Development Authority shall have the following powers and
duties:
Chapter 17
CHECKS OR DRAFTS, RETURNED
§ 17-1. Service charge established.
A service charge in the amount of $20 shall be imposed on any taxes, fees
or other charges due to the City of East Orange where a check or draft
has been submitted to the City toward the payment of such taxes, fees or
other charges and such check or draft is returned for insufficient funds.
The City Council authorizes the appropriate municipal officer to demand
that future payments be tendered in cash or by certified or cashier's check
on any account where a check tendered for payment on such account is
returned for insufficient funds. In addition, the service charge aforesaid
may be collected in any manner authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:5-18.
§ 17-2. Future determination of amount of service charge for
returned checks.
It is hereby authorized that the amount of such service charge in the future
shall be determined by resolution of the governing body consistent with the
applicable state statutes.
A. To foster participation in and encourage efforts to bring business and
industrial establishments to the City.
B. To cooperate with the various departments, boards, commissions and
agencies of the City and assist them in achieving the goals and
purposes of this chapter.
C. To report from time to time and not less than once a year to the Mayor
and City Council on policies, procedures and programs which will exist
to foster the growth of business and industry in the City and also to
recommend proposed legislation which might exist in the foregoing.
§ 15-4 CHARTER § 17-2
C:205
Chapter 18
CLAIMS: APPROVAL AND PAYMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization generally — See
Ch. 5.
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 14A.
Purchasing and contracting — See Ch. 68.
§ 18-1. Procedures for charging appropriations and paying of
claims and bills. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986;
6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall maintain a current record at all times
of all charges against the various appropriations made by the City. All
bills and claims for goods, materials or services provided or rendered to
the City shall, prior to payment, be submitted to the Chief Financial
Officer for his approval.
B. Payment and review.
(1) If the bill and claim as submitted shall appear to be in order, the
items thereon correctly calculated, and if there is written approval
annexed thereto by the Mayor, department head or responsible
commission, board or agency of the City, as provided by law, and if
there is an appropriation for the same, except in the case of
emergencies as set forth under § 18-2, the Chief Financial Officer
shall signify his consent thereon, and a check shall be drawn and
signed by the Chief Financial Officer, the Mayor and City
Administrator or, in the case of a commission, board or agency, the
officer or officers who, by law, must sign therefor. A list of all such
checks and payments shall be provided to the City Council for its
review and authorization. The City Council shall thereupon review
the same in committee and consider at a public meeting a
resolution authorizing or not authorizing any such payment or any
individual items contained therein which are subject to its
jurisdiction, as provided herein. However, reoccurring payments of
the following may be paid in advance of approval:
(a) Payroll obligations.
(b) Required payments to the Board of Education.
(c) Required county tax payments to the County Treasurer.
(d) Payments to banks for investment purposes, internal transfers,
and debt service obligation.
(e) Utility payments (water, sewer, gas, electric).
§ 17-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 18-1
C:206
§ 18-2. Emergency expenditure of funds.
§ 18-3. Annual preparation of budget. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 19-1986; 6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
The Chief Financial Officer shall distribute forms and procedures with
respect to the preparation of both a capital budget and the current budget
to all departments of the City on or about September 1 of each year. He
shall thereafter, on or about November 1, at a date set by him, collect from
each of the respective departments such budgets in completed form, and
each of such budgets shall thereupon be submitted by the Chief Financial
Officer to the Mayor and City Council for their consideration and review. He
shall attend all hearings relating to the preparation of the budget and be
(f) Postage.
(g) Insurance costs.
(h) State of New Jersey application fees, permit fees, license fees,
surcharges and DEP fees.
(i) Reissue of lost or mutilated checks after stop payment has
been enforced.
(j) Ten-percent bid bond returns.
(2) These bills need to be approved within 30 days of payment. Any
unforeseen or unanticipated expense that is less than $5,000 which
if not paid may cause the interruption of City government services
may be paid and approved within 30 days of said disbursement by
the Council. Payments for contractual or specific vendor amounts
previously authorized by the Council via legislation appear on the
bill list for purposes of reference only and do not require additional
approval.
C. The Chief Financial Officer, in conjunction with the Corporation
Counsel, shall prepare and approve all forms and written procedures to
be utilized for the purchasing and securing of goods, materials and
services and the processing of bills and claims therefor.
A. If an emergency occurs requiring the immediate expenditure of funds
prior to opportunity to secure an appropriation therefor, the Mayor
shall be authorized to approve the same in an amount not to exceed
$2,500 and shall immediately report the same to the Chief Financial
Officer and to the City Council for action thereon at its next regular
meeting. Such expenditure shall be payable out of the contingent
expense appropriation included in the annual budget. [Amended
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986; 6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
B. For the purposes of this section, an "emergency" is defined as a
pressing need for public expenditure to protect or promote the public
health, safety or welfare.
§ 18-1 CHARTER § 18-3
C:207
available for consultation and advice as may be required for the preparation
and presentation thereof for approval by the City Council within the times
prescribed by law.
§ 18-4. Handling and depositing of money.
§ 18-5. Administration and custody of insurance policies. [Amended
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986; 6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
The administration of all insurance policies relating to the City shall be
under the direction of the Chief Financial Officer. The City Clerk shall keep
custody of such insurance policies.
Chapter 21
COURT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court Administrator — See Ch. 5,
Art. XXVI.
A. Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, any person receiving
money in behalf of the City or any of its constituent boards or agencies
shall deliver the same to the Collector of Taxes on the day of receipt,
unless the office of the Collector of Taxes shall not then be open, in
which case by 12:00 noon of the next business day, in accordance with
such regulations for the receipt and handling of moneys as may be
promulgated by the Collector of Taxes.
B. The Collector of Taxes shall make such provisions for the receipt and
handling of money by the Department of Tax Collection as may be
necessary to protect the same and make provision and supervise
transfer and delivery of all cash receipts by any other department to the
custody of the Collector of Taxes, and such money shall be delivered
each day to an approved institutional depository for safekeeping to
await verification and deposit in the institution by the Chief Financial
Officer on the next business day. The Tax Collector shall, in conjunction
with the Chief Financial Officer, promulgate regulations governing the
handling, safekeeping and depositing of City funds. The Collector of
Taxes shall receive and retain a receipt from the City Treasurer for all
such money delivered to the Chief Financial Officer for deposit by the
Chief Financial Officer. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015;
6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
§ 18-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 21-1
C:208
§ 21-1. Court established.41
There is hereby established in the City a court, which shall be known as the
"Municipal Court of the City of East Orange, New Jersey," pursuant to the
authority vested in the City by provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 21-2. Court seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal bearing the impress of the name of
the Court.
§ 21-3. Municipal Judges. [Amended 3-22-1976 by Ord. No.
12-1976; 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 20-1968; 4-24-2000 by Ord. No.
10-2000; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No 26-2005; 7-16-2007 by Ord. No.
17-2007]
The Municipal Court shall have five Judges, each of whom shall have the
qualifications and shall serve for the term and be appointed in the manner
provided by law and the rules governing the courts of the State of New
Jersey. Notwithstanding the preceding, upon written approval of the
Assignment Judge of the Superior Court of Vicinage V, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2B:12-5, one additional Judge, who shall be a temporary Judge, may be
appointed. The Mayor may designate one of such Judges as Chief Judge.
The Chief Judge shall assume the prime administrative authority for the
operation of the Municipal Court in accordance with the rules governing the
courts of the State of New Jersey.
§ 21-4. Jurisdiction; practice and procedure.
The Municipal Court shall have the jurisdiction which is now or shall
hereafter be conferred upon it by law, and the practice and procedure of
the Court shall be governed by the law in such case made and provided and
such rules as the Supreme Court of the state shall promulgate and make
applicable to the Municipal Court.
§ 21-5. Municipal Court Administrator and clerical help.42
The Municipal Court shall have a Municipal Court Administrator and such
other clerical help as the City Council shall provide by ordinance or
resolution.
§ 21-6. Records.
The Municipal Court shall keep such records as may now or hereafter be
provided by law or the rules governing the courts of the state.
§ 21-7. Application fees for appointment of Municipal Public
Defenders. [Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 15-1997]
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-1 CHARTER § 21-7
C:209
§ 21-8. Office of Public Defender established. [Added 10-10-2000 by
Ord. No. 20-2000; amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009;
7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 16-2014]
There is hereby established the Office of Public Defender. The Municipal
Court shall have a Chief Municipal Public Defender, Deputy Municipal
Public Defender and five Municipal Public Defenders.
§ 21-9. Appointment of Public Defenders; authority of Chief
Municipal Public Defender. [Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 20-2000;
amended 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 19-2003; 7-7-2014 by Ord. No.
16-2014]
§ 21-10. Duties of Public Defender. [Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No.
20-2000; amended 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 16-2014]
A. All persons applying for legal representation by a Municipal Public
Defender shall pay an application fee of not more than $200 to the East
Orange Municipal Court, but only in an amount necessary to pay the
costs of Municipal Public Defender services. The Municipal Court may
permit a person to pay the application fee over a period of time not to
exceed four months. [Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 7-1998]
B. The East Orange Municipal Court may waive any required application
fee in whole or in part if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking representation.
A. The Chief Municipal Public Defender, Deputy Municipal Public
Defender and five Public Defenders shall be appointed by resolution of
the City Council for terms of one year. The Chief Municipal Public
Defender shall continue in office pending reappointment or
appointment of a successor.
B. The Chief Municipal Public Defender shall have authority over the
Deputy Municipal Public Defender and other public defenders
concerning the performance of their duties consistent with the
applicable statutes. The Deputy Municipal Public Defender shall assist
the Chief Municipal Public Defender in performing his duties.
A. The Municipal Public Defenders shall represent, except in the case of
temporary unavailability or conflict of interest, any defendant charged
with an offense in Municipal Court who is an indigent municipal
defendant entitled to representation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
B. The Municipal Public Defenders shall provide all necessary services and
facilities of representation, including both expert and lay investigation
and testimony, as well as other preparations, in every case. The
municipality shall be responsible for payment for such services. The
factors of need and real value to a defendant may be weighed against
the financial constraints of the municipality in determining the
§ 21-7 EAST ORANGE CODE § 21-10
C:210
§ 21-11. Municipal Public Defenders' compensation. [Added
10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 20-2000]
The Municipal Public Defenders shall be paid on a per diem basis as set by
resolution adopted by City Council.
Chapter 23
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Insurance Fund Commission — See Ch. 14A,
Art. XIV.
Court — See Ch. 21.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
§ 23-1. Policy.
Whenever a civil or criminal action is instituted against any current or
former appointed or elected City official, employee or servant, whether or
not compensated or hired on a part-time basis, who is authorized to perform
any act or service on behalf of the City or any individual subject to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-134.1, 40A:14-155 and 40A:14-128 (hereinafter "employee"), for any
act or omission arising out of and in the course of and within the scope of
the performance of the duties of such office, the City shall defray the cost of
defending such action as set forth below:
necessary services and facilities of representation. The final
determination as to necessity for services required shall be made by the
court.
C. The Municipal Public Defenders shall be responsible for handling all
phases of the defense, including but not limited to discovery, pretrial
and post-trial hearings, motions, removals to federal district court and
other collateral functions reasonably related to the defense. Post-trial
hearings shall not include de novo appeals in Superior Court.
A. In a civil matter if instituted against an employee based upon an act or
omission of that employee, the City's obligation hereunder shall be
limited to those cases in which:
(1) The employee was acting in a matter in which the City had an
interest;
(2) The employee was acting in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law in furtherance of the employee's official duties;
(3) The employee was acting in good faith;
§ 21-10 CHARTER § 23-1
C:211
(4) The employee is a named defendant in a matter pending before a
court of competent jurisdiction or other legal proceeding; and
(5) The civil proceeding is dismissed or results in a final disposition
without a specific finding of illegal wrongdoing or malfeasance in
office by the employee.
B. In a criminal matter if instituted against an employee based upon an act
or omission of that employee, the City's obligation shall be limited to
those cases in which:
(1) The employee was acting in a matter in which the City had an
interest;
(2) The employee was acting in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law in furtherance of the employee's official duties;
(3) The employee was acting in good faith;
(4) The employee is a named defendant in a matter pending before a
court of competent jurisdiction or other legal proceeding; and
(5) The criminal proceeding is dismissed or results in a final
disposition in favor of the employee.
C. Employees shall not be reimbursed for legal fees pursuant to this
chapter in civil or criminal actions where the City is a plaintiff, pursues
disciplinary action or otherwise initiates the action against the
employee, unless required by statute or court order.
D. The City's defrayal of the employee's costs of defending legal actions
shall not include any post-judgment appellate actions involving the
employee unless, in the opinion of the Corporation Counsel, it is in the
best interests of the City to pursue an appeal.
E. The City of East Orange may indemnify an employee for exemplary or
punitive damages resulting from the employee's civil violation of state
or federal law if, in the opinion of the City Council and the Mayor, upon
consultation with Corporation Counsel, the acts committed by the
employee upon which damages are based did not constitute actual
fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
F. The defense and indemnification provisions of § 23-1 shall not be
applicable when the Mayor and City Council, upon consultation with
Corporation Counsel, determine that:
(1) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment; or
(2) The employee failed to deliver to the Corporation Counsel, within
10 calendar days after the time he is served with any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the original or a
copy of the same unless excepted by the Corporation Counsel; or
§ 23-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 23-1
C:212
§ 23-2. Procedure.
(3) The employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense of the
proceeding; or
(4) A court of competent jurisdiction has determined that the act or
omission was not within the scope of employment.
G. Nothing contained in this chapter shall inure to the benefit of any
insurance company which has issued a policy of liability insurance or to
any person or entity who is obligated to indemnify the City or an
employee.
A. An employee who seeks reimbursement from the City for the costs of
defending any civil or criminal proceedings shall deliver the complaint
or the indictment to the Corporation Counsel within 10 days of the time
he is served with a complaint or indictment.
(1) In civil matters, the employee will be entitled to reimbursement for
his legal defense pursuant to § 23-1A of this chapter.
(2) In criminal matters, the employee will be entitled to
reimbursement for his legal defense pursuant to § 23-1B of this
chapter upon the successful termination of the criminal
proceedings.
(3) The employee who seeks reimbursement should retain his personal
attorney with the knowledge that he may or may not be
subsequently reimbursed by the City and that, if the employee is
reimbursed, it will be in an amount within the limits set out in
§ 23-3, even if the attorney's fees to be paid by the employee or
costs incidental to the representation are greater than that amount.
The City, under no circumstances, will be liable to any private
attorney at any time; rather the City will directly reimburse the
employee in the amount set forth in § 23-3.
B. In all civil or criminal proceedings, an employee will be barred from any
reimbursement by the City if he does not obtain a written retainer
agreement in which the attorney certifies to keep accurate and
complete records of the hours which the attorney spends on the legal
proceedings (to include the date and nature of services performed with
regard to all times, kept in tenths of an hour) from the outset of the case
and to submit an affidavit of service at the conclusion of the
proceedings setting out that detailed time information.
C. The costs incidental to the defense of an employee shall be reasonable
in nature, and Corporation Counsel shall be noticed prior to incurring
the service. Whenever possible, these costs shall be set out with
specificity in the written retainer agreement.
D. The employee, within 10 days after retaining an attorney, shall forward
a signed copy of said retainer agreement to the Corporation Counsel.
§ 23-1 CHARTER § 23-2
C:213
§ 23-3. Attorney reimbursement rate.
If the employee is entitled to reimbursement as set forth in §§ 23-1 and 23-2
of this chapter, attorney's fees shall be reimbursed at a rate set periodically
by resolution of City Council. Costs incidental to the representation may be
approved on an individual basis.
§ 23-4. Responsibility of Corporation Counsel.
§ 23-5. Expenditure of funds.
Any expenditure of funds in connection with the reimbursement of counsel
fees to an employee for defense of a legal proceeding or costs incidental
An employee who wishes to seek reimbursement of his legal expenses
in a civil or criminal proceeding shall notify the Corporation Counsel
within 20 days of the termination of that proceeding. Said employee
shall then submit the attorney's affidavit of service signed by his
attorney.
A. The Corporation Counsel in civil proceedings shall be directly involved
with the employee's retained attorney concerning any recommendation
for settlement of a civil lawsuit. The Corporation Counsel shall then
present any recommendation of settlement involving municipal funds
which exceeds nuisance value (defined as the bid threshold pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3C), which must be in the best interest of the City, to the
City Council for its approval.
B. Where a possible conflict exists between the City and the employee
acting within the scope of his official City duties, and where both are
named as parties in the same civil lawsuit, the Corporation Counsel
shall decline to represent that person.
C. In circumstances involving litigation or other legal proceedings
between two or more employees qualifying for the privileges granted
herein, the Corporation Counsel will not be required to represent or
otherwise participate on behalf of either party.
D. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the
Corporation Counsel in his judgment may provide for a defense
pursuant to this chapter by assigning an attorney from the Office of the
Corporation Counsel, employing outside counsel, utilizing counsel
through the City's third-party administrator or by asserting the City's
right under any appropriate insurance policy which requires the insurer
to provide a defense.
E. Whenever the Corporation Counsel provides for the defense of an
employee or former employee pursuant to this chapter, the Corporation
Counsel may assume exclusive control over the representation of such
employee or former employee, who shall cooperate fully with the
Corporation Counsel's efforts to defend.
§ 23-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 23-5
C:214
to the representation shall be subject to approval by resolution of the City
Council.
Chapter 25
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY; PUBLIC SAFETY
CITIZENS ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization, generally — See
Ch. 5.
Office of Emergency Management — See Ch.
5, Art. XVIII.
Division of Fire — See Ch. 14A, Art. IV.
Division of Police — See Ch. 14A, Art. X.
§ 25-1. Department created; head; divisions.
There is hereby established the Department of Public Safety, the head of
which shall be the Public Safety Director. The Department of Public Safety
shall consist of the Division of Police, the Division of Fire and the Division of
Office of Emergency Management.
§ 25-2. Director of Public Safety.
A. The Public Safety Director shall be a City official appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by City Council for a term of office coterminous
with the office of the Mayor. The Public Safety Director shall be
compensated pursuant to the appropriate Salary Ordinance
establishing the guideline for such compensation. The authority of the
Mayor to appoint the Fire Chief on an acting basis shall be subject to
the provisions of § 60-10.
B. The Public Safety Director shall be qualified by training and experience
for the duties of the position and shall have the following qualifications,
unless said qualifications are waived by affirmative vote of at least twothirds
of the entire Council: a minimum of 10 years' experience as a
member of a police department, fire department or other law
enforcement agency, five years of which shall have been in a
supervisory and administrative capacity.
C. The Public Safety Director shall be responsible for the administration,
regulation and discipline of the Division of Police, the Division of Fire
and the Office of Emergency Management.
D. The Public Safety Director shall report to the Mayor with
recommendations related to conditions of the Department and its
improvements and needs.
§ 23-5 CHARTER § 25-3
C:215
§ 25-3. Powers and duties of Director of Public Safety.
The Public Safety Director, under the supervision of the Mayor, shall:
A. Exercise such powers as set forth in the applicable statutes which shall
specifically include the powers granted to the appropriate authority
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7 et seq., and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.,
and all other applicable laws, including, but not limited to,
promulgation and adoption of rules and regulations for the government
of the Office of Emergency Management and the Police and Fire
Divisions and discipline of their members.
B. Supervise the Police Chief, Fire Chief and Director of the Office of
Emergency Management, who shall be directly responsible to the
Public Safety Director for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operations of the police and fire rank-and-file.
C. Organize the divisions according to such tables of organization as the
Director shall deem necessary and appropriate.
D. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel; establish performance criteria for the Department as a
whole as well as its individual members and conduct periodic
evaluations to assure compliance with those criteria.
E. Determine policy and direction for the Police Division, Fire Division and
Office of Emergency Management.
F. Provide recommendations to Mayor and City Council for the
establishment of ordinances to assist in the governance and
management of the Police and Fire Divisions.
G. Provide annually a report to the Mayor and City Council concerning the
state of the Office of Emergency Management, Police and Fire Divisions
and police and fire activity in the City.
H. Report to the Mayor and City Administrator.
I. Issue special emergency directives as necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the municipality in an emergency.
J. Receive daily reports or other periodic reports as designated by the
Public Safety Director from the Office of Emergency Management and
Police and Fire Chiefs, including but not limited to:
(1) Budget and expenses;
(2) Manpower allocations, including overtime, vacation, sick and
compensatory time accumulation, and usage reports for all
personnel;
(3) Accident reports;
(4) Incident reports;
§ 25-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 25-3
C:216
§ 25-4. Establishment of Public Safety Citizens Advisory Council.
The Public Safety Citizens Advisory Council is hereby established.
§ 25-5. Membership of Citizens Advisory Council.
The Public Safety Citizens Advisory Council shall consist of seven members,
one from each ward, appointed by the Council, and two members to be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by City Council for a term of three
years. The term shall be established so that no more than two terms nor
less than one term shall expire January 1 of each year. Upon the expiration
of each term, a new respective term shall be appointed as a member of the
Public Safety Citizens Advisory Council, whereupon the terms of members
so appointed shall be so established as to provide for the maximum feasible
staggering of terms.
§ 25-6. Powers and duties of Public Safety Citizens Advisory
Council.
(5) Personnel-related issues; and
(6) All general orders issued by the Office of Emergency Management
and the Police and Fire Chiefs.
K. Examine the operations of the Office of Emergency Management and
the Police and Fire Divisions and the performance of any officer or
member thereof.
L. Establish and maintain relations with school, civil and private
organizations to assure a full understanding of the public safety effort.
M. Conduct public relations and public information programs on behalf of
the Department in order to maintain the required relationship between
the Department and the citizens of the City of East Orange.
N. Promote a close liaison with the various agencies of the City of East
Orange and attend meetings of the City Council to better coordinate the
functioning of the Office of Emergency Management and the Police and
Fire Divisions with the work of all municipal agencies.
A. The Public Safety Citizens Advisory Council shall be considered a public
body as defined in the Open Public Meetings Act and shall conduct
public meetings accordingly at least four times a year. The Council shall
act by resolution subject to approval and veto by the Mayor as set forth
in § C-16 of the Charter.
B. The Citizens Advisory Council shall have the following powers:
(1) To conduct sessions to hear concerns of citizens.
(2) Recommend to the Mayor, City Administrator and Public Safety
Director policies to enhance the operation, management and
§ 25-3 CHARTER § 25-6
C:217
§ 25-7. Conflicts with other provisions.
Should any other chapter or provision of this Code conflict with the
provisions of this chapter; the terms of this chapter shall be deemed to
control and be in effect.
Chapter 28
EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Office of Emergency Management — See Ch.
5, Art. XVIII.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 100.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 28-1. Adoption authority.
The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1,
Subdivisions 6, 10, 14, 17, 18 and 20.
§ 28-2. Proclamation by Mayor.
The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a proclamation
declaring the existence of a public emergency when, in his judgment, there
shall exist in the City a breach of the peace, riot, resistance to process or
any other act which causes a threat to the maintenance of law and order or
an imminent threat of any of the foregoing.
§ 28-3. Sale, purchase or display of firearms or ammunition.
During the period when a proclamation is in effect pursuant to § 28-2:
efficiency of the East Orange Department of Public Safety and the
Divisions of Office of Emergency Management, Police and Fire.
(3) Serve as an advisory council to the Mayor and Public Safety
Director.
(4) Such other legally permissible duties and activities, except that
additional duties may be specifically designated by resolution of
City Council upon recommendation of the Mayor.
A. The sale, offer to sell, purchase, lease or loan of any ammunition, guns
and other firearms of any size or description is prohibited.
B. The display by or in any store or shop of any ammunition, guns or other
firearms of any size or description is prohibited.
§ 25-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 28-4
C:218
§ 28-4. Institution of emergency measures by Mayor.
During the period when a proclamation is in effect pursuant to § 28-2, the
Mayor is authorized and empowered to institute by proclamation any or all
of the following emergency measures for the entire City or for such portion
or portions thereof as may be designated therein and for such time or times
as may be designated therein:
§ 28-5. Publication of proclamation.
Any proclamation issued pursuant to this chapter shall be filed with the City
Clerk and published in all officially designated newspapers, provided that
its publication shall not be a condition precedent to its being effective.
§ 28-6. Termination of proclamation.
Any proclamation issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate at the end
of 15 consecutive days from the issuance thereof unless extended by further
proclamation within such period.43
Chapter 40
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 125.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
A. The prohibition of the use of all vehicular and pedestrian traffic except
for the provision of essential services, including but not necessarily
limited to fire, police and hospital services, including the transportation
of patients thereto, utility emergency repairs and emergency calls by
physicians.
B. The establishment of a curfew.
C. The prohibition of the sale of any alcoholic beverages as defined by or
pursuant to Title 33 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey. The power is
in addition to the powers conferred by Rule 2A of State Regulation No.
20 of The Rules and Regulations of the State Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
D. The closing of theaters and other places normally used for public
entertainment.
43.Editor's Note: Original § 28-7, Office of Emergency Management, which previously
followed this section, was relocated to Ch. 5, Art. XVIII, at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-4 CHARTER § 28-6
C:219
§ 40-1. Authority established.44
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and any amendments thereof or
supplements thereto, a body corporate and politic, to be known as the
"Housing Authority of the City of East Orange," is hereby created.
§ 40-2. Powers generally.
The Housing Authority of the City is hereby authorized to exercise the
powers granted to local housing authorities by any act of the Legislature of
the State or any act of the Congress of the United States of America.
§ 40-3. Redevelopment projects.45
The Housing Authority of the City is hereby authorized to adopt, initiate
and carry out any redevelopment project in accordance with the authority
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and any amendments thereof or
supplements thereto.
Chapter 43
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 43, Improvement Districts, which consisted of Art. I,
Central Avenue Business Improvement District, adopted 8-26-2002
by Ord. No. 9-2002, was repealed 5-29-2018 by Ord. No. 26-2018.]
Chapter 44
INTERLOCAL SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Water Commissioners — See Ch.
14A, Art. V.
§ 44-1. Statutory authorization.
A. By virtue of N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., Interlocal Services Act, and N.J.S.A.
40:8B-1 et seq., Interlocal Services Aid Act, or either,46 the City of East
Orange is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with the City of
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
46.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., the Interlocal Services Act, was repealed by P.L.
2007, c. 63; N.J.S.A. 40:8B-1 et seq., the Interlocal Services Aid Act, was repealed by P.L.
1999, c. 61. See now the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1
et seq.
§ 28-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 44-1
C:220
§ 44-2. Conformance of agreement to statutes.
The agreement to be executed by and between the City of Orange, the City
of East Orange and the Town of Irvington and Joint Enterprise Trusteeship
Corporation (JET) shall in all respects conform to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.
and N.J.S.A. 40:8B-1 et seq., or either.48
§ 44-3. Depositing and payment of state funds.
Such funds as may be received from the State of New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs shall be deposited with the City of East Orange and be
subject to payment to such persons, firms or corporations as may be legally
entitled to receive same in accordance with the agreement to be drawn as
set forth before and with the Joint Enterprise Trusteeship Corporation.
§ 44-4. Designating of representatives.
The City of East Orange, the City of Orange and the Town of Irvington each
shall designate a representative to serve upon the Board of Directors of JET.
Orange and Town of Irvington for the providing of services as set
forth in both statutes, or either, described as follows: homeownership
counseling, consumer credit counseling, consumer protection and
education, and business management training and technical assistance,
through Joint Enterprise Trusteeship Corporation (JET), or such
successor or other similar entity.
B. By virtue of N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., the Interlocal Services Act, the City
Council of the City of East Orange hereby consents to enter into
interlocal services agreements by and between the East Orange Board
of Water Commissioners and the North Jersey District Water Supply
Commission, or its successor or other similar entity, for the providing of
services as set forth in the statute, described as follows: management,
maintenance and operation of water systems, sewer systems and such
other and further responsibilities as are within the capacity of the East
Orange Board of Water Commissioners and its employees, as set forth
in the contract on file in the office of the City Clerk. [Added 4-8-1996
by Ord. No. 7-1996]
C. Any and all agreements under this chapter will comply with the Uniform
Shared Services and Consolidation Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq. Where
applicable, all prior agreements will be amended to comply with
N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq.47
47.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
48.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., the Interlocal Services Act, was repealed by P.L.
2007, c. 63; N.J.S.A. 40:8B-1 et seq., the Interlocal Services Aid Act, was repealed by P.L.
1999, c. 61. See now the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1
et seq.
§ 44-1 CHARTER § 44-5
C:221
§ 44-5. Required reports.
Reports as to the implementation of the agreement made under this chapter
shall be supplied by JET to the Mayors of the City of East Orange, the City of
Orange and the Town of Irvington monthly and a further quarterly updating
of previous reports.
§ 44-6. Availability of records for inspection.
The records of JET shall be open to inspection by the State of New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, the City of East Orange, the City of
Orange and Town of Irvington upon demand and without any prior notice
thereof.
§ 44-7. Payments made upon submission by vouchers.
Payment of moneys due the City of Orange and the Town of Irvington shall
be upon submission of an expense voucher: the City of East Orange to
receive services equivalent to 50% of funds set aside by the Department
of Community Affairs; the City of Orange, 25%; and the Town of Irvington,
25%.
§ 44-8. Grant funds to be deposited in general fund.
Grant funds as received by the City of East Orange shall be deposited in
the general funds of the City of East Orange and payment made as set forth
hereunder.
§ 44-9. Maintaining satellite offices.
Satellite offices shall be maintained in Orange and Irvington and shall
be readily accessible to JET and to residents of Orange and Irvington.
Satellite offices shall receive no rent assistance under the grant. Payment
for equipment used in the operation hereunder will be subject to approval
by the City of East Orange, and payment for such equipment out of grant
funds will be made either by voucher of the City of Orange or the Town of
Irvington or by voucher by JET.
§ 44-10. Management, maintenance and operation of water
systems. [Added 4-8-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
The City Council of the City of East Orange hereby consents to enter into
interlocal services agreements as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.,49
approved by the Board of Water Commissioners and subject to the approval
or veto procedures of N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(86), by and between the Board
of Water Commissioners and other local units, municipalities and public
entities, including, when appropriate, the City of East Orange, on terms and
49.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., the Interlocal Services Act, was repealed by P.L.
2007, c. 63; see now the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1
et seq.
§ 44-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 44-10
C:222
conditions in substantial conformity with the form of contract on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
Chapter 51
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 40.
Improvement districts — See Ch. 43.
Urban Enterprise Zone — See Ch. 83.
Air pollution — See Ch. 94.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 125.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 170.
Noise pollution — See Ch. 184.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Wireless communications and facilities — See
Ch. 262.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 292.
§ 44-10 CHARTER § 44-10
C:223

Part 1
Purpose; Terminology
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Scope
§ 51-1. Short title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "Land Use Ordinance of
the City of East Orange."
§ 51-2. Purposes.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
§ 51-3. Additional provisions.
A. Encourage the appropriate use and development of all lands within the
City in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare.
B. Regulate the use, size, type and location of buildings and other
structures as well as the size and location of yards and open spaces in
relation to buildings.
C. Provide for the uses of land in each district considering its peculiar
suitability for particular uses and to encourage the most appropriate
use of land.
D. Provide a zoning plan which is substantially consistent with the land
use plan element of the adopted Master Plan of the City of East Orange.
E. Provide regulations and standards to guide land subdivision and site
plan review.
F. Confer the greatest power of local self-government consistent with the
Constitution of this state to do any act authorized expressly or impliedly
by the adoption of this chapter. Any specific enumeration of municipal
powers contained in this chapter shall be construed as in addition and
supplementary to the powers conferred in general terms by the
Municipal Land Use Law50 and general statutory body of law. This
chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the City.
A. The following additional documents are incorporated into and made
part of this chapter and may be obtained from the Administrative
Officer:51
(1) The Zoning Map of the City of East Orange.
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
51.Editor's Note: These additional documents are available from the City offices.
§ 51-1 CHARTER § 51-3
C:225
(2) Application submission checklist.
(3) Zoning permit form.
B. The rules, regulations and standards set out in this chapter shall be
considered the basic requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of East Orange.
§ 51-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-3
C:226
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 51-4. Word usage.
§ 51-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A detached building separate from the principal
building on the same lot, the use of which is customarily incidental and
subordinate to that of the main buildings or to the use of the premises.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer or person in a similar
position employed within the Department of Policy, Planning and
Development of the City of East Orange.
ALLEY or SERVICEWAY — A public or private way open to public use,
primarily for service and access to the rear or side of the properties
abutting on a street.
A. All words used in this chapter in the present tense include the future
tense; all words in the plural number include the singular number and
all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless the
natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
B. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
C. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
D. The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
E. The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed, intended or
arranged to be used."
F. The term "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed,"
"reconstructed," "altered" or "moved."
G. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
H. The word "zone" includes the word "district."
I. The word "City" means the City of East Orange in the County of Essex,
State of New Jersey.
J. The terms "City Council," "Board of Adjustment," "Planning Board,"
"Construction Official" and "Administrative Officer" mean the
respective boards and officers of the City of East Orange.
K. This chapter should be interpreted consistent with the Municipal Land
Use Law, other applicable statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of
the City of East Orange, notwithstanding a specific reference to a
particular statute, rule, regulation or ordinance.
§ 51-4 CHARTER § 51-5
C:227
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency signals for wireless communications, including amateur
radio facilities, commercial wireless communication systems, commercial
telecommunications facilities, and facilities that serve mobile telephone
and data devices, which are licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure other than a
telecommunications tower which is attached to a building and on which one
or more antennas are located.
APARTMENT — One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities
comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit.
APARTMENT BUILDING — Any building or portion thereof which contains
three or more apartment dwelling units.
APARTMENTS, GARDEN — A group of residential buildings of a similar
architectural style, each building fronting either on a public street or on
a common yard or court and each building containing not fewer than four
dwelling units and being of limited height as provided in this chapter.
APARTMENTS, HIGH-RISE — A multifamily structure with a minimum
height of six stories.
APARTMENTS, MID-RISE — An apartment building containing from three
stories to not more than five stories.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APRON SHOPFRONT — A building type that is typically a commercial
property that has been converted from a single-family dwelling and
expanded with an apron, which is created when commercial design
elements are added to the ground-floor space between the original
structure and the sidewalk.
AUDITORIUM — A building or structure used for public gatherings or
meetings.
AWNING — An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it is
attached. An awning consists of a lightweight, rigid skeleton structure over
which a covering is attached. (See "valance.")
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment wherein any one or combination of the
following practices is performed by a state licensed barber:
A. Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache or other facial hair;
B. Shampooing, cutting, arranging, relaxing or styling the hair;
C. Singeing or dying of the hair;
Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams
to the hair, scalp, face or neck;
D.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:228
BASEMENT — The portion of the building that is partly underground,
which has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling,
above the average adjoining ground level. Where the natural contour of
the ground level immediately adjacent to the building is interrupted by
ditching, pits or trenching, then the average adjoining ground level shall
be the nearest natural contour line parallel to the walls of the building
without regard to the levels created by the ditching, pits or trenching. A
basement is counted as a story for the purposes of height regulation unless
it is used exclusively for incidental or accessory storage or for the housing
of mechanical equipment. (See "cellar.")
BEAUTY PARLOR or BEAUTY SALON — Any establishment where one or
a combination of the following practices is performed by a state licensed
beautician, cosmetologist-hairstylist or skin care specialist, as appropriate:
BEAUTY SCHOOL — Any establishment or place licensed by the New
Jersey State Board of Cosmetology and Hairstyling to be maintained for the
purposes of teaching cosmetology and hairstyling to registered students.
Massaging, cleansing or stimulating only the face, neck or scalp, with
or without cosmetic preparations, either by hand, mechanical or
electrical appliances; or
E.
Cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or wigs, to the extent
that the services are performed while the wig is being worn by a
person.
F.
A. Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache or other facial hair;
Shampooing, cutting, arranging, dressing, relaxing, curling, permanent
waving or styling the hair;
B.
C. Singeing, dying, tinting, coloring or bleaching of the hair;
Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions, creams or
makeup to the hair, scalp, face or neck;
D.
Massaging, cleansing or stimulating the face, neck, scalp or upper part
of the body, with or without cosmetic preparations, either by hand,
mechanical or electrical appliances;
E.
Removing superfluous hair from the face, neck, arms, legs or abdomen
by the use of depilatories, waxing or tweezers, but not by the use of
electrolysis;
F.
Cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or wigs, to the extent
that the services are performed while the wig is being worn by a
person; or
G.
Hairweaving to the extent that the procedure does not involve the
replacement of human hair by means of the insertion of any natural or
synthetic fiber hair into the scalp.
H.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:229
BILLBOARD — A sign larger than eight square feet directing attention to
or advertising a business, product, commodity, service, entertainment or
facility not located, conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where
such sign is located or which calls public attention to a candidate, cause or
public issue. (See "sign, advertising"; "sign, pylon"; "sign, roof" and "sign,
wall-mounted.")
BILLBOARD, DIGITAL — A billboard that incorporates digital video display
technology within all or part of its display area and is a type of sign that is
not permitted in any part of the City of East Orange, New Jersey.
BLOCK — A set of properties abutting on one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between
the nearest intersecting or intercepting street and a railroad right-of-way,
parking, boundary or waterway.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
BOARDINGHOUSE, CLASS A — Any dwelling regulated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:13B-1 et seq., whether furnished or unfurnished, with one or more
independent rooming units in which there are sleeping accommodations
occupied by or available for occupancy by four or more persons and where
meals are regularly served by the owner or operator of said dwelling; and
where there is no agreement between operator and occupant to assist in
bathing or dressing or providing other type of supervision; and by reason
of the same, the accommodations are not suited for occupancy by disabled
persons or persons requiring special care in accordance with Chapter 159;
except that hotels, as defined by N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3, containing 15 or more
rooms or accommodating 30 or more persons, shall be excluded therefrom.
BOARDINGHOUSE, CLASS B — Any dwelling regulated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:13B-1 et seq., whether furnished or unfurnished, with one or more
independent rooming units in which there are sleeping accommodations
occupied by or available for occupancy by one or more adult persons
and where meals are regularly served by the owner or operator to the
occupants; and where, by reason of the needs of the occupants, there
is provided assistance in bathing or dressing or providing other types of
supervision to assure safety at all times to all of the occupants, and thereby
occupancy is suited to persons requiring special care but not for disabled
persons. Where not more than two disabled persons or persons requiring
special care, as defined in Chapter 159, live with persons to whom they are
related by blood or marriage as part of a common household, the dwelling
unit in which they reside shall not be a Class B boardinghouse pursuant to
this definition.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
largest level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive
of uncovered decks, terraces and steps but inclusive of porches.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:230
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front lot line at any story level of a
building and representing the inner edge of the front yard setback and the
corresponding outer edge of the buildable area.
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING TYPE — A structure that is determined by a building's height,
scale, use and location of the building on its lot.
CANOPY — An architectural projection or structure without walls that
provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is supported by the
building to which it is attached and/or support posts. A canopy also includes
a rigid structure over which a covering is attached, such as those used at
formal building entrances, and it includes the canopies used to provide a
roof-like structure above gasoline filling station pumps.
CELLAR — The lowermost portion of the building partly or totally
underground, having 1/2 or more of its height, measured from clear floor to
ceiling, below the average adjoining ground level or with a floor-to-ceiling
height of less than 6 1/2 feet. Where the natural contour of the ground
level immediately adjacent to the building is interrupted by ditching, pits
or trenching, then the average adjoining ground level shall be the nearest
natural contour line parallel to the walls of the building without regard to
the levels created by the ditching, pits or trenching. A cellar is not included
in computing the number of stories for the purposes of height measurement.
(See also "basement.")
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An establishment which provides care and
supervision of preschool or school-age children during all or part of the
day and which is licensed, staffed and equipped in accordance with the
requirements of the State of New Jersey.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, vehicles, water, air, sewage or power by such
means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes
and conduits and the handling of people and goods by such means as
terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or
transshipment points.
CLUB — A building or premises reserved for the exclusive use of members
of an organization and their guests for civic, charitable, social or
recreational purpose not conducted for gain or profit.
CO-LOCATION — Use of common personal wireless communications
facilities (PWTF) or a common site by two or more wireless license holders
or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications
technology and/or placement of a PWTF on a structure owned or operated
by a utility or other public entity.
COMMERCIAL DISPLAY WINDOW — An area immediately inside an
exterior window of a commercial establishment, dedicated to the display of
merchandise and/or information regarding products and services furnished
by the establishment.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:231
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every type of vehicle registered and used for
commercial purposes, such as transportation of goods, wares, merchandise
and passengers, except vehicles of the passenger-car type and the type
commonly known as "station wagons," but including trailers and
construction equipment of every kind.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility, licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1
et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under supervision
as required, to not more than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally ill
persons as defined under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2a.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter as approved and certified by New Jersey Department of Human
Services, providing food, shelter, medical care and other services to not
more than 15 persons who have been victims of domestic violence.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — A completed application form and
accompanying maps and documents submitted by a developer as required
in Article XI (§§ 51-60 through 51-66) of this chapter and certified by the
Administrative Officer.
COMPUTER SERVER HOUSING FACILITY — A structure or portion of a
structure where the principal use is the housing of computer servers for offsite
computer operations such as for backup data storage, Internet service
hosting, or remote server hosting. Facilities known as "Internet hotels" or
"telecom hotels" are included in this definition.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location and/or operation of such
use as contained in Chapter 51, Land Use, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A
development of residential dwelling units exclusively for persons who are
at least 62 years of age or older, which provides a continuum of
accommodations and care, including at least the following three
components: independent living, assisted living and nursing care units;
and which provides continuing care as an integral part of the residential
development. Continuing care for a CCRC permitted use is the provision of
lodging and nursing, medical or other health-related services at the CCRC
or another location to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective
for the life of the individual or for a period greater than one year and in
consideration of the payment of an entrance fee, with or without other
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:232
periodic charges, provided that the person receiving the care is not related
to the person who provides the care.
COURT — An unoccupied space, other than yard space, unobstructed to
the sky, bounded on three or more sides by exterior building walls or
other enclosing devices, on the same lot with a building. A court extending
to a yard is an outer court. The length of an outer court is the mean
horizontal distance between the open and closed ends of the court. The least
dimension of a court at any level is the least of the horizontal dimensions
between the ends of the court and shall be deemed to be the mean distance
between these ends. The height of a court at any given level shall be
measured from the lowest level of such court as actually constructed or
from the curb level, whichever is higher.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by building area.
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street or alley with a turnaround at the end.
DECK — A roofless, floored structure, typically with a railing, that adjoins a
structure. (See "porch.")
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or
of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure or of land or extension of use of land, for
which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter. This definition
includes the subdivision of land.
DIGITAL BILLBOARD — See "billboard, digital."
DISABLED VEHICLE — A vehicle in, upon or by which a person or property
may be transported, which is in such state or condition that it is incapable
of being operated under its own power or is in such state or condition that,
if operated, it would constitute a hazard.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and the means necessary for water supply preservation or for prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — A facility utilized for the on-site
consumption of alcoholic beverages subject to the regulations of the
Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
DRUG ADDICTION — The compulsive or habitual use of any narcotic drugs,
as defined in N.J.S.A. 24:21-2.52
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:233
DRUG CENTER — Any building wherein the acts of prevention of drug
addiction, attempted cure of drug addiction or treatment of the same is
carried on.
DWELLING — Any structure designed for use by human occupants for
sleeping and living purposes, whether occupied or vacant, except that the
foregoing shall not apply to hotels as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure containing three or more
dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — Any dwelling containing only one dwelling
unit, within which unit there shall be no more than two roomers without
incidental cooking facilities.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (ETC.) — Where the term "dwelling" is modified
by designation of the number of families, the same shall by modifying term
be construed to mean that the building is designed to contain the number
of dwelling units equivalent to the number of families specified.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
forming independent living facilities for one or more persons living as a
single housekeeping unit, which includes permanent facilities for living,
sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT (see also "RESTAURANT") —
Retail establishment selling food and drink for consumption on the
premises.
FACADE — The principal exterior face(s) of a building to the street,
including, but not limited to, the wall, windows, window sills, doorways and
such traditional design elements as horizontal lines, cornice and parapet.
FAMILY — One or more persons not necessarily related by blood, marriage,
adoption or guardianship living together as a single housekeeping unit
under a common housekeeping management plan based upon an
intentionally structured relationship.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A home occupation in a private residence
approved by the Division of Youth and Family Services (DYFS) or provided
by an organization with which DYFS contracts for family day care, in which
child-care services are provided to no fewer than three and no more than
five children for no less than 15 hours per week.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment taken on a preliminarily approved major subdivision
or site plan after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements
have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guaranties properly posted for their completion or approval
conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
FLAG — Any fabric or flexible material attached to or designed to be
flown from a flagpole or other similar structure and which represents
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:234
or symbolizes an organization, group, cause, event, activity, or unit of
government.
FLAT — A dwelling unit, regardless of ownership or rental tenancy,
comprising all of its habitable space in a single floor of a multistory
residential or mixed-use building.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The entire floor area of a building measured for
each floor.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The entire floor area of a building measured for each
floor to the interior perimeter of the exterior wall of the building, other
than the cellar, halls, vestibules, elevator shafts, stairwells and toilet areas,
which shall not be included; provided, however, that where the cellar is
utilized for any purposes other than utilities and storage, then the cellar
area shall be included in the calculation of total floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the aggregate area of all floors of
buildings or structures as measured at the exterior walls of each floor
relative to the total area of the lot.
FREESTANDING — A building or structure, including billboards, built
directly on and anchored to the land and not attached to any other
structure.
GARAGE, ACCESSORY — An accessory building or part of a main building
used for the storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use.
GARAGE, AUTO BODY — A building or part thereof used for auto body
work, auto body spray painting or auto body welding.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — Any building or premises used only for the
storage of one or more automobiles, commercial trucks or other selfpropelled
vehicles owned and used by not more than one person, firm or
corporation and where such vehicles are incidentally serviced.
GARAGE, PARKING — Any building or premises used only for the housing of
motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and at which automobile
fuels and oils are not sold to the general public and motor vehicles are not
equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building designed for the storage of not more than
three motor vehicles, of which not more than one truck may exceed 1/2 ton
and in which no other business, services or industry connected with motor
vehicles is conducted or rendered.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building or premises in which a business, service
or industry connected with motor vehicles is conducted or rendered and
shall include all premises used for motor vehicles, either housed or
unhoused, except automobile salerooms conducted exclusively for the
exhibition of such vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building or part thereof, other than an accessory
garage or parking garage, used for the storage, care or repair of motor
vehicles, including the sale of fuel and lubricants but not including auto
body work, welding or spray painting.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:235
GARDEN APARTMENTS — See "apartments, garden."
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — Any premises designed for the sale of
gasoline and for other sales and services incidental to operation of motor
vehicles and in conjunction therewith, but not including any auto repair
shop, licensed parking lot for fee, or other industrial services.
GRADE — The curb level on a level lot. Where the lot level is higher or lower
than the curb level, the average level along the wall in question shall be
taken as the base for measuring the height of a building, yard or court.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured in the case of
flat roofs from the curb level to the level of the highest point of the roof
beams adjacent to the street wall, and in the case of pitched roofs, from the
curb level to the average height of the gable. In the case of both flat roofs
and pitched roofs, the measurement shall be made through the center of
the street facade. Where no roof beams exist or there are structures wholly
or partly above the roof, the height shall be measured from the curb level
to the level of the highest point of the building. Where the front wall of a
building is more than 20 feet from the street line, the average level of the
ground adjoining the walls of the building may be taken in measuring its
height instead of the curb level.
HIGH-RISE APARTMENTS — See, "apartments, high-rise."
HIGH-RISE OFFICE STRUCTURE — A multistory structure at least four
stories in height, containing elevators and used as business, professional or
governmental offices.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any legal occupation performed by a state-licensed
professional within a residential dwelling, other than that of operating a
beauty parlor, barbershop, boardinghouse, lodging house or nursing home
(including tourist home and convalescent home), massage or similar
establishment, offering services to the general public and subject to
standards under Article XXIII (§ 51-122). Such use shall not have any
signage, no employees other than members of the household, no deliveries
above one delivery by parcel-post type service per day, and no display from
the exterior that would indicate that the premises is being used for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling.
HOSPITAL — A facility for the primary health services and medical or
surgical treatment of patients, for in-hospital and outpatient care, and
including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as
laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices and
staff residences.
HOTEL — Any building having sleeping rooms that are provided for hire,
with or without meals or meeting facilities. Any hotel permitted by Chapter
51, Land Use, shall meet the following criteria:
A. It shall not be a permanent/primary residence for its users.
B. It shall not contain a self-service guest laundry.
C. No guest shall use the hotel as his residential address.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:236
JUNKYARD — The use of the area of any lot for the storage, keeping,
placing, collecting, storing or abandoning of any waste or discarded
materials obtained from dismantled buildings, old iron or other metal or
substance, glass, paper, machine parts, accessories, discarded machines in
whole or in part, motor vehicles not in operating condition, used parts of
motor vehicles and any material acquired or collected commercially and
commonly known as "junk" in the ordinary meaning of the word or any of
the above items. Exempt from this definition is a structure's garbage room
or site's enclosure for temporary storage only of waste generated on site.
LAND — Ground, soil or earth, including structures on, above or below the
surface.
LINER BUILDING — A building type that is a building or portion of a
building constructed between the facade of a parking garage, cinema,
supermarket or other large building and that building's lot line to conceal
large expanses of blank wall area. Liner buildings face the street with a
facade that has ample doors and windows opening onto the sidewalk.
LIVE-WORK BUILDING — A building that combines living space with work
space that is related to the livelihood of the building's occupants. All of
these uses may occupy any story of the building. A live-work building may
include one unit or multiple units and may be an attached or detached unit.
LIVING FLOOR SPACE — The area of all portions of the dwelling actually
used for or designed to be used by the residents thereof for cooking, eating,
sleeping, recreation and storage of personal belongings and effects.
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space not less than 12 feet wide and 45
feet long and having a clearance height of 15 feet, surfaced to be available
in all weather, suitable for the loading or unloading of goods and having
direct access to a street or an alley.
LODGING HOUSE — Any dwelling, whether furnished or unfurnished, in
which there are one or more independent rooming units where there are
sleeping accommodations for occupancy or available for occupancy by four
or more persons and where there is no agreement between the operator and
any occupant for feeding, personal care or special supervision or attention,
except that hotels, as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3, containing 15 or more
rooms or accommodating 30 or more persons shall be excluded therefrom.
(See "hotel.")
Minimum rental period for each sleeping or other non-meeting-type
room shall be 24 hours; maximum period is six months.
D.
All rooms shall only have access by way of a common lobby and hallway.
There can be no direct access to a room from a parking space by way of
an outside doorway at the room or direct access to a garage. "Motels"
or "motor hotels" shall not be permitted.
E.
Minimum guest room size shall be 150 square feet, and minimum
bathroom size for each room shall be 60 square feet. (See "lodging
house.")
F.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:237
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot covered by the sum of the largest
floor areas of all structures, both principal and accessory.
LOT DEPTH — The length of a straight line drawn from the center of the
front lot line to the center of the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The narrower side of the lot abutting a street,
regardless of the location of the principal entrance of a building thereon.
Where two lot lines abutting streets are of equal width, the owner shall have
a choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The street line of a lot.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line which is most distant from and most nearly
parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot abutting on two parallel or approximately parallel
streets.
LOT WIDTH — The mean width of a lot measured at right angles to its depth
at the building line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARQUEE — A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by
the building and that projects into the public right-of-way.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality, as set forth in and adopted
pursuant to § 19 of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.53
MEDICAL ARTS CENTER — A type of office structure containing a group
of professional offices for medical and osteopathic physicians, dentists and
other practitioners having state licenses in the healing arts. The building
may contain a pharmacy which is not visible, identified or accessible
directly from the street.
MID-RISE APARTMENTS — See "apartments, mid-rise."
53.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:238
MINOR SITE PLAN —
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Subdivision of land for the creation of three
or fewer lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve a planned
development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract improvement.
MIXED-USE — A building or building type that includes more than one use.
MOBILE HOME — Any portable or mobile structure or vehicle used as
a dwelling unit or for sleeping purposes, whether or not such vehicle or
structure is attached to a foundation.
NAIL SALON — Any business operated by a state-licensed manicurist,
cosmetologist-hairstylist or beautician whose primary purpose is providing
manicures, pedicures or other fingernail and/or toenail cosmetic treatment.
NIGHTCLUB — All buildings and places of public assembly, including all
rooms, lobbies and other spaces connected thereto with a common means of
egress and entrance, designed for use as dance halls, eating and/or drinking
establishments, and similar occupancies, in which the established maximum
permitted occupant load exceeds the number of seats provided by more
than 30% or which affords less than 12 square feet net area per occupant in
the room or rooms used for public assembly.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of Chapter 51, Land Use, but which fails to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of Chapter 51, Land Use, but which fails
A development plan of one or more lots, which does not involve:
Planned development of any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated;
(1)
An enlargement of an existing building by not more than the lesser
of 2,000 square feet or 10% of the floor area or construction of a
building of less than 2,000 square feet;
(2)
An enlargement of existing driveways and parking areas and
related site improvements by more than the lesser of 10% of the lot
area or 1,000 square feet.
(3)
A.
A minor site plan also does not consist of a:
(1) Planned unit development of two acres or more;
(2) Multiple-dwelling developments consisting of more than 20 units;
(3) Industrial development;
Commercial development with more than three stories or 5,000
square feet of floor area or lot area.
(4)
B.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:239
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME — Any building in which two or more disabled persons, as
defined in Chapter 159 of the Code of the City of East Orange, are housed
for purposes of care, special attention, treatment or supervision and are
housed for such purposes overnight or longer, but dwellings where not more
than two disabled persons live with members of their families to whom they
are related by blood or marriage shall be excluded therefrom.
OFFICE OF A PHYSICIAN, SURGEON, DENTIST, LAWYER OR OTHER
LICENSED STATE PROFESSIONAL — An office for or containing only one
professional practitioner.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN-AIR PARKING STATIONS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES — See "parking
lot."
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or land area or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OUTDOOR USABLE OPEN SPACE — Any outside area on a lot which is
accessible or available to all occupants of the building on such lot and is
allocated, appropriately designed, developed and maintained for outdoor
recreation purposes. Area required may be provided by private balconies
having a minimum width of 4 1/2 feet and a minimum length of six feet.
Those areas designated or used for driveways, parking, services and the
required front yard shall not be considered "outdoor usable open space,"
provided that a ground level surface area provided on top of underground
parking or service facilities, if otherwise suitable and appropriate, may be
included in the computation as required herein.
OWNER — The owner or owners in fee of the property of a lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, and assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or any other person, firm or corporation,
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:240
directly or indirectly in control of a building, structure or real property, and
shall include any subdivision thereof of the state.
PARKING AREA — Any open, unoccupied space used or required for use for
parking of private automobiles or other private vehicles exclusively, and in
which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold and no other business
is conducted.
PARKING LOT — An open-air plot of ground, lot or land on which motor
vehicles are parked, kept or located for a parking fee or parking charge
and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold and no other
business is conducted. (See "parking structure.")
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — An off-street space available for the
parking of one motor vehicle, being at least nine feet wide and 18 feet in
length, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto, and
having direct usable access to a street or alley. All parking spaces, whether
open or enclosed, shall be paved.
PARKING SPACE, ON-STREET — A space within the right-of-way of a street
available for the parking of one vehicle approved in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
PARKING STRUCTURE — A multistory structure within which motor
vehicles are parked, kept or located for a parking fee or parking charge,
and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold and no other
business is conducted. (See "parking lot.")
PAROCHIAL SCHOOL — A primary or secondary school supported by a
religious organization.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by a
municipality, including cash, provided that a municipality shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PERSONAL SERVICE — Use related to the office or place of business
maintained for conduct of one of the following legal occupations: cleaner,
barber, tailor, beautician, manicurist or similar occupations.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES — Facilities for the provision
of personal wireless services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
FACILITIES (PWTEFs) — Accessory facilities serving and subordinate in
area, extent and purpose to, and on the same lot as, a telecommunications
tower or antenna location. Such facilities include, but are not limited to,
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:241
transmission equipment, storage sheds, storage buildings and security
fencing.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (PWTFs) —
Facilities for the provision of wireless communications services, including,
but not limited to, antennas, antenna support structure,
telecommunications towers and related facilities other than PWTFs.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — A building or portion thereof designated
and built for the gathering of a group of persons for civic, political, travel,
religious, social, public or recreational purposes. No house of worship,
school, club, charitable institution or college or any place of public assembly
shall be of frame or combustible construction, except the roof, as shall be
approved by the Construction Official.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance, to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and any
residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be
permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance, to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters or planned
unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential
uses to residential uses as shall be specified in this chapter.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of five acres or more to be developed as
a single entity according to a plan, containing one or more residential
clusters, which may include appropriate commercial or public or quasipublic
uses, all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Municipal Planning Board established pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PODIUM BUILDING — A building type that is a variant of the liner building
type, but which has a small footprint on the ground level at the front of the
lot with the rest of the lot devoted to parking spaces and auto circulation;
with larger floors on the second floor (and higher floors, if applicable) above
all or some of the parking spaces.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:242
PORCH — A covered platform structure, usually having a separate roof, at
an entrance to a building. (See "deck.")
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
this chapter of the Code of the City of East Orange prior to final approval
after specified elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by
the Planning Board and the applicant.
PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICE — The office of a state-licensed
professional located within a residential dwelling.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic historic sites; and sites
for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate
public body or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land reserved or dedicated for
the installation and maintenance of stormwater sewers, drainage ditches
and sanitary sewers or required along a natural stream or watercourse for
preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water to safeguard the
public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space conveyed or otherwise dedicated to
a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or county agency
or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
REDEVELOPER — Any person, firm, corporation or public body that shall
enter into or propose to enter into a contract with a municipality or other
redevelopment entity for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of an area
in need of redevelopment or an area in need of rehabilitation, or any
part thereof, or for any construction or other work forming part of a
redevelopment or rehabilitation project, under the provisions of the New
Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — A contiguous or noncontiguous area to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing residential
housing units which have a common or public open space area as an
appurtenance as defined by the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
RESTAURANT (see also "EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT") —
An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed
within the principal building in which the food is prepared.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment whose principal business is
the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer,
where food is in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within
the restaurant building or in cars off the premises and where by design
of physical facilities customers may receive food and/or beverages while
remaining in their vehicles.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:243
RESTAURANT, TAKEOUT — An establishment where food and/or beverages
are sold in a form ready for consumption, where all or a significant portion
of the consumption takes place outside the confines of the restaurant.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of
any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but not including conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
ROADWAY, PRIVATE — Any roadway providing private access to property.
Such roadway shall have a minimum width of 22 feet and may be continuous
or shall provide a minimum turning radius of 75 feet which is not used
for parking and shall be constructed under specifications and in a manner
satisfactory to the Director of Public Works.
ROOMER — An occupant of a rooming house who is not a member of the
family of the operator of that rooming house; and also an occupant of a
dwelling unit who is not the primary occupant of the dwelling unit.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "lodging house."
ROOMING UNITS — Any habitable room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit, used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
for cooking or eating.
SCHOOL, BUSINESS — A school listed to special instruction, such as in
business, art, music, trades, handicraft, dancing or riding, except that no
such school may be provided in the cellar or basement of a frame building.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — An elementary or intermediate school other than
a parochial school giving regular instruction capable of meeting the
requirements of state compulsory education laws and approved as such and
operating at least five days a week for a normal school year and supported
by other than public funds.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SENIOR CARE COMMUNITY (SCC) — A development of residential living
units exclusively for persons who are at least 62 years of age or older,
which provides a continuum of accommodations and care, including at
least the following three components: independent living, assisted living
and nursing care units; and which provides continuing care as an integral
part of the residential development. Continuing care is the provision of
lodging and nursing, medical or other health-related services at the SCC.
Each component of an SCC development shall be subject to all of the
requirements of the State of New Jersey relating to each particular
permitted use. To qualify for approval as an SCC, the applicant must
demonstrate that the SCC has received or will be able to receive all
necessary state approvals for each component of the SCC.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:244
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A business establishment conducted to
render a personal service, including shoe repair shops, dry-cleaning shops
and laundries, or conducted to render a household service, including the
repair of watches, clocks, locks, furniture, radios, television sets and other
household appliances, but not including the repair of furnaces and boilers,
refrigerators, air conditioners and other articles of similar bulk and weight.
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of two or more commercial
establishments built primarily for retailing purposes on common property,
planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit, with a gross leasable area
of at least 10,000 square feet and common off-street parking provided on
the same site.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or painted
on or displayed in any manner or represented thereon which displays or
includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device
or representation, visible to the public right-of-way or other properties,
used as or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or
advertisement. For the purposes of this chapter, the word "sign" does not
include billboards or the flag, pennant or insignia of any national, state or
other political unit or of any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic,
civic, professional or religious organization.
SIGN, ADDRESS — A sign that indicates the address of the property.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than upon the premises or not exclusively related to the premises.
SIGN, A-FRAME — An A-shaped, portable, freestanding, business sign used
for advertising commodities, services or entertainment conducted upon the
premises where the sign is located.
SIGN AREA — The smallest rectangle comprising the dimensions of a sign
and enclosing all letters, symbols and other devices, or comprising the area
of its background if distinguishable from a larger background, such as the
wall of a building. The sign area does not include poles, bases or other
supports or embellishments to the sign structure.
SIGN, AWNING — A building-mounted, framed structure with reinforced
fabric covering that projects from the face of the building.
SIGN, BANNER — A sign made of fabric or other similar nonrigid material
with no enclosing framework or electrical components that is supported or
anchored on two or more points or edges or at all four corners. Banner signs
also include nonrigid signs anchored along one edge, or two corners, with
weights installed that reduce the reaction of the sign to wind.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign that directs attention to a permitted profession,
office, business, commercial enterprise or industry conducted upon the
premises, which sign shall be deemed an integral part of that profession,
office, business, commercial enterprise or industry.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:245
SIGN, CIVIC — A sign that directs attention to an event of any political,
educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or
similar noncommercial organization, but not including any political sign.
SIGN, ENTRANCE CANOPY — A sign mounted, painted or otherwise
applied on or attached to a fixed canopy or awning constructed to provide
protection at the entrance of a building, either supported entirely from a
building or supported partly from a building and with posts.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by uprights or braces or placed
upon the ground and not attached to any building.
SIGN, GASOLINE PUMP ISLAND CANOPY — A business sign flush-mounted
on the vertical surface of a gasoline pump island canopy above the pumps
of a gasoline filling station. (See "canopy, gasoline pump island.")
SIGN HEIGHT — The dimension measured vertically from the ground level
to the highest point of a sign.
SIGN, HOLIDAY DECORATION — A temporary sign, in the nature of
decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily associated with
recognized federal, state, local or religious holidays, and which contains no
advertising message.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign used to identify the name or address
of a building, attached or unattached to the building, or the name of the
management thereof.
SIGN ILLUMINATION — The lighting of a sign to enhance its visibility.
SIGN ILLUMINATION, AMBIENT — The sign is visible at night only by light
indirectly falling upon it from other fixtures, such as street lamps.
SIGN ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL — External lights are separate from the
sign assembly but are intended to be the primary source of illumination
for the sign. External lights are usually mounted above or below a sign.
Examples of external lighting are gooseneck lamps or down-lighting
fixtures.
SIGN ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL — Internal lighting elements are
included in the sign assembly, such that the sign is lit from within.
SIGN ILLUMINATION, NEON — The sign itself is made from illuminated
neon tubes.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign used for the direction and convenience of the
public, including but not limited to signs which identify restrooms, parking
lot and parking structure entrances and delivery entrances.
SIGN, MARQUEE — A sign attached flush to or inscribed on a marquee,
which is a structure attached to or supported by a building and projecting
over the public right-of way.
SIGN, MESSAGE BOARD — A sign used to announce events conducted
upon the premises on which the sign is located or to indicate the names of
persons associated with the event or the services offered upon the premises.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:246
SIGN, MESSAGE BOARD, ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — A message board
sign whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic information content is
changed or altered, entirely or in any part, on a display surface composed
of electrically illuminated or mechanically driven changeable segments.
SIGN, MESSAGE BOARD, ELECTRONIC FIXED-MESSAGE — A message
board sign whose information content has been preprogrammed to include
only certain types of changeable information, such as time, temperature,
traffic conditions, or other content subject to prior programming.
SIGN, MESSAGE BOARD, ELECTRONIC VARIABLE-MESSAGE — A
message board sign whose information content can be changed or altered
by means of computer-driven electronic impulses.
SIGN, MESSAGE BOARD, MANUALLY ACTIVATED — A message board sign
whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic information content is changed
or altered by manual means.
SIGN, MONUMENT — A freestanding business or civic sign supported
primarily by solid structural features, where the entire bottom of the sign is
affixed to a base on the ground.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — An identification sign attached or unattached to
a building or structure, showing the name and address of the person
occupying the building and not exceeding one square foot in area.
SIGN, NEON — An illuminated sign affected by a colorless, odorless light
source consisting of a neon or gas tube that is bent to form letters, symbols
or other shapes.
SIGN, OUTDOOR DISPLAY CASE — A square or rectangular case used for
the advertising of cinema or other on-site attractions, affixed to the wall of
a theater or the front facade thereof.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A sign advancing the candidacy of any candidate or
group of candidates for public office, expressly excluding, however, any
such signs posted or displayed on existing commercial billboards by or with
the consent of the owner thereof and any such signs posted or displayed on
licensed motor vehicles in operating condition; provided, however, that no
such vehicle is parked or placed in any location for the primary purpose of
displaying any such sign. Such signs may not be displayed on any trees or
lighting stanchions or other public property.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is movable and not permanently attached to
a building or the ground, including A-frame signs, portable message boards
on wheels or trailers, gas-filled or inflated balloons, and similar signs.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A business sign or civic sign that is attached to a
building or structure, extending in whole or in part beyond the building line
but perpendicular to the building line.
SIGN, PYLON — A freestanding, business sign supported above the ground
by one or more supports.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected, constructed and maintained upon or over
the roof of any building with the principal support of the roof structure.
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:247
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature.
SIGN, VIDEO DISPLAY — A sign placed inside a window consisting of
electronically generated text and images displayed on a computer monitor,
television screen, LCD photo frame, or similar device.
SIGN, WALL-MOUNTED — Any sign of solid-face or open-face construction
which is placed against a building and attached to the exterior front, rear
or side wall of any building.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign posted, painted, placed or affixed to the interior
or exterior of a window, also including signs that face the interior of a
window and are exposed to public view within three feet of the window and
not including merchandise within a window display.
SIGNBAND — A standardized strip on one or more facades of a building for
wall-mounted signs.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utilities services, landscaping, structures, signs and lighting and screening
devices; and any other information that may be reasonably required by
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment in order to make an informed
determination pursuant to this chapter regarding review and approval of
site plans.
STABILIZED BUSINESS OCCUPANCY — In determining the stabilized
business occupancy for the application of parking or other standards
contained herein, the Administrative Officer shall base his/her
determination upon the actual roster of employees and other persons
working on the premises on a daily basis; the usual number of persons
needed to operate an establishment of the type and size involved; and
such adjustments as may be necessary to establish an average use of the
premises in light of peak periods, summer vacations and other special
circumstances.
STORY — That part of a building, other than a cellar or basement, between
any floor and the floor or top of roof rafters next above. Any story under the
pitched roof, the floor of which is not more than two feet below the plate,
shall be counted as a half story.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building situated above a full story and
having at least two opposite exterior walls meeting a sloping roof at a level
not higher above the floor than five feet zero inches.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or which
is approved by official action as provided by this chapter or which is shown
on a plat filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:248
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board
of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulder,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
lines.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot.
STREET WALL — The street wall of a building at any level is the wall or
part of the building nearest to the street line. Porches, piazzas or other
structures attached to the building, except roofless steps, shall be
considered as a part of the building.
STREET WIDTH — The mean distance between the right-of-way lines
thereof within a block. The right-of-way lines form the boundaries of a strip
of land acquired by reservation, dedication or condemnation to be occupied
or occupied by a street or road.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in structural
parts, including but not limited to partition walls, bearing walls, beams and
girders or in the existing facilities; or an enlargement, either by extending
on a front, side, cubical content or square footage or by increasing in height;
or the moving of any building or part thereof from one location to another.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction or part of
a construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on,
above or below the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered "subdivisions" within the meaning
of this chapter if no streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes, where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size;
(1)
(2) Division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
(3) Divisions of property upon court order;
Conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument; and
(4)
The assemblage of land and resale of any tract or parcel by the
Chairman of the Housing Authority of the City or other public
agency to any resale by a redeveloper purchasing land from the
Housing Authority or other public agency or body and thereafter
subdividing any such tract or parcel as established by the
Chairman of the Housing Authority or other public agency or body.
(5)
A.
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:249
SUPERMARKET — A building, used as a departmentalized, usually selfservice,
retail market of a chain-store system or an independent, selling
foods and other household merchandise and which contains a total floor
area of 8,000 square feet or more.
TAXI STAND — Such portion or portions of the public street or highway
designated by the City Council as a place in which licensed commercial taxis
may stand or temporarily park.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A freestanding structure on which
one or more antennas are located, including lattice towers, guyed towers,
monopoles and similar structures.
TERRACE — A platform structure extending outdoors from a floor of a
house or apartment building, or a patio or other open, often paved, area
adjacent to a house serving as an outdoor living space.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to public
entertainment, with permanently installed lighting, projection and sound
equipment and associated facilities for motion pictures, concerts and/or
stage productions.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling with one or two dwelling units that has no
fewer than two stories or more than three-and-a-half stories, a common or
party fire wall with an adjacent unit on the other side of the common or
party fire wall, and with a street and/or yard on at least two sides of the
unit.
TOWNHOUSE DWELLING STRUCTURE — A structure containing at least
two townhouse units.
TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES — Temporary residential living
units for groups of persons, no more than four in number, who are still
receiving some type of medical or psychiatric care or supervision.
TRANSIT VILLAGE DISTRICTS (TVD) — Zoning districts and/or
redevelopment plan areas in the section of the City located within 1/2
mile of the Brick Church Station. Transit village zoning districts and
redevelopment plan areas are as follows:
VC District Village Core Transit District and Muir's Berkeley
Redevelopment Area
ES District Evergreen/Halsted and Evergreen Square Redevelopment
Areas
MSE District Lower Main Street Redevelopment Area - Phase I and Phase
II
CAE District Central Avenue Entertainment District
TR-2 District Transit Area Medium Density Residential
TR-3 District Transit Area Multifamily Structures, Townhouses, Garden
Apartments
TR-4 District Transit Area Multifamily Structures, High-Rise Apartments,
Hotels
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:250
T-RO District Transit Area High-Rise Multifamily Structures; Offices
NW District North Walnut Street Redevelopment Area
LM District Lower Main Street Area Phase 2 Area
TWIN — A structure with only two side-by-side townhouse dwelling units
sharing a single common or party fire wall with the adjacent unit along a
shared property line and with open space on at least three sides of each
unit.
UNDERGROUND STRUCTURE — Any structure or part hereof, whether
separate or part of a main building, which does not protrude above the
finished ground level in the front yard or side yard with street frontage
and does not protrude more than 2 1/2 feet above the finished ground level
at any other point. In no case shall the finished ground level be graded
to an unnatural configuration above or below the existing ground level of
adjoining properties.
UNDUE HARDSHIP — The circumstance where special conditions, which
were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict
conformity with the restrictions governing dimensional standards, including
lot area, lot width, setbacks, yard requirements, or building height,
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this
chapter. Undue hardship is present only where, in the absence of a variance,
no feasible use can be made of the property.
USE — The specific purpose or purposes for which land or a building is
designed, intended, occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use which is customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use of a lot or a building and located on the same lot
therewith.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The primary purpose for which land or a building is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
USE VARIANCE — An appeal to allow a structure or use within a district
that is restricted against such structure or use in particular cases and for
special reasons.
USED CAR LOT — Any area where two or more vehicles in operating
condition are offered for sale or are displayed other than within a
completely enclosed structure.
VALANCE — The narrow vertical hanging flap at the front edge of an
awning. (See "awning.")
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA), which
includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging,
and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be
developed. It does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned
§ 51-5 CHARTER § 51-5
C:251
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is
used exclusively for receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular
telephone service.
YARD — An open space of uniform width or depth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings, which lies between the building or group of
buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward, except as provided in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across any street side of a lot between
the side lot lines, the depth of which yard is the minimum horizontal
distance between the street line and the main building or any accessory
building or any projection of either, other than roofless steps, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot, the depth of
which yard is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the rear of the main building or any projection thereof, other than roofless
steps, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. On both corner lots and
interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot
from the front yard for which the property is addressed.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the building and the side lot line extending
from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which yard is the minimum
horizontal distance between the side lot line and the adjacent side of the
main building or any projection thereof, other than roofless steps, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Municipal Zoning Board of
Adjustment established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
ZONING OFFICER — This shall be the functional position of a member of
the staff of the Department of Policy, Planning and Development appointed
to administer Chapter 51, Land Use, of the City of East Orange, including
its interpretation and enforcement.
ZONING ORDINANCE — Chapter 52, Land Use, of the City of East Orange.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Administrative Officer which
is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that such
use, structure or building complies with the provisions of Chapter 51, Land
Use, or duly authorized variance.
§ 51-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-5
C:252
Part 2
Administration
ARTICLE III
Planning Board
§ 51-6. Establishment and membership.
There is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., in the
City of East Orange a Planning Board of nine members, consisting of the
following four classes:
A. Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
The Mayor may appoint a designee in writing that is filed with the City
Clerk and Secretary of the Planning Board prior to the meeting(s) in
which the designee is to participate. The Mayor's designee shall be a
citizen of the municipality, sit as a Class I member acting only on behalf
of the Mayor in the absence of the Mayor. The designee is precluded
from participating or voting on any matter that precludes the
participation or voting of the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor. If an Environmental
Commission is established, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV or
alternate members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and one may be a
member of the Board of Education. A member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board member unless
there is among the Class IV members of the Planning Board both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board
of Education, in which case the member of the Environmental
Commission (if established) shall be deemed to be the Class II member
of the Planning Board. Membership on a municipal board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment
of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be
considered the holding of a municipal office.
E. Alternate members.
§ 51-6 CHARTER § 51-6
C:253
§ 51-7. Terms.
(1) Two alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor, who shall
be municipal residents who meet the qualifications of Class IV
members. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years,
except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any
one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of
the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
(2) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
(3) Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of
any class. Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed
to increase the size of the Planning Board. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
F. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members are prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 or 40:55D-23.1
from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial
interests therein, regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the
Planning Board in order of seniority of continuous service to the Board
of Adjustment until there are the minimum number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any
personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a
choice has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the
Chair of the Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.54
A. The term of the Mayor composing Class I membership shall correspond
with his official tenure, excepting that the Mayor's designee in the
absence of the Mayor shall serve at his pleasure during the Mayor's
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
54.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-7
C:254
§ 51-8. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as delineated above for the unexpired term.
§ 51-9. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may be either a member of
the Planning Board, alternate member or a municipal employee designated
by it. An alternate member shall not be eligible to serve as Chairman or Vice
Chairman of the Planning Board.
§ 51-10. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-24. The Board shall not, however, exceed the amount appropriated
by the governing body for its use.
§ 51-11. Powers and duties generally.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall have the following powers and duties:
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first.
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent
possible, the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over
the first four years after their appointment; provided, however, that no
term of any member shall exceed four years, and further provided that
nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion
of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV
members shall be appointed for terms of four years, except as
otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the
year in which the appointment is made, unless an appointment is made
to fill an unexpired term.
D. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the governing body for cause.
A. To prepare and, after a public hearing, may adopt and from time to time
amend a Master Plan for the physical and social development and policy
of the City, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the
§ 51-7 CHARTER § 51-11
C:255
Board's judgment, bear essential relation to the planning of the City, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of subdivision control and site plan review
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
C. To approve conditional uses in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations, including preparation of
grant proposals and evaluation thereof.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years and amendments thereto and
recommend the same to the governing body. A committee consisting of
the Director of Public Works, Planning Director, Director of Finance,
Community Development Agency Director, and Health Officer shall be
established to assist the Planning Board in the preparation of the
capital improvements program.
G. To consider and make a report to the governing body within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
governing body pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. Variances and building permits.
(1) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject
to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(b) Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
reserved on the Official Map pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(c) Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.55
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit, as the case may be.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-11
C:256
§ 51-12. Citizens advisory committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a citizens advisory
committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
J. Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of the
Master Plan, the governing body or other public agency having
jurisdiction over a capital project, before taking action necessitating
the expenditure of any public funds incidental to the location, character
or extent of such capital project shall refer the action involving such
specific project to the Planning Board for review and recommendation
in conjunction with such Master Plan and shall not act thereon without
such recommendation or until 45 days have elapsed after such referral
without receiving such recommendation. This requirement shall apply
to action by a housing, parking, highway, special district or other
authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other similar public
agency, either state, county or municipal, consistent with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-31.
K. The Planning Board may investigate, study and survey substandard
areas within the City and recommend to the Mayor and City Council
such action as it deems advisable for the rehabilitation and
preservation of such areas pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6.
L. The Planning Board may study and make recommendations to the
governing body on an Official Map prepared pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 et seq.
M. The Planning Board shall review and issue findings concerning any
long-range facilities plan submitted to the Board pursuant to the
Educational Facilities Construction and Financing Act, P.L. 2000, c. 72
(N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et seq.). The purpose of review is to determine the
extent to which the long-range facilities plan is informed by, and
consistent with, at least the land use plan element and the housing
element contained within the Municipal Master Plan adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 and such other elements of the Municipal Master
Plan as the Planning Board deems necessary, and to determine whether
the prospective sites for school facilities contained in the long-range
facilities plan promote more effective and efficient coordination of
school construction with the development efforts of the municipality.
The Planning Board shall devote at least one full meeting of the Board
to presentation and review of the long-range facilities plan prior to
adoption of a resolution setting forth the Board's findings.
§ 51-11 CHARTER § 51-13
C:257
§ 51-13. Subdivision and Site Plan Review Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint a Subdivision and Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee for the purpose of reviewing complex subdivision and site plan
applications and making recommendations to the Planning Board in regard
thereto. Members of the Subdivision and Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee may include but need not be limited to the Mayor, Council
liaison to the Planning Board, another member of the Council appointed
by the Council, the Director of Public Works, Planning Director, Chief
Building Inspector, Traffic Engineer, Fire Chief and the Health Officer. This
committee may meet from time to time as deemed necessary based on the
complexity of the site plan and/or subdivision application. The Planning
Director or a designee thereof shall call this committee when an application
of necessary complexity is received.
§ 51-14. Minor Subdivision and Site Plan Subcommittee.
The Planning Board Chairman shall appoint a Minor Subdivision and Site
Plan Subcommittee for the purpose of reviewing and acting on minor
subdivision and minor site plan applications to ensure that they conform
to the requirements as detailed in this chapter. Members shall include the
following four Planning Board members: Council liaison to the Planning
Board (Class III member), municipal official (Class II member), and two
Class IV members from the public.56
§ 51-15. Rules and regulations.
A. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this article.
B. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of
testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
56.Editor's Note: Original ordinance § 51-21, Environmental Commission, which immediately
followed this section was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-13 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-15
C:258
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 51-16. Establishment.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the City of East
Orange appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the governing body
to serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year of their
appointment. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so
determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of
such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed four years. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be for
four years. Four alternate members designated at the time of their
appointment as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," "Alternate No. 3"
and "Alternate No. 4" shall be appointed for a term not to exceed two
years.
B. Nothing in this article shall, however, be construed to affect the term of
any present member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
D. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
E. Alternate members.
(1) Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
(2) Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to increase
the size of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member.
(4) In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, alternate members are to vote in the order of
their numerical designations.
F. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its
regular or alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from
acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interest
therein, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to
serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Board of
Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be
called upon to serve in order of seniority of continuous service to the
Planning Board until there are the minimum number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any
§ 51-16 CHARTER § 51-16
C:259
§ 51-17. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee.
§ 51-18. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and offices as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use. It shall also receive advice and information from staff of the City
of East Orange as it may deem necessary.
§ 51-19. Rules and regulations.
§ 51-20. Powers generally.
personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a
choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the
Chairman of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
A. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this article.
B. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of
testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter or any term,
clause, sentence or word thereof and the Zoning Map in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative
enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions as applicable to it in said
§ 51-16 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-20
C:260
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or subsequent statutes in such case made and
provided, and the Administrative Officer shall from time to time furnish
to any person requesting the same a copy of its rules and information
as to how appeals or applications may properly be filed with the Board
for its decision thereon.
D. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted
by law to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of Chapter 51, Land Use.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
this chapter or for decisions on other special questions upon which
such board is authorized by ordinance to pass.
(3) Grant "C" variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(a) General provisions.
[1] The fact that a proposed use is an inherently beneficial use
shall not be dispositive of a decision on a variance under
this subsection.
[2] No variance from those departures enumerated in
Subsection D(4) ("D" variances) of this section shall be
granted under this subsection.
[3] No variance shall be granted under this subsection for
proposed development that requires approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or a conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has
power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60.
(b) "C(1)" or "hardship" variances. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may grant, upon an application or an appeal
relating to a specific piece of property, a variance from the
strict application of any regulation in this chapter that would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property, subject to the provisions of Subsection D(3)(a) of this
section, by reason of one or more of the following conditions:
[1] By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c(1)(a); or
[2] By reason of exceptional topographic conditions, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c(1)(b); or
§ 51-20 CHARTER § 51-20
C:261
[3] By reason of other extraordinary and exceptional situation
or condition of such piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c(1)(c).
(c) "C(2)" or "substantial benefit" variances. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may grant a variance to allow departure from
regulations under this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c(2) where in an application or appeal relating to a
specific piece of property the purposes of this act or the
purposes of the Educational Facilities Construction and
Financing Act, N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et seq., would be advanced by
a deviation from this chapter's requirements and the benefits
of the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment,
subject to the provisions of § 51-20D(3)(a).
(4) Grant "D" variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment may only by the affirmative vote of at least five
members of the Board grant a variance to allow departure from
regulations in this chapter in the particular cases and for the
special reasons specified below:
(a) To permit a use or principal structure in a district restricted
against such use or principal structure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(1); or
(b) To permit an expansion of a nonconforming use pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(2); or
(c) To permit a deviation from a specification or standard
pertaining solely to a conditional use pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(3); or
(d) To permit an increase in the permitted floor area ratio
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(4); or
(e) To permit an increase in the permitted density, except as
applied to the required lot area, for a lot or lots for detached
one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots are either
an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5); or
(f) To permit a height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10
feet or 10% the maximum height permitted in the district for a
principal structure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(6).
(5) If an application for development requests one or more variances
but not a variance for a purpose enumerated under § 51-20D(4), the
decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered
under § 51-20D(3).
§ 51-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-20
C:262
(6) All requests for use variances shall be governed by the standard of
the most restrictive district in which said use is permitted.
E. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and this chapter. The
developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon the granting of all
required subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approval can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
this chapter. The number of votes of Board members required to grant
any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this
chapter for the approval in question. The application requesting
approval of the variance shall be accepted as complete when the
Administrative Officer determines that the information presented is
clearly shown, subject to any request of the Board of Adjustment for
additional information before making a decision.
F. No variance or other relief may be granted permitting the creation or
establishment of a nonconforming use which would be prohibited in any
airport safety zone pursuant to the Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983
(N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.), except upon issuance of a permit by the
Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
G. Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in Subsection D of this section, have power given by law to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
I. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the
same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
(Article 6), or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67,
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval of a use
variance pursuant to Subsection D(4) of this section.
§ 51-20 CHARTER § 51-21
C:263
§ 51-21. Appeals and applications.
§ 51-22. Powers to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may,
in conformity with provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or amendments
thereto or subsequent statutes, apply, reverse, affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of an Administrative Officer of
the municipality based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter or
Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days of the decision
of the Administrative Officer by filing a notice of appeal with the officer
from whom the appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal.
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to
the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to the Administrative Officer. Applications addressed to the original
jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment without prior application to an
administrative officer shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment. Four copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of
filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior
to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans,
maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter
or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all
necessary forms from the Administrative Officer, who shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by
the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
D. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once each year, review
its decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare and
adopt by resolution a report on its findings on chapter provisions which
were the subject of variance requests and its recommendations for
chapter amendment or revision, if any. The Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall send copies of its report and resolution to the governing body and
the Planning Board.
§ 51-21 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-22
C:264
from and make such order, requirement, decisions or determination as
ought to be made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative
officer from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 51-22 CHARTER § 51-22
C:265

ARTICLE V
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 51-23. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular manner, he shall not continue to sit with the board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto. All members of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall familiarize themselves with the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) to ensure their compliance with this section.
§ 51-24. Absence of member.
A member of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment who was absent for
one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to
vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding
his absence from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that
such Board member has available to him a transcript or recording of the
meetings from which he was absent and certifies, in writing, to the Board
that he has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
§ 51-25. Meetings.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled due to
extenuating circumstances.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of the
municipal agency present at the meeting except as otherwise required
hereunder.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(P.L. 1975, c. 231). An executive session for the purpose of discussing
and studying any matters to come before either Board shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
§ 51-23 CHARTER § 51-26
C:267
§ 51-26. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
transmitted to the Municipal Clerk and made available for public inspection
during normal business hours at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any
interested party shall have the right to obtain reproductions of the minutes
as legally permissible for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his/her use as provided
for in the rules of the Board.
§ 51-27. Hearings.
§ 51-28. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, every application for
development submitted to the Planning Board or to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments
for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the
subject of such application, or if it is shown that taxes or assessments are
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before their respective bodies,
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties.
The provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorney, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either a stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof, on request, to any interested party at his, her or its expense.
§ 51-26 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-28
C:268
delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief granted by either
Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in
such manner that the municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 51-29. Public notice requirements.
§ 51-30. List of property owners.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Administrative Officer
shall, within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt
of payment of a fee as specified in the fee schedule, request a list from
the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the
applicant is required to give notice pursuant to § 51-29B of this chapter.
This list shall be produced and certified by the Tax Assessor in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 51-31. Referral of application.
The Board of Adjustment or Planning Board may refer any application to
any appropriate person or agency, including from the Board of Adjustment
to the Planning Board, for a report, provided that such reference shall not
extend the period of time within which the Board of Adjustment shall act.
§ 51-32. County Planning Board approval.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3) in the
case of a subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6)
in the case of a site plan, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall
condition any approval upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or upon approval by the County
A. For the following classes of site plans, the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment shall hold a public hearing prior to making a decision, with
notice in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(1) Any site plan or subdivision or development project requiring a
variance.
(2) Any application for a conditional use.
(3) Any site plan which includes an application for subdivision.
(4) Any major site plan.
(5) Any major subdivision.
B. Whenever a public hearing is required on an application for
development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall
give notice in accordance with N.J.S.A. 50:55D-1 et seq.
§ 51-28 CHARTER § 51-32
C:269
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time; in
the case of other variances, the County Planning Board shall be notified of
any application which fronts on an existing or proposed county road, adjoins
other county land or is within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
§ 51-33. Time for decision.
Time-of-decision requirements shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
§ 51-34. Decisions and resolution of memorialization.
Each decision on any application for development shall be memorialized in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 51-35. Time for applications requiring more than one approval.
The longest time period for action by the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment shall be determined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 51-36. Public notice requirements. [Added 5-26-2015 by Ord. No.
26-201557]
§ 51-37. Signing of plats, site plans and conditional use.
A. An applicant shall provide public notice in accordance with the notice
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
B. In addition, public notice in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 shall be
given by an applicant for:
(1) Preliminary site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 and
minor site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.1;
(2) Appeals of determinations of the administrative officer pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, Subdivision a; and
(3) Requests for interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70,
Subdivision b.
A. Approved plats for preliminary major subdivisions and final major
subdivisions as well as deeds for minor subdivisions shall be signed by
officers of the approving board in accordance with the Map Filing
Law.58
B. Approved site plans and conditional uses shall be signed by the
Planning Board Chairman and Secretary.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 51-36, Publication of decisions.
58.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 51-32 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-38
C:270
§ 51-38. Expiration of variances.
The effective time period of any variance shall be determined in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 51-39. Expiration of site plan approval.
The effective time period of any site plan approval shall be determined in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 51-38 CHARTER § 51-39
C:271

ARTICLE VI
Appeals
§ 51-40. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party
whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by a
decision of the Administrative Officer of the municipality based on or made
in the enforcement of this chapter or Official Map. Such appeal shall be
taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal in the manner set forth in
this chapter and in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 et
seq.
§ 51-41. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to governing
body.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the governing body any final
decision of a Board of Adjustment approval of an application for
development under § 51-20D. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days
of the date of publication of such final decision. A brief notice of the
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality.
The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may be made shall
run from the first publication of the decision, whether arranged by the
municipality or by the applicant. The appeal of the governing body shall
be made by serving the Municipal Clerk, in person or by certified mail,
with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the name
and address of the appellant and name and address of his attorney, if
represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the governing body only
upon the record established before the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record shall be given by the
governing body by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, to
those entitled to notice of a decision and to the Board from which the
appeal is taken at least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting. A copy
of the decision shall be mailed by the municipal agency within 10 days
of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge, and to all who request a copy of the
decisions for a reasonable fee. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
by the municipal agency in the office of the Administrative Officer. The
Administrative Officer shall make a copy of such filed decision available
to any interested party for a reasonable fee and available for public
inspection at his office during reasonable hours. The parties may
submit oral and written argument on the record at such meeting, and
the governing body shall provide for verbatim recording and transcripts
of such meeting. The municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim
recording of the proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or
electronic means. The municipal agency shall furnish a transcript or
duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request, to any interested party
at his expense. The municipal agency, in furnishing a transcript of the
§ 51-40 CHARTER § 51-41
C:273
proceedings to an interested party at his expense, shall not charge such
interested party more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4.
Said transcript shall be certified, in writing, by the transcriber to be
accurate.59
C. The appellant shall, within five days of service of the notice of the
appeal, arrange with the certified court reporter for a transcript for use
by the governing body and pay a deposit of $50 or the estimated cost of
such transcription, whichever is less, or within 35 days of service of the
notice of appeal submit a transcript as otherwise arranged to the
Municipal Clerk; otherwise, the appeal may be dismissed for failure to
prosecute. The governing body shall conclude a review of the record
below not later than 95 days from the date of publication of the notice of
the decision below unless the applicant consents, in writing, to an
extension of such period. Failure of the governing body to hold a
hearing and conclude a review of the record below and to render a
decision within such specified period shall constitute a decision
affirming the action of the Board.
D. The governing body may reverse, remand or affirm, with or without the
imposition of conditions, the final decision of the Board of Adjustment
approving a variance granted. The review shall be made on the record
made before the Board of Adjustment.
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the governing body shall be necessary to reverse, remand or affirm,
with or without conditions, any final action of the Board of Adjustment.
F. An appeal to the governing body shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the Board from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the governing body, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with such Board, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an
order of the Superior Court on application, upon notice to the Board
from whom the appeal is taken, and on good cause shown.
G. The governing body shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant or,
if represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge, and for a
reasonable charge to any interested party who has requested it, not
later than 10 days after the date of the decision. A brief notice of the
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality.
The period of time in which an appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction may be made shall run from the first publication, whether
arranged by the municipality or the applicant.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-41 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-41
C:274
H. Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the right of any
party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law.
§ 51-41 CHARTER § 51-41
C:275

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 51-42. Enforcement by administration and governing body;
Administrative Officer.
§ 51-43. Enforcing officer; issuance of permit.
The Zoning Officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and any
supplements and amendments thereto and the provisions of all resolutions
relating to this chapter. In the absence of a Zoning Officer, the Construction
A. The administration and governing body, where appropriate, shall
enforce this chapter and any regulations made and adopted hereunder.
To that end, the governing body may:
(1) Require the issuance of specified permits, certificates or
authorizations as a condition precedent to the erection,
construction, alteration, repair, remodeling, conversion, removal or
destruction of any building or structure and the use or occupancy
of any building, structure or land and the subdivision or
resubdivision of any land; and
(2) Shall establish an Administrative Officer, who shall be the Zoning
Officer employed within the Department of Policy, Planning and
Development or a designee of that department, and offices for the
purpose of issuing such permits, certificates or authorizations upon
the submission of such data, materials, plans, plats and information
as are authorized hereunder and upon the express approval of the
appropriate state, county or municipal agencies; and
(3) May establish reasonable fees to cover administrative costs for the
issuance of such permits, certificates and authorizations; and
(4) In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of this chapter or other regulation made
under authority conferred hereby, the proper local authorities of
the municipality or any interested party, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alterations, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain,
correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
B. The import, export and/or movement of 200 cubic yards or more of soil
shall be subject to the requirements of § 51-199 and approval by the
Planning Board and the Director of Public Works.
C. All improvements specified in § 51-180A(1) shall be subject to approval
by the Director of Public Works.
§ 51-42 CHARTER § 51-43
C:277
Official may act as the Zoning Officer. The Construction Official shall not
issue a permit for the construction, alteration, enlargement, extension or
reconstruction of any building or structure or for the change or extension
of use on any premises until satisfied that the proposed construction,
alteration, enlargement, extension or reconstruction of any building or
structure or change or extension of use of any premises complies with the
provisions of this chapter or as determined by the Zoning Officer.
§ 51-44. Notice of violation.
Upon his becoming aware of any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, the Zoning Officer or the Construction Official shall serve
notice of such violation on the person, firm or corporation committing
or permitting the same, and if such violation has not ceased within such
reasonable time as the Administrative Officer has specified in such notice
and a new certificate of occupancy obtained as provided in this chapter, he
shall institute such action as may be necessary to terminate this violation,
including the issuance of summons.
§ 51-45. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.
§ 51-46. Enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. The payment of any penalty shall
not be in lieu of making changes to fully comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 51-47. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with any permit previously issued, nor is it intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any existing easements,
covenants or other agreements between parties, provided that, where this
chapter poses a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises
upon the height of buildings or requires larger yards, courts or other open
spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or
ordinances or by such rules, regulations or permits or by such easements,
covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 51-43 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-47
C:278
ARTICLE VIII
Certificates of Occupancy
§ 51-48. Certificate required; issuance.
Certificate of occupancy issuance is subject to applicable state and
municipal laws.
§ 51-49. Zoning information reports.
A. Whenever an owner, operator, occupant, prospective purchaser,
mortgagee, any licensed real estate broker or prospective occupant
shall apply to the Administrative Officer for a written zoning
information report upon payment of a fee in accordance with the
schedule contained herein, the Administrative Officer shall prepare
such a report and submit it to the applicant.
B. The report shall include each zone classification and zoning boundaries,
if any, affecting the premises. The report shall further provide a list of
any nonconforming conditions or nonconforming uses pursuant to the
zoning requirements shown on the records of the Department of
Property Maintenance or other official records.
C. The providing of a report shall be as a convenience to the persons
applying therefor and shall not constitute an estoppel or limitation on
the right of the City to enforce any provision of this Code or other
ordinance of the City which may be violated, whether or not such
violation is recited in the report, nor shall any person relying thereon be
entitled to any claim or defense by reason of such reliance, the
application for the report being expressly based on the readiness of the
applicant and other persons utilizing the report to accept the limitation
contained herein. The report shall not be considered as sanctioning or
approving or extending any existing nonconforming uses or conditions.
The report shall be provided after payment of the fee charges in
§ 51-56.
§ 51-48 CHARTER § 51-49
C:279

ARTICLE IX
Completion and Restoration of Existing Buildings
§ 51-50. Completion of existing buildings.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has
heretofore been issued or plans for which are on file with the Construction
Official at the time of the passage of this chapter and the permit for the
erection of which is used within three months of the passage of this chapter
and the construction of which, in either case, shall have been diligently
prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit and the ground
story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have
been completed within a year of the date of such permit, and which entire
building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within two
years from the date of the passage of this chapter.
§ 51-51. Restoration of existing buildings.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration of a structure partially
destroyed by fire, neglect or otherwise subsequent to the passage of this
chapter or prevent the continuance of the use of a building or part thereof
existing at the time of such destruction. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the restoration or removal of a wall or any part of a building
declared unsafe by the Construction Official.
§ 51-50 CHARTER § 51-51
C:281

ARTICLE X
Administration; Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 51-52. Repealer.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance60 or
any other ordinance of the City of East Orange which contains provisions
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby, to the
extent of such inconsistency, repealed.
§ 51-53. Amendments.
The City Council of the City of East Orange may from time to time on its
own motion, on recommendation from the Planning Board or upon petition
from property owners, after public notice and hearing in accordance with
law, amend, supplement or change the regulations and districts herein
established and adopt rules and regulations for the purpose of interpreting
and carrying out this chapter.
§ 51-54. Pending applications.
The Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., shall determine the status of pending applications.
A. Prior to the public hearing on adoption of any amendment falling within
the purview of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26, the City Council shall refer any such
proposed amendment to the Planning Board pursuant to § 51-11 of this
chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of a zoning
ordinance may be filed with the City Clerk, signed by owners of 20% or
more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed
change or of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all directions
therefrom, inclusive of street space, whether within or without the
municipality. Such amendment or revision shall not become effective
following the filing of such protest except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of
all the members of the City Council subsequent to referral to the
Planning Board.
C. The passage and taking effect of amendments to this chapter shall not
abate or prevent the continuance of any proceedings instituted under
the chapter hereby revised and amended, nor abate or prevent any
proceedings or prosecutions for violations of said chapter which is
hereby revised and amended.
60.Editor's Note: See Art. XII, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, and Part 3, Zoning,
respectively, of this chapter.
§ 51-52 CHARTER § 51-55
C:283
§ 51-55. Tolling of running of periods of approval.61
The Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-21
et seq., shall determine the tolling of running of periods of approval.
§ 51-56. Fee schedule.
The following schedule of fees is hereby adopted as a part of this chapter:
Type of Application Fee
Rezoning request $1,000
Redevelopment plan amendment request Fee specified in the applicable
redevelopment plan; $1,000, if
no fee specified
Concept plan:
Minor subdivision/site plan $250
Major subdivision/site plan $500
Sign plan:
Nondigital signs only:
Display area of up to 50 square
feet
$50
Display area of 50 square feet or
more
$75
Freestanding signs taller than 3 feet $150
Subdivision application:
Minor subdivision $300
Preliminary and final major subdivision $500, plus $30 per lot
Site plan application:
Minor site plan
Nonresidential uses $500
Preliminary and final major site plan:
Nonresidential uses $750, plus $10 per 1,000
square feet floor area
Residential uses $750, plus $10 per dwelling
unit
Mixed use $750, plus $10 per dwelling
unit plus $10 per 1,000 square
feet of nonresidential floor
area
Appeals/interpretations (in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a or 40:55D-70b)
$500
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-55 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-56
C:284
Type of Application Fee
Conditional uses $500
Use variance including height, FAR, or
density (in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d)
$800 per project
Bulk variance (in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c)
$200 per project or $75 per
individual bulk variance,
whichever is greater
Miscellaneous Fee
Requested special meeting $2,000, paid prior to
commencement; when two or
more hearings are conducted at
the special session, the fee shall
be prorated among the
applicants based on hearing
duration.
Transcript cost In full, but not more than the
maximum permitted in N.J.S.A.
2B:7-4.62
Transcript copies Per OPRA requirements; see
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
Minute copies Per OPRA requirements; see
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
Document retrieval fee Established by City Clerk
City Council appeals $600
Publication of decisions costs $100
List of property owners within 200 feet $0.25 per name or $10,
whichever is greater
Extension of subdivision, site plan or
variance approval
$300 per application
Contractor certification fee; contractor
recertification fee
To be determined by Building
Department
Certificate of occupancy To be determined by Building
Department
Zoning information request $25 per site
Zoning reports:
Unimproved land $5
1- to 3-family houses $10
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-56 CHARTER § 51-56
C:285
Miscellaneous Fee
Other property up to assessed value
of $1 million
$10 or 0.01% of assessed value
thereof, whichever is greater
Other property of assessed value over
$1 million
$250 plus 0.005% of assessed
value over $1 million
Zoning permit:
Residential structure with 1 to 4
dwelling units
$50
Residential structure(s) with 5 or
more dwelling units
$75
Commercial use(s) or mixed uses $100
Copy of Master Plan $100
Copy of Zoning Map $3
Copy of Summary of District Regulations $3
Copy of Master Plan Reexamination
Report
$50
Copy of Redevelopment Area
Investigation Report
$50
Copy of Redevelopment Plan $50
Copy of Chapter 51, Land Use Ordinance $30
Copy of Planning Study/Analysis $35 per study
Copy of Retail Market Analysis $25
Copy of Housing Market Analysis $25
§ 51-57. Fees for escrow deposit accounts.
A. Escrow deposits for professional services.
(1) The reviewing board shall require fees for technical and/or
professional services and testimony employed to the board in
reviewing an application, including the review services of the
Director of Public Works, City Planner, Board Attorney, Board
Consultant, any other City official and such other experts as may be
deemed necessary (i.e., traffic, environmental, soils, etc.).
(2) Fees for technical and professional services shall be in addition to
any and all other required fees.
B. Applicants required to submit escrow deposits; exemptions.
(1) Applications involving one single-family dwelling on a single lot, a
subdivision not involving the creation of additional lots, or a site
plan only involving a change in use shall be exempt from the
payment of escrow deposits upon review by the Administrative
Officer. This exemption shall be void and escrow fees shall be paid
§ 51-56 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-57
C:286
in the event that it is necessary to hold more than two hearings on
the application or if the application is for the same site as a prior
application made to either Board within the prior two years.
(2) When the Administrative Officer determines that the application
will serve a public purpose and promote the public health, safety
and welfare, the following applicants shall submit 50% of the
required escrow deposit:
(a) Public organizations and/or agencies.
(b) Charitable and/or philanthropic organizations.
(c) Fraternal and/or religious nonprofit organizations.
C. Submission of escrow deposits.
(1) The applicant shall submit the required escrow deposit to the
Administrative Officer prior to the application being reviewed for
completeness. No application shall be determined complete,
reviewed by professional staff or placed on the agenda for public
hearing until the required escrow deposit is paid.
(2) Required escrow deposits shall be in the form of a money order or
certified check payable to the City of East Orange.
D. Escrow for informal review.
(1) Whenever an applicant requests an informal review of an
application for development involving technical or professional
advisors, an escrow deposit shall be required in accordance with
the schedule for formal applications. The deposit must be received
prior to professional review.
(2) Any escrow deposit received for informal review shall be credited
to the required escrow deposit for formal applications. The cost for
professional services involved in the informal review shall be
considered part of the formal application review and charged to the
escrow account.
E. Schedule of required fees for escrow deposits.
(1) The following sums are required to be deposited in an escrow
account for applications to the Planning Board and/or Board of
Adjustment:
Type of Application Escrow Deposits
a. Variances under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d
not requiring site plan or subdivision
approval (use, etc.)
$1,000
b. Conditional use approval $1,000
c. Site plan applications
§ 51-57 CHARTER § 51-57
C:287
Type of Application Escrow Deposits
[1] Residential site plans:
Minor residential site plan for 1
single-family dwelling
$250
Residential site plan, preliminary
approval:
0 to 10 units $2,500
11 to 50 units $5,000
51 to 100 units $15,000
Over 100 units $20,000
Final approval: 33% of preliminary
approval
[2] Nonresidential site plans:
Small project involving less than
2,000 square feet in gross floor area
and no change in building code use
classification as determined by
Construction Official
$250
Small project involving less than
2,000 square feet in gross floor area
and change in building code use
classification as determined by
Construction Official
$500
Preliminary approval:
With principal buildings over
2,000 square feet of gross floor
area (gfa):
2,001 to 5,000 square feet gfa $2,500
5,001 to 25,000 square feet
gfa
$10,000
25,001 to 100,000 square feet
gfa
$15,000
Over 100,000 square feet gfa $25,000
Without principal buildings over
1,000 square feet of gross floor
area (gfa):
Lot area up to 1 acre $5,000
1 acre to 5 acres $10,000
6 acres to 10 acres $20,000
Over 10 acres $30,000
§ 51-57 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-57
C:288
Type of Application Escrow Deposits
Final approval 33% of preliminary
approval
d. Subdivision applications (fees shall be
in addition to any required variances)
Minor subdivision $250
Major subdivision (over 3 lots):
Preliminary approval $5,000
Final approval $1,500
e. Rezoning requested by developer $3,000
f. Redevelopment plan amendment
requested by developer
$3,000
(2) All applications not specifically noted or excluded above shall be
accompanied by an escrow fee of $250.
(3) The above schedule is intended to cover the estimated costs for
professional services related to the application. In the event that
the balance in any escrow account falls to a point where it is
expected that it will be insufficient to cover anticipated costs, the
applicant will be required to provide additional funds. Failure to
provide these funds may be used as a basis to discontinue further
action on the application.
F. Review of escrow deposit amount.
(1) Prior to making a determination of completeness upon any
application, the board shall review said application to determine
whether the escrow amount set forth above is sufficient. If the
amount set forth is determined insufficient by the reviewing board
to cover professional costs anticipated for the application,
additional funds in the amount of 33 1/3% of the initially required
escrow fee shall be deposited by the applicant prior to declaring
the application complete. The application shall not be declared
complete or placed on the agenda for public hearing until such
additional escrow deposit is received.
(2) Further additional escrow deposit fees may be required at any time
upon determination by the reviewing board. All approvals shall be
conditional upon receipt of such additional fees deposited by the
applicant in increments of 1/3 of the initially required escrow fee,
when and as determined necessary by the reviewing board.
G. Appeal of escrow deposit. In the event that the applicant believes the
escrow deposit to be unreasonable, the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment shall hear and decide whether such fees are reasonable,
and the applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment to the governing body, provided that the applicant
§ 51-57 CHARTER § 51-57
C:289
shall provide the governing body such transcripts of the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment hearing on fees at his cost, and such hearing
shall be on record. The governing body shall set a hearing date, with
notice to all parties, and the applicant shall provide a court-certified
stenographer to record said hearing. The governing body may reverse
a Planning Board or Board of Adjustment decision only if the Board's
decision is not sustained by the preponderance of the evidence.
H. Escrow accounts over $5,000; conditions. Whenever an amount of
money in excess of $5,000 shall be deposited by an applicant with the
municipality for professional services employed by the municipality to
review applications, the money, until repaid or applied to the purposes
for which it is deposited, including the applicant's portion of the
interest earned thereon, except as otherwise provided for herein, shall
continue to be the property of the applicant and shall be held in trust by
the municipality. Money deposited shall be held in escrow. The
municipality shall deposit it in a banking institution or savings and loan
association in this state insured by an agency of the federal government
or in any other funds or depository approved for such deposits by the
state in an account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid
by the institution or depository time on savings deposits. The
municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and
address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made and
the amount of the deposit. The municipality shall not refund an amount
of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year. If
the amount of the interest exceeds $100, that entire amount shall
belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the municipality
at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purpose for which it
was deposited, as the case may be; except that the municipality will
retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than
33 1/3% of that entire amount which shall be in lieu of all other
administrative and custodial expenses.
I. Accounting of escrow deposits. In the event that any applicant desires
an accounting of the expenses or fees paid by him for professional
review, he shall request such in a letter directed to the Secretary of the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall be
responsible for any costs incurred by the Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment in having its professional and administrative staff
prepare an accounting of the fees expended. Such additional amount as
may be required for said accounting shall be paid to the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in
the event that there are insufficient escrow funds to pay for said
accounting.
J. Refunds. All escrow funds described herein shall be utilized by the
appropriate board to pay the cost of any technical and/or professional
services incurred by the board for review and/or testimony in
connection with the particular application. All funds not expended shall
be refunded to the applicant within 60 days after the final
§ 51-57 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-57
C:290
§ 51-58. Permits required for signs; procedure.
determination by the appropriate board with respect to such
application. No amount shall be refunded prior to certification by the
Board Secretary that said application has been finally determined.
A. Sign permit required. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place, replace or
relocate any sign within the City of East Orange without first obtaining
a sign erection permit from the Construction Official. Signs shall be a
component of site plans subject to approval by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment. All other signs shall be subject to the
approval of the Zoning Officer within 10 business days, based upon
compliance with applicable standards. The Construction Official shall
issue a sign erection permit only for such signs as are approved by the
Zoning Officer. Exempt from this provision is the installation of political
lawn signs limited in size to four square feet per side placed within 120
days of the affected election.
B. Sign permit procedure.
(1) Applications for sign erection permits shall be made on forms
provided by the Zoning Officer in accordance with the procedure
summarized in Diagram 51-58.1 below. Such forms shall contain or
have attached thereto the following information:
(a) The name and address of applicant.
(b) The plot plan showing the location and size of the property, the
location of buildings thereon and the location of the proposed
sign(s).
(c) A series of color photographs showing the facade of the
property at which the sign(s) will be located and including all
properties within 200 feet of the property line. Photographs
shall be of sufficient resolution and detail for all signs to be
identifiable and legible.
(d) A reasonably accurate sketch or blueprint indicating the
appearance of the proposed sign or signs (size, material, color,
lighting, area and direction of illumination and the lumen
power).
(e) Location of any proposed or existing signs on the building
facade, if applicable.
(f) The written consent of the owner or lessor of the premises.
(g) Such other information as the Zoning Officer may reasonably
require.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as
enumerated in § 51-56, Fee schedule.
§ 51-57 CHARTER § 51-58
C:291
§ 51-59. Zoning permit.
A zoning permit shall be required for all new tenancies before occupying
any nonresidential building or nonresidential tenant space and shall be
required before any building permit can be issued. A zoning permit
application form shall be prepared by and made available from the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Officer shall grant or deny a zoning permit within 10
business days from the receipt of a complete zoning permit application. If
the Zoning Officer fails to act within this time period, the failure shall be
deemed to be an approval of the application for a zoning permit.
(3) Shopping centers, or any commercial structure that is new,
subdivided for more than one commercial tenant, or seeking
permits for exterior remodeling or upgrades, are also required to
submit a sign guideline package and elevation drawings, showing
the following:
(a) The location and placement of signs for each tenant, including
a sign area or sign band, if applicable.
(b) A list of approved colors, materials and construction types.
(c) Identification of any preestablished and preexisting
trademarks.
Diagram 51-58.1. Sign Erection Permit Procedure
A. Except for applications for minor repairs, as defined by the Uniform
Construction Code, no construction permit or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued unless a zoning permit has been obtained from the
Zoning Officer.
B. Required inspection. Inspection of the subject premises prior to
issuance of a zoning permit shall be at the discretion of the Zoning
Officer.
C. Zoning permit exceptions. Pursuant to the above, all applicants for
building permits shall apply for a zoning permit. Notwithstanding the
foregoing to the contrary, the following items shall not be subject to a
zoning permit:
(1) Replacement roofing.
(2) Replacement siding.
§ 51-58 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-59
C:292
(3) Replacement windows and doors, where there is no change in
glazing area or opening size.
(4) Replacing chimneys and chimney liners, where a new chimney is
the same size and material as the original.
(5) Interior oil tank replacement.
(6) Furnace/boiler replacement.
(7) Garage door replacement, same size.
(8) Replacement bathroom fixtures.
(9) Replacement floors/ceilings.
(10) Replacement kitchen cabinets/fixtures/appliances.
(11) Installation of radon mitigation systems (interior systems only).
(12) Installation of commercial carpet for nonresidential uses.
(13) Minor work or ordinary maintenance as defined by the Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.
(14) Interior electrical work.
§ 51-59 CHARTER § 51-59
C:293

ARTICLE XI
Application Procedures
§ 51-60. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for Board review
and action on applications for subdivisions and/or site plans. The procedure
is intended to provide orderly and expeditious processing of such
applications.
§ 51-61. Preapplication conference.
§ 51-62. Informal concept plan review.
A. For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing subdivision
and site plan design and development costs, a preapplication
conference is recommended.
B. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to:
(1) Acquaint the applicant with the substantive procedural
requirements of the subdivision and site plan ordinance;63
(2) Provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed
development plan and applicable elements of the Master Plan, this
chapter and other development requirements;
(3) Otherwise identify policies and regulations that create
opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed
development;
(4) Review any proposed concept plans and consider opportunities to
increase development benefits and mitigate undesirable project
consequences;
(5) Permit input into the general design of the project.
C. The preapplication conference shall provide for the applicant to meet
with the Subdivision and Site Plan Review Advisory Committee as
designated under § 51-13.
D. Applicants seeking a preapplication conference shall request a meeting
of the Subdivision and Site Plan Review Advisory Committee with the
Comprehensive Planning Office.
E. The applicant shall not be required to pay a fee for the preapplication
conference.
F. The applicant shall not be bound by the preapplication conference, nor
shall the reviewing board be bound by any such review.
63.Editor's Note: See Art. XII, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter.
§ 51-60 CHARTER § 51-62
C:295
§ 51-63. Application assignment.
The applicant shall have the option of seeking the direction of the Zoning
Officer as to which approvals are required and the appropriate board for
hearing the same or for filing an application and proceeding before the
board which the applicant believes to be appropriate. The Zoning Officer's
determination shall have a presumption of validity. The following
applications may be filed:
A. In addition or as an alternative to the preapplication conference, at the
request of the applicant, the Planning Board or the Subdivision and Site
Plan Review Advisory Committee may grant an informal review of a
concept plan for a development for which the applicant intends to
prepare and submit an application for development. The purpose of the
concept plan is to provide Planning Board or Subdivision and Site Plan
Review Advisory Committee input in the formative stages of subdivision
and site plan design.
B. Applicants seeking concept plan informal review shall submit the items
stipulated in § 51-75 at least 10 days before the concept plan meeting.
These items provide the applicant and Planning Board or Subdivision
and Site Plan Review Advisory Committee with an opportunity to
discuss the development proposal in its formative stages.
C. A brief written summary of the concept plan review shall be provided
within 15 working days after the final meeting. Neither the applicant
nor the reviewing board shall be bound by such review.
D. The applicant shall be charged reasonable fees for concept plan review
as stipulated in Article X, § 51-56. The amount of any fees for such
informal review shall be a credit towards fees for review of the
application for development.
A. Full or partial escrow deposit exemption per § 51-57.
B. Minor subdivision per § 51-70.
C. Major preliminary subdivision per § 51-71.
D. Major final subdivision per § 51-73.
E. Site plan waiver per § 51-82.
F. Minor site plan per § 51-70.
G. Preliminary major site plan per § 51-72.
H. Final major site plan per § 51-73.
I. Conditional use per § 51-20.
J. Variance per § 51-20.
(1) Hardship.
§ 51-62 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-63
C:296
§ 51-64. Application content.
An application for development shall include the items specified in Article
XII (§§ 51-67 through 51-74) and Article XV (§§ 51-80 through 51-82) of
this chapter and in Schedule D, Site Plan Application Checklist, which
constitutes a checklist of items to be submitted for subdivision, site plan and
use variance review. A copy of this checklist, together with an IRS W-9 form,
shall be completed by the applicant and submitted with the application
form.64
§ 51-65. Complete application.
§ 51-66. Applications: procedures for filing.
(2) Substantial benefit.
(3) Restricted use and/or principal structure.
(4) Expansion of nonconforming use.
(5) Deviation from specification/standard pertaining to conditional use.
(6) Excess of maximum floor area ratio allowed.
(7) Excess of maximum density allowed.
(8) Excess of maximum height allowed.
K. Request for interpretation and/or special questions of the Zoning Map
or this chapter.
L. Appeal of Zoning Officer determination.
A. Applications to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
be deemed to be complete in accordance with the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and as set forth in this chapter.
A. Applications for development shall be filed with the Administrative
Officer at least 10 days before the date of the meeting of the board or
the date set for hearing.
B. At the time of filing, the applicant shall also file a complete application,
which shall constitute all plot plans, maps or other papers required by
virtue of any provision of this chapter.
C. No application shall be placed on the board agenda for review or
approval until all reviews for completeness are satisfied.
D. Any application determined to be incomplete or denied by the board
may be resubmitted by the applicant, provided that all revisions from
64.Editor's Note: Checklists referred to in this chapter are on file and available in the
applicable City office.
§ 51-63 CHARTER § 51-66
C:297
the original application are clearly shown and fully address all reasons
for the board's determination or denial.
E. The applicant shall pay any necessary filing fees established by the
governing body before an application can be deemed complete.
§ 51-66 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-66
C:298
ARTICLE XII
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures
§ 51-67. Site plan approval - where required. [Amended 2-23-2015
by Ord. No. 7-2015; 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 26-2015]
§ 51-68. (Reserved)65
§ 51-69. Exception of specific subdivision and site plan
requirements.
The Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, when acting upon
applications for preliminary or minor subdivision or site plan approval, shall
have the power within its sole discretion to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for approval as may be reasonable and within the general
purpose and intent of the provisions for review and approval contained in
this chapter if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this
chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the lands in question; if such exception is granted,
it shall be done by a resolution of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment which sets forth the reasons for the exception in the particular
case and demonstrates that the exception will not have an adverse effect on
surrounding properties.
§ 51-70. Minor subdivision and minor site plan procedures.
A. Site plan approval shall be required for all applications for development
except the following:
(1) Subdivision or individual lot applications for detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings;
(2) A change of use to a permitted use where there is no increase in the
parking requirement when compared to the current use;
(3) The rehabilitation of commercial, industrial, institutional or
attached or multifamily dwelling unit buildings, provided there is
no increase in the parking requirement, no decrease in the number
of on-site parking spaces, no change in on-site circulation patterns
and no variance relief required; or
(4) The construction of an accessory building which has a gross floor
area of less than 1,000 square feet, unless one or more variances
are required.
B. Notwithstanding anything set forth in Subsection A, above, any
application for development involving drive-through services shall
require site plan approval.
65.Editor’s Note: Former § 51-68, Waiver of site plan application, was repealed 5-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 26-2015.
§ 51-67 CHARTER § 51-70
C:299
A. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision or
minor site plan, as defined in this chapter, shall submit to the Office of
Comprehensive Planning 10 copies of the items required in Article XV
(§ 51-82) of this chapter, together with an executed application form,
the prescribed fee and evidence that no taxes or assessments are
outstanding against the property.
B. The application shall be declared complete or incomplete within a fortyfive-
day period from the date of its submission according to the
provisions of Article XI (§ 51-77) of this chapter.
C. In accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law if the subdivision or
site plan is unanimously approved with at least four members of the
Minor Subdivision and Site Plan Subcommittee present and voting (only
those who are members or alternates of the Board having jurisdiction to
act may vote), no further action shall be required of the Planning Board
as a whole; however, a report will be submitted by the Minor
Subdivision and Site Plan Subcommittee to the Planning Board to
inform the Board of the action taken. If the vote is not unanimous or if
such committee has not been established, the minor subdivision or site
plan shall be referred to the Planning Board. If a variance within the
jurisdiction of the Planning Board is requested, the subdivision or site
plan shall not be referred to the Committee but instead to the Planning
Board as a whole.
D. The action of the Minor Subdivision and Site Plan Subcommittee or the
Planning Board under this article must be taken within 45 days, or 120
days if a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60b or 40:55D-70 is
involved, of a complete application as defined in Article II (§ 51-5) of
this chapter or within such further time as is agreed to by the
subdivider and the Board. Failure of the Planning Board or Committee
to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision or
site plan approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to
the failure of the Planning Board or Committee to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and shall be
so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
E. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
municipal approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer,
the Director of Public Works and the Municipal Tax Assessor, as
specified by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Any such plat or deed accepted for
such filing shall have been signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of
the Planning Board.
F. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision and site plan
§ 51-70 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-70
C:300
§ 51-71. Preliminary major subdivision and major site plan
applications.
§ 51-72. Effect of preliminary approval of major subdivision and
major site plans.
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision and site plan shall, except as
provided in Subsection D of this section, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval as specified by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.:
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years
after the date of minor subdivision and site plan approval.
A. The applicant seeking preliminary major subdivision or preliminary
major site plan approval shall submit to the Administrative Officer of
the Planning Board 10 copies of the materials stipulated in Article XIV
(§ 51-78) or Article XV (§ 51-80), as applicable, of this chapter.
B. The application shall be declared complete or incomplete within a fortyfive-
day period from the date of its submission according to the
provisions of § 51-65.
C. The Subdivision and Site Plan Review Advisory Committee may review
the application and shall comment and make recommendations to the
Planning Board.
D. A complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots or for a site
plan of 10 acres of land or less or 10 dwelling units or fewer shall be
acted upon within 45 days of the date of such submission, or 120 days if
a variance is required, or within such further time as may be consented
to by the developer. A subdivision of more than 10 lots or a site plan that
involves more than 10 acres of land or more than 10 dwelling units shall
be acted upon within 95 days of the date of such submission, or 120
days if a variance is required, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise the Planning Board shall be
deemed to have granted preliminary subdivision or site plan approval.
A. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot sizes; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; and in
the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to site plan approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41, except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the municipality from modifying by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to
public health and safety;
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
§ 51-70 CHARTER § 51-72
C:301
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may
be; and
C. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extension on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least
one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that,
if the design and improvement standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
D. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 51 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsections A, B and C above for such period of time longer than three
years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval and the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided
that, if the design and improvement standards have been revised, such
revised standards may govern.
E. Where a developer plans to install the site improvements prior to final
approval, the developer may submit the engineering plans and
specifications for the improvements to the Director of Public Works,
who shall approve them within 35 days. In the event of a denial, the
specific reasons must be enumerated in a letter to the applicant. If
revised plans are submitted in response to the denial letter, they shall
be approved or denied within 20 days with the same requirement as
previously imposed for a denial. After the plans are approved, the
developer may install the site improvements prior to final approval. The
developer shall be required to furnish a restoration bond for 120% of
the maximum cost of restoring the site in the event that the
improvements are not complete within two years from the
commencement of the work on any section in the development or prior
to the expiration of preliminary approval, whichever occurs first. The
bond shall either be a security bond, a letter of credit or an escrow
account in accordance with Article XIV (§ 51-78), where not
inconsistent herein. The type, form and amount of the bond are subject
to the approval of the Director of Public Works and the Municipal
Attorney.
F. In the case of a site plan for a development consisting of not less than
150,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area or not less than 100
residential dwelling units, or consisting of a combination of square feet
of nonresidential floor area and residential dwelling units which when
§ 51-72 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-72
C:302
§ 51-73. Final major subdivision and major site plan applications.
proportionately aggregated at a rate of 1,500 square feet of
nonresidential floor area to one residential dwelling unit are equivalent
to at least 150,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area or 100
residential dwelling units, the Planning Board may grant the rights
referred to in Subsections A, B and C of this section for such period of
time beyond three years as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable taking into consideration: (1) the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval; (2) economic conditions; and (3) the comprehensiveness of
the development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension to the preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by
the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration: (1)
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval; (2) the potential number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval; (3) economic conditions; and (4) the comprehensiveness of
the development, provided that, if the design standards have been
revised, such revised standards may govern.66
A. An applicant requesting final approval of a proposed major subdivision
and site plan shall submit to the Administrative Officer 10 copies of the
materials specified in Article XIV (§§ 51-78 and 51-79) or Article XV
(§ 51-80) of this chapter. Unless the preliminary plat was approved
without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all changes or
modifications required by the Planning Board. The final plat shall also
be accompanied by a statement from the Director of Public Works that
the municipality is in receipt of as-built plans showing all streets and
utilities in exact location and elevation and identifying those portions
already installed and those to be installed and/or certified in the amount
of performance guaranties required to assure completion of those
improvements not yet installed, as stipulated in Article XXII (§ 51-116)
of this chapter.
B. The application for final subdivision or site plan approval shall be
declared complete within a forty-five-day period from the date of its
submission according to the provisions of Article XI, § 51-65, of this
chapter.
C. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Administrative Officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer
as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
66.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-72 CHARTER § 51-73
C:303
§ 51-74. Effect of final approval of major subdivisions and major
site plans.
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and shall
be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
D. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat by the Chair and Secretary of the Planning Board
unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the
developer with the County Recording Officer. The Planning Board may,
for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional
period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
E. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on
the instrument by the signature of the Chair and Secretary of the
Planning Board or a certificate has been issued. The signatures of the
Chair and Secretary of the Planning Board shall not be affixed until the
developer has posted the guaranties required pursuant to Article
XXVIII (§§ 51-180 through 51-182) of this chapter.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
preliminary approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval,
provided that, in the case of major subdivision, the rights conferred by
this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the
time period provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and in the case of
a subdivision has duly recorded the plat, the Planning Board may
extend such period of protection for extensions of one year, but not to
exceed three extensions.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or more or site
plan for development of a nonresidential floor area of 200,000 square
feet or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection A of this section for such period of time, longer than two
years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The
developer may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
§ 51-73 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-74
C:304
C. In the case of a site plan for a development consisting of not less than
150,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area or not less than 100
residential dwelling units, or consisting of a combination of square feet
of nonresidential floor area and residential dwelling units which when
proportionately aggregated at a rate of 1,500 square feet of
nonresidential floor area to one residential dwelling unit are equivalent
to at least 150,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area or 100
residential dwelling units, the Planning Board may grant the rights
referred to in subsection A of this section for such period of time beyond
two years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration: (1) the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval; (2)
economic conditions; and (3) the comprehensiveness of the
development. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning
Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration: (1) the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval; (2)
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to
be developed; (3) economic conditions; and (4) the comprehensiveness
of the development.67
67.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-74 CHARTER § 51-74
C:305

ARTICLE XIII
Concept Plan Submission Requirements
§ 51-75. Concept plan.
The concept plan shall contain the following information to assist in a
knowledgeable review to assure and evaluate compliance with municipal
codes and specifications:
A. Names, addresses of owner and applicant.
B. Name, signature, license number and address of engineer, land
surveyor, architect, professional planner or landscape architect, as
applicable, involved in plan preparation.
C. Title block containing Tax Map sheet, county, name of municipality,
block and lot, street location.
D. Key map.
E. Zoning schedule indicating general lot area and setback, parking
requirements.
F. North arrow and scale.
G. Size and location of any existing or proposed structures.
H. Location of any existing or proposed streets.
I. Copy and/or delineation of any existing deed restrictions.
J. Location of any existing or proposed easements or land dedicated to
public use.
K. Payment of fee (for concept plan review).
L. Location of existing streams, watercourses, wetlands and other
environmentally sensitive features.
M. Topographical features from USGS map.
N. Boundary, limits and extent of wooded areas, specimen trees or other
significant physical features.
O. General vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns.
P. Digital photographs of the site, including adjacent property frontages
within 200 feet of each side of the site.
§ 51-75 CHARTER § 51-75
C:307

ARTICLE XIV
Subdivision Submission Requirements
§ 51-76. Sale of land prior to approval of subdivision.
§ 51-77. Minor subdivision application submission details.
The plat for a minor subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn by a
licensed New Jersey land surveyor and shall be at a scale of not less than
one inch equals 30 feet. The plat shall be designed in compliance with
the provisions on design standards of this chapter and shall show or be
accompanied by the following information:
A. If before final subdivision approval has been granted any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
municipal approval is required by ordinances pursuant to this chapter,
such person shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each
lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief; and
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with this chapter, but only if the municipality has a
Planning Board and has adopted, by ordinance, standards and
procedures in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38).
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of land from which the subdivision
was made that remains in the possession of the developer or his assigns
or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made or purchase
price paid and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and titleclosing
expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two
years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale
or conveyance of said land or within six years if unrecorded.
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. The tract name; Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers; date; reference;
North point; graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
(1) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(2) Name and address of the subdivider.
(3) Name and address of person who prepared map.
§ 51-76 CHARTER § 51-77
C:309
§ 51-78. Major preliminary subdivision application submission
details.
C. Existing and proposed lot lines, dimensions and bearings.
D. The location of existing streets abutting the subdivision.
E. The location and uses of existing buildings within 100 feet of the subject
property.
F. The zoning districts and boundaries within one proposed subdivision
and within 100 feet of the perimeter thereof.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided.
H. Certification by the Collector of Taxes that all taxes are paid to date.
A. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 60 feet. Preliminary plats shall
be designed and drawn by a licensed New Jersey engineer or land
surveyor. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions
of design standards of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the
following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to the
surrounding areas.
(2) The tract name; Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers; date;
reference; North point; graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
(a) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(b) Name and address of the subdivider.
(c) Name and address of person who prepared map.
(3) Acreage of tract to be subdivided, to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(4) Existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions.
(5) Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater
and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope; indication of the
high and low points; and tentative cross sections and center-line
profiles for all proposed new streets.
(6) The location and uses of existing buildings within 100 feet of the
subject property.
(7) The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings, monuments, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts,
drainpipes and any natural features such as wooded areas and rock
formations.
§ 51-77 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-78
C:310
§ 51-79. Major final subdivision application submission details.
(8) The zoning districts and boundaries within one proposed
subdivision and within 100 feet of the perimeter thereof.
(9) Plans, profiles and cross sections of all proposed streets and the
profiles of existing streets to which the proposed streets shall be
connected within the proposed subdivision and within 100 feet of
the perimeter thereof where the streets are to be constructed by
the subdivider or other private person.
(10) Plans and profiles, including the size, grade and elevation, of all
proposed waterlines, stormwater drains and sanitary sewers and of
existing water mains, stormwater drains and sanitary sewers to
which the proposed utilities shall be connected within the proposed
subdivision and within 100 feet of the perimeter thereof where the
same are to be constructed by the subdivider or other private
person.
(11) Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas
and electricity), showing feasible connections to existing or any
proposed utility systems.
(12) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
(13) Certification by the Collector of Taxes that all taxes are paid to
date.
B. The Administrative Officer shall have the power to waive submission of
any of the above items which are not applicable to a particular
application; except that, in the case of engineering requirements, the
waiver must be approved by the Director of Public Works.
A. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared on translucent Mylar at
least four mils thick and one of six standard sizes (all dimensions
measured from cutting edges): 18 inches by 24 inches; 15 inches by 21
inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; 30 inches by 42 inches. The scale shall
be large enough to contain legibly written data on the dimensions,
bearings and other boundary details. Two copies of the Mylar shall be
submitted with each application. The final subdivision plat shall be in
compliance with all provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9
et seq.,68 and with the minimum survey detail requirements as
promulgated by the State Board of Professional Engineers and Land
Surveyors. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) Date of the survey, name and location of the subdivision, name of
owner, name of the last property owner(s), municipality, county,
68.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. was repealed 2011, c. 217; see now N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 51-78 CHARTER § 51-79
C:311
graphic scale in inches to feet and North point. The reference
meridian used for bearings on the map shall be shown graphically.
The coordinate base, either assumed or based on the New Jersey
State Plane Coordinate System, shall be shown on the plat.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii,
length of arcs, chord distances, chord bearings, and delta angles of
all curves. The square footage of each lot shall be to the nearest
square foot or nearest hundredth of an acre.
(3) All monuments found, set or to be set shall be shown. If a
monument that has been found has been reset, it shall be indicated
on the map. A minimum of three corners distributed around the
tract shall indicate the coordinate values. The outbound corner
markers shall be set pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
State Board of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
(4) The location and uses of existing buildings within 100 feet of the
subject property.
(5) Zoning districts and their boundaries within the proposed
subdivision and within 100 feet of the perimeter thereof.
(6) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(7) Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall
be numbered consecutively beginning with the number "1."
(8) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(9) Location and description of all monuments.
(10) Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(11) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the
plat.
(12) Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Director of
Public Works.
(13) Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater
and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
(14) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(15) Certification by the Collector of Taxes that all taxes are paid to
date.
§ 51-79 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-79
C:312
(16) The following endorsements, as applicable, are to be shown on the
plat along the leading edge (right-hand side) of the Mylar:
As owner of the lands delineated upon this map, I hereby consent
to the filing thereof
Block _______, Lot _______
(Name of development)
(Address of development including county)
(Telephone number)
Owner
Date
Subscribed and sworn before me this _____ day of __________
20____
Notary Public
Date
This plat has been classified and approved as a (minor/major)
subdivision by the City of East Orange Planning Board on
_______________
Chairperson
Date
Secretary
Date
This plat has been filed in the Essex County Clerk's office on
______________________ and is known as Map No. ______________
County Clerk
Date
Municipal Clerk's Certification - I
I hereby certify that all new streets and easements shown have
been approved by the Planning Board and a bond has been given
to the municipality guaranteeing the completion of such
improvements.
Municipal Clerk
Date
Municipal Clerk's Certification - II
The interior monuments shown on this map shall be set within
an appropriate time limit as provided for in the Municipal Land
Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) or local
ordinance.
§ 51-79 CHARTER § 51-79
C:313
(If monuments are to be set at a later date, the following
requirements and endorsements shall be shown on the map.)
I certify that a bond has been given to the municipality,
guaranteeing the future setting of the monuments shown on the
map and so designated.
Municipal Clerk
Date
Director of Public Works' Certification
I have carefully examined this map and to the best of my
knowledge and belief find it conforms with the provisions of the
Map Filing Law resolution of approval and the municipal
ordinance and requirements applicable thereto.
Director of Public Works
Date
Land Surveyor's Certification - I
I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief
this map and land survey, dated __________, meets the minimum
survey detail requirements as promulgated by the State Board of
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and has been made
under my supervision, and complies with the provisions of the Map
Filing Law and that the outbound monuments as shown have been
found or set.
(Include the following, if applicable.)
I do further certify that the monuments as designated and shown
hereon have been set.
(Surveyor's Name)
Date
Licensed Professional Land Surveyor #_______________
(Affix Seal)
Land Surveyor's Certification - II
(If the land surveyor who prepares the map is different than the
land surveyor who prepares the outbound survey, the following
two certificates shall be added in lieu of the certificate above.)
I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief this
map and land survey, dated ____________, has been made under my
supervision and meets the minimum survey detail requirements,
with outbound corners marked, promulgated by the State Board of
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and that the outbound
corner markers as shown have been found or set.
(Surveyor's Name)
Date
§ 51-79 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-79
C:314
Licensed Professional Land Surveyor # _______________
(Affix Seal)
I hereby certify that this map has been made under my supervision
and complies with the provisions of the Map Filing Law.
(Include the following, if applicable.)
I do further certify that the monuments as designated and shown
hereon have been set.
(Surveyor's Name)
Date
Licensed Professional Land Surveyor #_______________
(Affix Seal)
B. The applicant shall also submit a digital subdivision map that meets or
exceeds the standards of the New Jersey Division of Taxation and
common New Jersey land surveying practices, and shall also meet or
exceed the standards set forth in this subsection. It is the City's intent
to use subdivision map digital CAD deliverables for inclusion in City's
GIS database and for maintenance of the City's Tax Maps. The digital
data submitted shall be such that it will be capable of being processed
through typical GIS feature development techniques, for both line work
and attribute data, with minimal to no editing of the source CAD data,
translation or other manipulation. Submissions which do not meet these
standards or are unreadable will be returned to the applicant.
(1) Final subdivision plat map information shall be input into a
computer utilizing a commercially available computer drafting
package. The CAD software output shall be readable by AutoCAD
release 2000 or greater.
(2) Each subdivision map sheet shall be constructed full scale and
georeferenced to the New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System
and NAD83.
(3) The subdivision map shall be prepared in such a way that all
different types of lines and text are placed on separate layers. The
layers are to include dimensions/verbiage and locating arrows or
directional indicators.
(4) Layering shall be the same for all subdivision sheets, with each
sheet containing the full set even though some layers may be void
of data. Layer names shall be all uppercase and contain no spaces.
Underscores may be used to separate portions of the layer names.
(5) The subdivision map shall not contain any duplicate line work (i.e.,
no lines on top of lines). All intersecting lines shall be snapped to
within 0.01 foot. There shall be no undershoots or overshoots, and
all short line segments shall be deleted.
§ 51-79 CHARTER § 51-79
C:315
(6) All curves, including those along street center lines, shall be true
curves. All straight lines between lot corners shall consist of a
single line segment with no intermediate nodes. All property
boundaries shall be broken at lot line intersections.
(7) All files pertaining to the project are to be submitted on one or
more CDs or DVDs with an attached table of contents of files,
including file names and descriptions.
C. The Administrative Officer shall have the power to waive submission of
any of the above items which are not applicable to a particular
application; except that, in the case of engineering requirements, the
waiver must be approved by the Director of Public Works.
§ 51-79 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-79
C:316
ARTICLE XV
Site Plan Submission Requirements
§ 51-80. Major site plan application.
A. The site plan for a major site plan application shall be clearly and
legibly drawn by a licensed New Jersey engineer, land surveyor,
professional planner or registered architect and shall be at a scale of
not less than one inch equals 30 feet. All distances shall be in feet and
decimals of a foot to the nearest hundredth of a foot, and all bearings
shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
B. The site plan for a major site plan application should be 24 inches by 36
inches in size and folded whenever possible to 8.5 inches by 11 inches.
The site plan shall be designed in compliance with the provisions on
design standards of this chapter and the Major Site Plan Application
Checklist69 and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information; except that, for minor site plans, as defined in § 51-5
herein, the data shown may be limited to that clearly showing the
alterations in existing buildings or site improvements proposed:
(1) Basic elements of site plan: first page.
(a) Project name and short narrative description of development,
including impact on surrounding uses.
(b) Property address, block, lot, case number in title box.
(c) Revision box and date of each revision.
(d) Standard scale and North arrow (preferably on each site plan
page).
(e) Size of property (include feet and acreage).
(f) Use of land and structures indicated. If the precise use of the
building is unknown at the time of application, an amended
plan showing the proposed use shall be required prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(g) Property dimensions (depth, width and frontage).
(h) Key map showing the location of the subject property with
reference to surrounding areas and existing street
intersections, at a scale of not smaller than 100 feet to the inch
(hatched location of property).
(i) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
zone boundaries included within the boundaries of the parcel
69.Editor's Note: Checklists referred to in this chapter are on file and available in the
applicable City office.
§ 51-80 CHARTER § 51-80
C:317
and within 100 feet therefrom. (Hatch property on the Zoning
Map.)
(j) Zoning schedule analysis table (zoning district designation,
required and proposed dimensions, parking requirements,
variance requests).
(k) Structures and uses within 100 feet (Sanborn map can be
obtained in Public Works Department; hatch property on map).
(l) Names and addresses of property owners within 200 feet of
subject property on the original list provided by the Tax
Assessor and submitted with the application form, as shown on
the current tax records of the City of East Orange, together
with the block and lot numbers of each said property.
(m) Narrative describing nature of operation or activities to occur
on the site, noting business hours and number of employees (if
applicable).
(n) Description of trucking activities on site, if applicable. A
narrative shall describe trucking on the site; number and size
of trucks used in applicant's operation; number, size and
frequency of trucks making deliveries; time of loading and
unloading operations.
(o) Signature block (required signatures for Board Chairperson,
Board Secretary, Director of Public Works, and City Clerk).
(p) Name and address of record owner. If the owner of the
premises is a corporation, the name and address of the
president and secretary shall be submitted with the
application.
(q) Name and address and license number and seal of person
preparing the site plan.
(r) Evidence of compliance with any state requirements, if
applicable.
(2) Existing features on or adjacent to subject property: second to third
page.
(a) Survey of the entire subject property (second page only).
(b) Existing streets, lots, reservations, easements and areas
dedicated to public use, including grants, restrictions and
rights-of-way. A copy of any existing covenants, deed
restrictions or exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel
shall be submitted with the application.
(c) Adjacent roads/driveways/streams/rivers/waterways/
floodplains/floodways. The distances to the nearest
§ 51-80 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-80
C:318
intersections with other public streets shall be indicated,
measured along the right-of-way lines of existing streets
abutting the property.
(d) Existing structures (including setbacks and lot lines). Identify
the location of any existing buildings on the site and all other
structures, including walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with
spot elevations of such buildings and structures. Structures to
be removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to
remain shall be indicated by solid lines.
(e) Easements (access/utility).
(f) The location of all existing waterlines, valves and hydrants and
all sanitary sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or
sewage disposal and treatment, as well as storm drains and
appurtenances, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
sizes, grades, connections and direction of flow.
(g) Existing utility lines and connections. If any existing utility
lines are underground, the estimated location of said utility
lines shall be shown.
(h) Existing vegetation, topography and landscaping. Existing
contours, referred to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
datum, with a contour interval of one foot for slopes of 3% or
less; an interval of two feet for slopes of more than 3% but less
than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15% or
more, are to be indicated by dashed lines. Include the locations
of existing rock outcrops, cliff faces, high points, watercourse,
high-tide and low-tide levels, depressions, ponds, marshes,
wooded areas, existing trees and other significant existing
features, including previous flood elevations of watercourse,
ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey.
(i) Fences and refuse area details. Identify the location and type of
garbage and refuse disposal facilities, including maneuvering
areas.
(j) Existing lighting, traffic circulation, and pedestrian walkways.
Identify the location, direction of illumination, power and hours
of operation of existing outdoor lighting.
(k) Spot elevations for property.
(l) Other site improvements (i.e., signs, parking meters,
streetlighting). Identify the location and elevation of existing
signs.
(m) Photographs of existing property and adjacent property
frontages within 200 feet of each side of the site (separate
§ 51-80 CHARTER § 51-80
C:319
page). The site plan application shall also include digital
photographs in formats acceptable to the Planning Board.
(3) Proposed/new modifications and improvements. Must show the
following, including dimensions: fourth page and beyond.
(a) Full site layout of proposed structures (including planned
streets, road orientation, dedications, demolitions, additions).
The location, height and first-floor elevation of all proposed
buildings or other structures, and the elevation of the finished
grade at each corner of each structure, shall be indicated. At
the time of application for preliminary site plan approval,
preliminary architectural plans and elevations shall be
sufficient.
(b) Proposed lots, reservations, easements and areas dedicated to
public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way. A
copy of any proposed covenants, deed restrictions or
exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel shall be
submitted with the application.
(c) Signage plan with details (include height and width
dimensions, elevation, lettering and location).
(d) Roads, driveways, parking areas and locations, circulation
(ingress and egress access). Identify all proposed streets, with
profiles, indicating grading, and cross sections showing width
of roadway, location and width of sidewalk and location and
size of utility lines conforming to the standards and
specifications of the City of East Orange. Identify the means of
vehicular access for ingress to and egress from the site,
showing in particular the size and location of driveways and
curb cuts; walkways; the proposed traffic channels, if any;
acceleration and deceleration lanes, if any; additional width, if
any; and any other means of controlling vehicular and
pedestrian traffic. Identify access for firefighting equipment.
Identify the location and design of any off-street parking areas
or loading areas, showing size and location of bays, aisles and
barriers.
(e) Grading, drainage, lighting plan with isolux lines (details;
location; hours of operation all shown on same sheet).
Proposed contours, referred to United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of one foot for
slopes of 3% or less; an interval of two feet for slopes of more
than 3% but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for
slopes of 15% or more, are to be indicated by solid lines.
(f) The location of all proposed (including new, modified and
remaining existing) waterlines, valves and hydrants and all
sanitary sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or
sewage disposal and treatment, as well as storm drains and
§ 51-80 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-80
C:320
§ 51-81. Minor site plan application.
The site plan for a minor site plan application should be 24 inches by 36
inches in size and folded whenever possible to 8.5 inches by 11 inches. Ten
copies of the minor site plan application shall be provided. The site plan
shall be clearly and legibly drawn, and signed and sealed by a licensed
New Jersey professional engineer, land surveyor, professional planner, or
registered architect, and shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals
30 feet. All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot to the nearest
hundredth of a foot, and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10
seconds. The site plan shall be designed in compliance with the provision on
design standards in this chapter (Article XXIX, §§ 51-183 through 51-199)
and the elements identified among the Site Plan Checklist70 and shall show
or be accompanied by the following information:
appurtenances, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
sizes, grades, connections and direction of flow.
(g) The location and treatment of open space, with a landscaping
plan including proposed screening, landscaping and planting
plans, schedule and number and variety of plants, shrubs and
trees, plant/tree type, size and planting schedules (separate
page).
(h) Soil erosion and sedimentation plan (separate page).
(i) Fences and refuse area details (include location, height,
materials, colors and narrative of waste disposal methods).
Identify the location and type of garbage and refuse disposal
facilities, including maneuvering areas.
(j) Interior floor plans (include room square footages); building
elevation drawings (include existing grade, height above
existing grade, finish grade, materials and colors) (separate
pages).
(k) The location, direction of illumination, power and hours of
operation of proposed outdoor lighting.
(l) Notation of cell tower locations at subject property, if
applicable.
(m) Setback distances from structures to lot lines.
(n) Environmental information statement (narrative description on
impacts on air, soil, existing environment, potable water
demands, runoff, etc.).
C. The application for a major site plan shall include such other
information or data as may be required by the Planning Board for
determination that the details of the site plan are in accordance with
the standards of all ordinances of the City of East Orange.
§ 51-80 CHARTER § 51-81
C:321
A. Basic elements of minor site plan: first page.
(1) Project name and short narrative description of development,
including impact on surrounding uses.
(2) Property address, block, lot, case number in title box.
(3) Revision box and date of each revision.
(4) Standard scale and North arrow (preferably on each site plan
page).
(5) Size of property (include feet and acreage) and use of land and
structures indicated.
(6) Key map showing the location of the subject property with
reference to surrounded areas and existing street intersections, at
a scale of not smaller than 100 feet to the inch (hatched location of
property).
(7) Property dimensions (depth, width, and frontage).
(8) Zoning information map, identifying the zoning district in which the
parcel is located, together with zone boundaries included within
the boundaries of the parcel and within 100 feet therefrom.
(9) Zoning schedule analysis table (zoning district designation,
required and proposed dimensions, parking requirements, variance
requests).
(10) Business hours and number of employees noted, if applicable.
(11) Description of trucking activities on site, if applicable.
(12)Name and address of applicant and record owner. If the owner of
the premises is a corporation, the name and address of the
president and secretary shall be submitted with the application.
(13)Name and address and license number and seal of person
preparing the site plan.
(14) Signature block (required signatures for Board Chairperson, Board
Secretary, Director of Public Works and City Clerk).
(15) Evidence of compliance with any state requirements, if applicable.
B. Existing features on subject property: second to third page.
(1) Signed and sealed survey of the entire subject property (second
page only).
70.Editor's Note: Checklists referred to in this chapter are on file and available in the
applicable City office.
§ 51-81 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-81
C:322
(2) Location and use of any existing buildings on the site and all other
structures, including walls, fences, culverts and bridges, within
100 feet of the boundaries of the site, including setbacks and lot
lines, with spot elevations of such buildings and structures.
Structures to be removed shall be indicated by dashed lines;
structures to remain shall be indicated by solid lines.
(3) Adjacent roads/driveways/streams/rivers/waterways/floodplains/
floodways.
(4) Easements (access/utility).
(5) Location of any existing sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage
structures, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe sizes,
grades and direction of flow shown. Also include sufficient spot
elevations or contours to determine the flow of drainage water.
(6) Existing utility lines and connections. If any existing utility lines are
underground, the estimated location of said utility lines shall be
shown.
(7) Existing vegetation, topography and landscaping.
(8) Fences and refuse area details.
(9) Existing lighting, traffic circulation, and pedestrian walkways.
Identify the location, direction of illumination, power and hours of
operation of existing outdoor lighting.
(10) Spot elevations for property, if deemed necessary and applicable.
(11) Other site improvements (i.e., signs, parking meters,
streetlighting).
(12) Photographs of existing property and adjacent property frontages
within 200 feet of each side of the site (separate page). The site
plan application shall also include digital photographs in formats
acceptable to the Planning Board.
C. Proposed modifications or site improvements. Must show the following,
including dimensions: fourth page and beyond.
(1) Full site layout of proposed structures (including planned streets,
road orientation, dedications, demolitions, additions, alterations).
Identify the proposed use or uses of land and buildings, together
with the floor spaces of all structures on the lot.
(2) Signage plan with details (include height and width dimensions,
lettering and location).
(3) Roads, driveways, parking areas and locations, and circulation
(ingress and egress access), showing, in particular, the size and
location of driveways and curb cuts; walkways; the proposed travel
channels, if any; acceleration and deceleration lanes, if any;
§ 51-81 CHARTER § 51-81
C:323
§ 51-82. Waiver of site plan submission requirements.
The Administrative Officer shall have the power to waive submission of any
of the above items which are not applicable to a particular application;
except that, in the case of engineering requirements, the waiver must be
approved by the Director of Public Works. Any waiver requests for site
plan review requirements that are not applicable to a particular application
must be made by the applicant in a separate letter to the Administrative
Officer with detailed reasons for the waiver. Applicants seeking waiver of
engineering requirements must provide the Director of Public Works with a
detailed letter with reasons requesting a waiver.
additional width, if any; and other means of controlling vehicular
and pedestrian traffic. Identify access for firefighting equipment.
Identify the location and design of any off-street parking areas
or loading areas, showing size and location of bays, aisles and
barriers.
(4) Grading, drainage, lighting plan with isolux lines (details, location,
direction, power and hours of operation of proposed outdoor
lighting, all shown on same sheet), if applicable.
(5) Location of any proposed sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage
structures, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe size,
grades and direction of flow shown. Also include sufficient spot
elevations or contours to determine the flow of drainage water.
(6) Landscaping plan with schedule if proposing new screening,
landscaping and planting on the subject property.
(7) Soil erosion and sedimentation plan (separate page), if applicable.
(8) Fences and refuse area details (include location, height, materials,
colors and narrative of waste disposal methods, the location and
type of garbage and refuse disposal facilities, and maneuvering
areas).
(9) Interior floor plans (include room square footages); building
elevation drawings showing alterations or site improvements
(include existing grade, height above existing grade, finish grade,
materials and colors) (separate pages).
(10) Notation of cell tower location additions at subject property, if
applicable.
D. The application for a minor site plan shall include such other
information or data as may be required by the Planning Board for
determination that the details of the site plan are in accordance with
the standards of all ordinances of the City of East Orange.
§ 51-81 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-82
C:324
Part 3
Zoning
ARTICLE XVI
Zoning Regulations
§ 51-83. Zoning districts.
In order to regulate and restrict the location and type of buildings and
structures intended for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; to
regulate and limit the height and size of buildings; to regulate the use and
limit the intensity of the use of the land and the density of population; and to
regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces surrounding
buildings, the City is hereby divided into districts known as:
A. Regular zoning districts.
R-1 District Single-Family Residential
R-2 District Two-Family Residential, Townhouses
R-3 District Multifamily Structures, Townhouses, Garden
Apartments
R-4 District Multifamily Structures, High-Rise Apartments,
Hotels
R-O District High-Rise Multifamily Structures; Offices
CCC District Continuing Care Community
C-1 District Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 District Gateway Commercial
C-3 District Gateway Commercial
IND District Industrial
IND-1 District Mixed Industrial/Commercial
INST District Institutional, Medical Related, Cemeteries
MPX District Multiplex Concrete Redevelopment Area
GRN District Greenwood Redevelopment Area
UPS District Upsala Redevelopment Area
RUT District Rutledge Avenue Redevelopment Area
ARC District Arcadian Gardens Redevelopment Area
B. Transit Village Districts (TVD).
VC District Village Core Transit District and Muir's Berkeley
Redevelopment Area
ES District Evergreen/Halsted and Evergreen Square
Redevelopment Areas
§ 51-83 CHARTER § 51-83
C:325
§ 51-84. Redevelopment areas.
§ 51-85. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map designated as the
"Zoning Map," as amended and supplemented and as approved by the City
Council as part of this chapter and filed in the office of the Administrative
Officer. Such Zoning Map and all notations, references and other
MSE District Lower Main Street Redevelopment Area — Phase I
& Phase II
CAE District Central Avenue Entertainment District
TR-2 District Transit Area Medium Density Residential
TR-3 District Transit Area Multifamily Structures, Townhouses,
Garden Apartments
TR-4 District Transit Area Multifamily Structures, High-Rise
Apartments, Hotels
T-RO District Transit Area High-Rise Multifamily Structures;
Offices
NW District North Walnut Street Redevelopment Area
LM District Lower Main Street Area — Phase 2 Area
Regulations for these districts are contained in this chapter.
A. Applicability. In redevelopment areas designated by the City of East
Orange for which redevelopment plans are adopted pursuant to the
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and
where there exists variations in land use or design controls between the
redevelopment plan and other provisions of this chapter, the provisions
of the adopted redevelopment plan supersede the applicable provisions
of this chapter of the City of East Orange.
B. Urban redevelopment districts. The following redevelopment areas are
designated on the Zoning Map as urban redevelopment districts:
VC District Muir's Berkeley Redevelopment Area
MPX District Multiplex Concrete Redevelopment Area
ES District Evergreen/Halsted Redevelopment Area
GRN District Greenwood Redevelopment Area
UPS District Woodlands at Upsala Redevelopment Area
NW District North Walnut Street Redevelopment Area
RUT District Rutledge Avenue Redevelopment Area
MSE District Lower Main Street Redevelopment Area — Phase I
LM District Lower Main Street Redevelopment Area — Phase II
ARC District Arcadian Gardens Redevelopment Area
§ 51-83 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-85
C:326
information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same
force and effect as if the Zoning Map and all notations, references and other
information shown thereon were all fully set forth as described herein.
§ 51-86. General provisions.
Except as in this chapter otherwise provided, the following shall apply:
§ 51-87. Building regulations in all zoning districts.
A. Compliance with district regulations. No building or structure shall be
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor
shall any building or structure or land be used, which does not comply
with all the district regulations established by this chapter for the
district in which the building, structure or land is located.
B. Yard and area regulations, minimum requirements. The yard
regulations and the lot area per family provisions required by this
chapter shall be considered minimum regulations for each and every
building or structure at the time of the effective date of this chapter and
for any building or structure thereafter erected or structurally altered.
No land required for yards or for lot area per family in connection with
an existing building or structure or in connection with any building or
structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be decreased
by sale or otherwise or be made a portion of any required yard or lot
area for any other building or structure.
C. Principal buildings to be on lots. Every principal building or structure
thereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, as
herein defined.
D. District boundary lines dividing lots. Where a district boundary line
divides a lot of record at the time such line is adopted, the regulations
as are applicable to accessory uses and accessory structures for the
less-restricted portion of such lot shall apply to the more-restricted
portion, but for a distance of not more than 51 feet, measured at right
angles to such district boundary line. In such instance, the lot must
have frontage on a street in the less-restricted district, and where such
accessory uses and buildings extend into a residential district, they
shall be set back and screened with a minimum height of six feet of
either an evergreen landscape buffer installed in accord with § 51-193
or an opaque wall or fence which shall have no painted or attached
signage.
E. The site plan standards as enumerated under Articles XIII (§ 51-75), XIV
(§§ 51-76 through 51-79) and XV (§§ 51-80 through 51-82) shall be
deemed the minimum requirements for all site plan and subdivision
applications unless otherwise indicated.
A. Front yard setback standards. Front yard setback standards shall be
measured to the structural front walls of applicable buildings and shall
§ 51-85 CHARTER § 51-87
C:327
not be based on the locations of open or enclosed porches, balconies
or bay windows. Small sections of a new facade may also be recessed
deeper than the required setback to allow for architectural interest in
the new building.
(1) The front setback of a new structure shall match the shorter front
setback of the two closest principal buildings on each side of the
project site on the same block frontage as the site.
(2) Bay windows (with no wall section wider than six feet), balconies,
stoops and porches are permitted to encroach into the front
setback area.
(3) When the block has no existing development to serve as the
reference for the required setback, the front yard setback shall be
six feet.
(4) For through lots, the street frontage where the closest principal
buildings on each end of the lot that have the lesser setback shall
be considered the front yard.
(5) For corner lots, the following special setback requirements apply to
the street frontages of the two intersecting streets.
(a) One of the setbacks of a new structure shall match the lesser
front setback of the closest principal building on that block and
on that street frontage.
(b) The other frontage's setback shall be six feet or less.
(6) Existing front yard setbacks for existing buildings are conforming.
B. Glazing regulations.
(1) Minimum amount of area on exterior walls devoted to transparent
glazing for new buildings other than buildings put to warehousing
or industrial use.
(a) For the primary front facade, a minimum of 25% of the wall
area shall be devoted to transparent windows or doorway
areas, except for ground-floor commercial portions of
buildings, which shall comply with Subsection B(1)(e) below.
(b) For street-facing side or rear walls of structures on corner lots
or through lots, a minimum of 20% of the wall area shall be
devoted to transparent windows or doorway areas.
(c) For non-street-facing walls, the greater of a minimum of 10% of
wall area or the maximum amount allowed by the construction
code shall be devoted to transparent windows or doorway
areas.
§ 51-87 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-87
C:328
(d) All transparent glazing areas on door panels count toward this
requirement, but door panels themselves do not count towards
this requirement.
(e) For the first-floor facade, measured from grade to the ceiling
height of that first floor of commercial or mixed use buildings,
the minimum required area of wall devoted to transparent
windows or doorway areas is 45%. Additionally, any security
gates, grilles or roll-down barricades shall have a minimum
transparency of 75%.
(2) For existing buildings, no additional transparent glazing is
required; however, the removal of existing windows or the
reduction in size of existing windows is prohibited on all streetfacing
walls (walls parallel to the street) of the building.
(3) For all storefront windows facing Central Avenue or Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Boulevard (Main Street), no more than 30% of the
window area is permitted to be used for posters, displays, shelves
or other items that block the view into the interior of the
commercial space in that building. Therefore, 70% of the window
area shall be transparent and provide a view from the sidewalk into
the commercial area, enabling a view distance of at least 10 feet
into the building's interior.
(4) Opaque window tinting is prohibited. Window tinting that gives a
metallic or mirrored appearance is prohibited. Any installed
window tinting is required to provide a visible light transmission
percentage in excess of 70%.
C. Special side yard and rear yard setback regulations. No new
construction may encroach within three feet of the windows or doors of
another existing building on another property nor block emergency
access to those windows or doors.
D. Minimum dwelling unit or apartment sizes for newly constructed
buildings, new additions or for the subdividing of dwelling units in
existing buildings.
(1) Studio apartment: 500 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom apartment: 700 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom apartment: 850 square feet.
(4) Three-bedroom apartment: 1,000 square feet.
(5) Bedroom size: 110 square feet (10 feet by 11 feet).
(6) New residential units larger than three bedrooms are only
permitted in the R-1 District and the Woodlands at Upsula
Redevelopment Plan Area and are prohibited in all other districts.
§ 51-87 CHARTER § 51-88
C:329
§ 51-88. Additional height regulations.
§ 51-89. Additional area regulations.
A. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks,
solariums, steeples, penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts,
tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, wireless radio or
television towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be
erected, provided that no tower other than a church steeple or tower of
a public building shall exceed the applicable height limitations by more
than 10%. No tower shall be used as a place of habitation or for tenant
purposes. No sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or be attached to any chimney,
tower, tank or other structure which extends above the applicable
height limitations. Cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, gas
tanks, penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, wireless radio or television towers or necessary mechanical
appurtenances are only permitted to be mounted on flat roofs and shall
be set back from any street-facing edge of the roof on which they are
mounted for a distance of one foot from the roof edge for every one foot
of height above the roofline of the item.
B. On through lots 120 feet or less in depth, the height of a building may
be measured from the grade on either street. On through lots more than
120 feet in depth, the height regulations and basis of height
measurements for the street permitting the greater height shall apply
to a depth of not more than 120 feet from the street.
A. In computing the depth of a rear yard where the rear yard opens to an
alley, 1/2 of the width of the alley shall be considered to be a portion of
the rear yard.
B. No accessory building shall occupy more than 400 square feet for lots
smaller than 10,000 square feet and no more than 15% of the rear yard
for lots larger than 10,000 square feet, and shall only be permitted in
the rear yard.
C. Every part of a required rear yard shall be open to the sky
unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard.
D. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, required by law, projecting into a
yard not more than five feet and the ordinary projection of chimneys
and pilasters shall be permitted by the Construction Official when
placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
E. Along a narrower street near its intersection with a wider street or on
an interior lot running through to a narrower street, any building or
part of a building shall be governed by the volume regulations provided
for the wider street or to within 100 feet of such narrower street where
the restriction on the latter may be less severe.
§ 51-88 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-89
C:330
§ 51-90. Community residences.71
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1, community residences for the
developmentally disabled, community shelters for victims of domestic
violence, community residences for the terminally ill, community residences
for persons with head injuries, and adult family care homes for elderly
persons and physically disabled adults shall be a permitted use in all
residential districts, and the requirements therefor shall be the same as for
single-family dwelling units located within such districts.
§ 51-91. Child-care centers.72
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6, child-care centers for which, upon
completion, a license is required from the Department of Human Services
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq., shall be a permitted use in all
nonresidential districts of a municipality. The floor area occupied in any
building or structure as a child-care center shall be excluded in calculating:
(1) any parking requirement otherwise applicable to that number of units
or amount of floor space, as appropriate, under state or local laws or
regulations adopted thereunder; and (2) the permitted density allowable for
that building or structure under any applicable municipal zoning ordinance.
F. An offset to a court or yard may be considered as a part of such court or
yard, provided that it shall not be deeper in any part than it is wide on
the open side and that such open side shall in no case be less than six
feet wide.
G. The space above any underground structure shall be considered a yard.
No underground structure is subject to the setback requirements of this
chapter, nor shall its area be used in the calculation of the floor area
ratio and the building area.
H. Where a nonresidential zone adjoins a residential zone within a block,
any principal or accessory building constructed in the nonresidential
district within 100 feet of the residential district along the same street
front shall be set back at least 1/2 the distance that would be required if
the premises were deemed to be located in the adjoining residential
zone, but in no event less than 20 feet.
71.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
72.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-89 CHARTER § 51-91
C:331

ARTICLE XVII
Residential Districts
§ 51-92. R-1 District (Single-Family Residential).
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the R-1 District.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) A building or premises in the R-1 District shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Parks and playgrounds owned and operated by the City, by any
of its agencies or by the Essex County Park Commission, or
community gardens authorized by the East Orange
Department of Public Works and the Department of Policy,
Planning and Development.
(c) Premises used for municipal purposes, except public works
garages and solid waste facilities.
(d) Home professional office uses, provided there is no external
signage, no delivery or company vehicles parked on site, and
there are no employees other than residents of the household.
(2) No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type
retail use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club
or charitable or philanthropic institution.
C. Conditional uses. In the R-1 District, the following uses shall be
permitted as conditional uses, subject to approval by the Planning
Board and subject to the standards contained in Article XXIII (§ 51-118)
of this chapter:
(1) Public schools and private schools having curricula the same as
ordinarily given in public schools in the public school system of the
City, excluding nursery schools, but not excluding house-of-worship
school activities.
(2) Houses of worship, convents, parish houses or religious school
buildings.
(3) One accessory dwelling unit in an accessory building, limited in
size to not more than 25% of the principal building not including
the cellar.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, including a private garage, shall occupy not
more than 400 square feet in the rear yard; shall not exceed the
§ 51-92 CHARTER § 51-92
C:333
height of the principal structure; shall not exceed 50% of the floor
area of the principal structure and shall be located not less than
40 feet from the front lot line and not nearer to the front lot line
than the street wall of the main building or a private garage which
is constructed as part of the main building. No accessory building
shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main
building has actually been commenced, and no accessory building
shall be used unless the main building on the lot is completed
and used. A private garage may be used for the storage of one
commercial vehicle of not more than one-and-one-half-ton capacity.
Space for not more than two noncommercial vehicles may be
leased. Accessory buildings shall be set back three feet from any
lot line.
(2) Private swimming pools are subject to the setback requirements of
accessory buildings.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for the R-1 District are contained in Table
51-92.A.
Table 51-92.A: Bulk Requirements for R-1 District
Minimum lot area (square feet) Existing lots shall be permitted
to retain their size and
dimension, but lots created
through subdivision shall be
larger than 4,000
Minimum lot width (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted
to retain their size and
dimension, but lots created
through subdivision shall be
wider than 40
Minimum lot depth (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted
to retain their size and
dimension, but lots created
through subdivision shall be
deeper than 100
Minimum/maximum yard depth,
front (feet)
In accordance with § 51-87
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
3
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
13
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 25% of lot depth*
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 35%
§ 51-92 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-92
C:334
§ 51-93. R-2 District (Two-Family Residential, Townhouses).
Table 51-92.A: Bulk Requirements for R-1 District
Maximum building height
(stories)
2 1/2
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum density (dwelling
units per acre)
10
Maximum floor area ratio —
NOTE:
* Need not exceed 45 feet.
(2) The parking and loading requirements for the R-1 District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(3) The sign regulations for the R-1 District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the R-2 District.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) A building or premises in the R-2 District shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(a) Uses permitted in the R-1 District as provided in § 51-92.
(b) Two-family dwellings on lots with more than 3,000 square feet
of lot area.
(c) One-family townhouses.
(d) Preexisting mixed residential/commercial uses are permitted
to remain and retain their physical configuration. Any change
of commercial occupancy shall be to a use permitted in the C-1
District, and all signage shall be replaced with signage only of
the type permitted by this chapter. Expansion of such a
structure, enlargement of commercial area, paving additional
parking/loading area, or adding commercial units is not
permitted.
(2) No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type
retail use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club
or charitable or philanthropic institution.
C. Conditional uses. In the R-2 District, the following uses shall be
permitted as conditional uses, subject to approval by the Planning
§ 51-92 CHARTER § 51-93
C:335
Board and in accordance with the standards contained in Article XXIII
(§ 51-118) of this chapter:
(1) Conditional uses permitted in the R-1 District.
(2) Accessory parking facilities, off-site.
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) The same accessory uses permitted in the R-1 District.
(2) Community facilities developed as accessory uses to a townhouse
development.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for the R-2 District, with the exception of
townhouses, are contained in Table 51-93.1.
Table 51-93.1: Bulk Requirements for Non-Attached
Dwellings within R-2 District
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be larger than
3,500
Minimum lot width (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be wider than 30
Minimum lot depth (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be deeper than
95
Minimum/maximum yard
depth, front (feet)
Shall be in accordance with
§ 51-87
Minimum yard width, each
side (feet)
3
Minimum yard depth, rear
(feet)
25% of lot depth*
Maximum lot coverage
(percent)
50%
Maximum building height
(stories)
3
Maximum building height
(feet)
35
§ 51-93 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-93
C:336
Table 51-93.1: Bulk Requirements for Non-Attached
Dwellings within R-2 District
Maximum density (dwelling
units per acre)
34
Maximum floor area ratio —
NOTE:
* Need not exceed 45 feet.
(2) The bulk requirements for townhouses within the R-2 District are
contained in Table 51-93.2.
Table 51-93.2: Bulk Requirements for Townhouses
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
1,500 per townhouse unit
Minimum lot width (feet) 18
Minimum lot depth (feet) 70
Minimum yard depth, front
(feet)
In accordance with § 51-87
Maximum yard width, one
side (feet)
0 on one side
Minimum yard width, other
side (feet)
3 or zero on other side
Minimum yard depth, rear
(feet)
15
Maximum lot coverage
(percent)
80%
Maximum building height
(stories)
3
Maximum building height
(feet)
35
Maximum density (dwelling
units per acre)
30
Maximum floor area ratio —
(3) The parking and loading requirements for the R-2 District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(4) The sign regulations for the R-2 District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
F. Supplementary regulations for townhouses.
§ 51-93 CHARTER § 51-93
C:337
(1) The construction and occupancy of townhouses and townhouse
complexes, as herein defined, shall be permitted with the following
additional characteristics pertaining to the design and occupancy:
(a) Development shall be on a rental or nonrental basis by the
original developer or owner so that each townhouse dwelling
unit, when initially built, shall be available for sale or lease.
(b) No structure or part thereof shall be erected more than 300
feet in clear distance from a street or roadway.
(c) No space below the first story of any dwelling unit shall be
used for dwelling purposes, except in the case of a basement
where the floor is less than three feet below the grade. Such a
basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulations under this section.
(d) The first floor of a dwelling structure may be occupied as a
dwelling unit, and the second and third floors may be occupied
as a separate dwelling unit under the same roof in zoning
districts where two-family townhouses are permitted.
(e) The minimum frontage of each dwelling unit shall be 18 feet.
(f) There shall be no parking area in the front yard. A driveway for
access to a garage or to the rear or side of the lot shall not be
considered a parking space, and such a driveway shall be no
wider than 10 feet.
(g) There shall be a variety of design and architectural modes of
designs and architectural features for the purpose of
presenting an aesthetically desirable overall effect over the
entire townhouse complex, with varied elevations, designs and
appearances and without excess uniformity. Porches, bay
windows and/or stoops shall serve this purpose.
(h) The minimum room size of any room, except kitchens and
bathrooms, shall be 110 square feet, excluding closets or
storage space. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 500
square feet. All party walls shall be fire-resistant and
soundproof and shall begin at the basement or grade slab level
and extend to the underside of the sheathing of the roof.
(i) Minimum outdoor usable open space shall be provided at 150
square feet per townhouse unit.
(j) Fences may be erected on the rear of the property or between
each dwelling unit but not in the front yard of any dwelling
unit.
(k) No end dwelling unit of any townhouse or townhouse complex
shall have a blank wall. End walls shall have windows and front
doors facing public streets as in accordance with § 51-87.
§ 51-93 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-93
C:338
(l) Where a dwelling has two stacked residential units in a zoning
district that permits two-family townhouses, a balcony shall be
provided on the second floor, either on the front or rear of such
unit.
(m) Any applicant for townhouse development where units would
be on individual lots shall comply with the procedure of an
applicant for subdivision of lands contained in Article XI
(§§ 51-60 through 51-66).
(n) A certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the completion
of each dwelling unit or structure, provided that the
installation of all utilities, sidewalks, parking areas, roads and
landscaping affecting the particular structure is satisfactory
and has met all requirements as herein specified.
(o) Parking may be in the rear of each dwelling unit, in a central
parking area provided or in a garage where provided, which
shall be no more than 10 feet wide if facing a public street, or
in a detached garage to the rear of the dwelling unit.
(p) Driveways shall be not more than 10 feet wide in one direction
of travel or 20 feet wide in dual direction of travel when for
community parking areas. Such driveway may be placed on the
perimeter of the site. Ingress and egress in the rear of the
property or on either side of the property may be used as a
common passage to parking or to a garage or the central
parking area so provided.
(q) Provisions shall be made by way of covenants, restrictions or
otherwise for the maintenance of any common site and
facilities, and the liability for such maintenance shall be
enforceable by liens against the owners, developers or
sponsors of the townhouse dwelling unit or townhouse
structure in favor of the City.
(r) No interior roadway within the complex shall be less than 28
feet wide.
(s) The developer or developers, sponsor or sponsors, owner or
owners of any townhouse or townhouse complex shall make
proper and adequate provisions for the installation of roads,
drives, walkways, parking facilities, water, sewerage and
drainage facilities and such other desirable and necessary
facilities in accordance with the requirements of the Planning
Board or other municipal authority or agency having
jurisdiction, control and supervision over the respective
requirements herein mentioned. The installation of any and all
improvements herein required shall be the responsibility of the
owner, owners, developer, developers, sponsor or sponsors,
and no building permit shall be issued unless and until the
developer, developers, sponsor or sponsors shall, in
§ 51-93 CHARTER § 51-93
C:339
§ 51-94. R-3 District (Multifamily Structures, Townhouses, Garden
Apartments).
accordance with the application, post the necessary bond to
secure the installation of all site improvements necessary,
including fire hydrants as may be required by the Fire
Department of the City.
(t) In any townhouse development, all public utilities on the site,
including but not limited to electrical wires, telephone wires,
sewerage pipes, gaslines and waterlines, shall be installed
beneath the surface of the ground.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the R-3 District.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) A building or premises in the R-3 District shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(a) One- and two-family dwellings as permitted in the R-2 District,
but with the additional requirement that at least 3,000 square
feet of lot area is required for a two-family dwelling to be built,
and at least 4,000 square feet of lot area is required for a threefamily
dwelling to be built.
(b) Townhouses (one-family or two-family with individual units) as
permitted in the R-2 District and subject to requirements under
§ 51-93F.
(c) Garden apartments, subject to supplemental requirements
under § 51-94F.
(d) Three-family dwellings.
(e) Multifamily structures not to exceed five stories.
(f) Preexisting mixed residential/commercial uses are permitted
to remain and retain their physical configuration. Any change
of commercial occupancy shall be to a use permitted in the C-1
District, and all signage shall be replaced with signage only of
the type permitted by this chapter. Expansion of such a
structure, enlargement of commercial area, paving additional
parking/loading area or adding commercial units is not
permitted.
(g) Parks and playgrounds owned and operated by the City, by any
of its agencies or by the Essex County Park Commission, or
community gardens authorized by the East Orange
Department of Public Works and the Department of Policy,
Planning and Development.
§ 51-93 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-94
C:340
(h) Premises used for municipal purposes, except public works
garages and solid waste facilities.
(i) Home professional office uses, provided there is no external
signage, no delivery or company vehicles parked on site, and
there are no employees other than residents of the household.
(2) No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type
retail use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club
or charitable or philanthropic institution.
C. Conditional uses. In the R-3 District, the following uses shall be
permitted as conditional uses, subject to approval by the Planning
Board and subjected to the standards contained in Article XXIII
(§ 51-118) of this chapter:
(1) Conditional uses permitted in the R-2 District.
(2) Clubs, except those whose chief activity is a service customarily
carried on as a gainful business.
(3) Child-care centers.
(4) Senior care community (SCC) and continuing care retirement
community (CCRC) uses.
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Accessory uses as provided in the R-2 District.
(2) Community facilities developed as accessory uses to a garden
apartment development.
(3) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses, that shall occupy not more than 15% of the rear yard, shall
not exceed the height of two stories and 25 feet, shall not exceed
50% of the floor area of the principal structure, and that shall be
located not less than 40 feet from the front lot line and no nearer to
the front lot line than the street wall of the main buildings,
including storage garages, provided that such garages shall not
exceed a capacity of one motor vehicle for each 1,000 square feet of
lot area; and provided, further, that the storage garage shall not be
used for storage of more than one commercial vehicle, except that
one additional commercial vehicle may be stored for each 10,000
square feet of lot area. No such commercial vehicle shall exceed
one-and-one-half-ton capacity. Space for noncommercial vehicles
may be leased, provided that space for at least one noncommercial
vehicle may not be leased but must be retained for the use of an
occupant of the building.
E. Additional requirements.
§ 51-94 CHARTER § 51-94
C:341
(1) The bulk requirements for any R-2 District permitted or conditional
use within the R-3 District shall be the same as those in the R-2
District.
(2) The bulk requirements for three-family dwellings within the R-3
District are contained in Table 51-94.1.
Table 51-94.1: Bulk Requirements for Non-Attached 1-, 2-
or 3-Family Dwellings within R-3 District
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be larger than
3,500
Minimum lot width (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be wider than 30
Minimum lot depth (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be deeper than
95
Minimum/maximum yard
depth, front (feet)
Shall be in accordance with
§ 51-87
Minimum yard width, each
side (feet)
3
Minimum yard depth, rear
(feet)
25% of lot depth*
Maximum lot coverage
(percent)
50%
Maximum building height
(stories)
3
Maximum building height
(feet)
35
Maximum density (dwelling
units per acre)
34
Maximum floor area ratio —
NOTE:
* Need not exceed 45 feet.
(3) The bulk requirements for townhouses within the R-3 District are
contained in Table 51-94.2.
§ 51-94 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-94
C:342
Table 51-94.2: Bulk Requirements for Townhouses
Minimum lot area (square feet) 1,500 per townhouse unit
Minimum lot width (feet) 18
Minimum lot depth (feet) 70
Minimum yard depth, front (feet) In accordance with § 51-87
Maximum yard width, one side
(feet)
0 on one side
Minimum yard width, other side
(feet)
3 or zero on other side
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 15 feet
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 80%
Maximum building height (stories) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
30
Maximum floor area ratio —
(4) The bulk requirements for multifamily dwellings up to five stories
in the R-3 District are contained in Table 51-94.3.
Table 51-94.3: Bulk Requirements for Multifamily
Dwellings (Up to 5 Stories)
Minimum lot area (square feet) 8,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 90
Minimum/maximum yard depth,
front (feet)
In accordance with § 51-87
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
3
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
6
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 20
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 60%
Maximum building height (stories) 5
Maximum building height (feet) 60
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
45
Maximum floor area ratio —
(5) The bulk requirements for garden apartments within the R-3
District are contained in Table 51-94.4.
§ 51-94 CHARTER § 51-94
C:343
Table 51-94.4: Bulk Requirements for Garden Apartments
Minimum lot area (square feet) 30,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 150
Minimum lot depth (feet) 150
Minimum yard width, front (feet) 20
Maximum yard width, front (feet) 25
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
10
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
10
Minimum yard width, corner side
(feet)
20
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 20
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 50%
Maximum building height (stories) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
30
Maximum floor area ratio —
(6) The parking and loading requirements for the R-3 District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(7) The sign regulations for the R-3 District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
F. Supplementary regulations for garden apartments. In addition to the
height and area regulations of the R-3 District, the following
regulations shall apply specifically to garden apartments:
(1) Each building shall front either on a public street or on a common
yard or court at least 25 feet wide.
(2) No building or part thereof shall be erected more than 300 feet in
clear distance from a street or roadway.
(3) No building or part thereof shall be erected more than 300 feet in
clear depth from a fire hydrant located either on a street bounding
the lot or project of which the building is a part or located within
the lot or project area itself. Every such fire hydrant shall have a
minimum barrel diameter of 4 1/2 inches and a connecting main of
six inches in diameter.
(4) The minimum distance between buildings shall be 20 feet.
Individual buildings connected by common stairwells or party walls
§ 51-94 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-94
C:344
shall be permitted if the distance between such stairwells or party
walls shall not be greater than 150 feet; and provided, further, that
the design as determined by the Site Plan Review Committee is
such as to avoid undue monotony in appearance.
(5) Outdoor usable open space. There shall be provided outdoor usable
open space, as defined herein, for each dwelling unit according to
Table 51-94.5.
Table 51-94.5: Required Outdoor Usable Open Space for
Garden Apartments
Number of Dwelling Units
Required Outdoor Usable
Open Space Per Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Up to 75 120 per unit
From 76 to 150 90 per additional unit
Over 150 75 per additional unit
(6) No driveway or parking area shall be within 10 feet of any window
in the front facade of any residential building nor shall any parking
area be within 10 feet of any other window which is part of a
dwelling unit, and in addition thereto, there shall be a safety and
buffer area of not less than 10 feet in width separating the main
entrance of each residential building from any driveway or parking
area to provide a landscaped or paved area for pedestrian use
which connects each residential building with the public street.
Such parking area may be located between the main buildings and
the street bounding the line, provided that it shall be set back no
less than 20 feet from any such street line and shall be screened
from the street by hedges or other attractive and suitable
shrubbing, and the area between such parking and street line shall
be fully landscaped.
(7) No portion of the building below the first story or above the third
story shall be used for dwelling purposes, except as provided in
Subsection F(8) of this section.
(8) No space below the first story or above the third story of any
garden apartment building shall be used for dwelling purposes,
except that a basement, where the floor is less than three feet
below grade, may contain living quarters for the superintendent of
the buildings and his family and for other employees of the building
owner, and such a basement shall not be counted as a story for the
purposes of height regulation under this section.
(9) In any garden apartment development, all public utilities, including
but not limited to electrical wires, telephone wires, sewerage pipes,
§ 51-94 CHARTER § 51-94
C:345
§ 51-95. R-4 District (Multifamily Structures, High-Rise
Apartments, Hotels).
gaslines and waterlines, shall be installed beneath the surface of
the ground.
(10) Owners of garden apartment developments shall be responsible for
the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the R-4 District.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) A building or premises in the R-4 District shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(a) One- and two-family dwellings as permitted in the R-2 District.
This use, however, is prohibited on any lot larger than 8,000
square feet.
(b) Townhouses as permitted in the R-2 District and subject to
requirements under § 51-93F.
(c) Garden apartments, subject to supplemental requirements
under § 51-94F.
(d) Three-family dwellings as permitted in the R-3 District. This
use, however, is prohibited on any lot larger than 8,000 square
feet.
(e) Multifamily structures not to exceed five stories.
(f) Preexisting mixed residential/commercial uses are permitted
to remain and retain their physical configuration. Any change
of commercial occupancy shall be to a use permitted in the C-1
District, and all signage shall be replaced with signage only of
the type permitted by this chapter. Expansion of such a
structure, enlargement of commercial area, paving additional
parking/loading area or adding commercial units is not
permitted.
(g) Parks and playgrounds owned and operated by the City, by any
of its agencies or by the Essex County Park Commission, or
community gardens authorized by the East Orange
Department of Public Works and the Department of Policy,
Planning and Development.
(h) Premises used for municipal purposes, except public works
garages and solid waste facilities.
§ 51-94 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-95
C:346
(i) Home professional office uses, provided there is no external
signage, no delivery or company vehicles parked on site, and
there are no employees other than residents of the household.
(j) High-rise multifamily structures.
(2) No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type
retail use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club
or charitable or philanthropic institution.
C. Conditional uses. In the R-4 District, the following uses shall be
permitted as conditional uses, subject to approval by the Planning
Board, subject to the standards contained in Article XXIII (§ 51-118) of
this chapter:
(1) Conditional uses permitted in the R-3 District.
(2) Commercial service facilities primarily for the benefit of and to
meet the needs of the tenants of the apartment structure.
(3) Areas for parking private automobiles, for which no fee is charged,
in connection with a building or structure on a bordering lot or on a
lot within 400 feet, provided that such building or structure is used
as permitted in this section.
(4) Senior care community (SCC) and continuing care retirement
community (CCRC) uses.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses shall be the same as provided in the R-3 District.
(2) Community facilities developed as accessory uses to a high-rise
multifamily structure shall be permitted.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for any permitted or conditionally permitted
use in the R-3 District shall apply in the R-4 District.
(2) The bulk requirements for high-rise multifamily structures within
the R-4 District are contained in Table 51-95.1.
Table 51-95.1: Bulk Requirements for High-Rise
Multifamily Structures
Minimum lot area (square feet) 20,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 130
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Minimum/maximum yard depth,
front (feet)
In accordance with § 51-87
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
10
§ 51-95 CHARTER § 51-95
C:347
Table 51-95.1: Bulk Requirements for High-Rise
Multifamily Structures
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
15
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 1/3 of building height
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 60%
Minimum building height (stories) 6
Maximum building height (stories,
feet)
20, 230
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
100
(3) The parking and loading requirements for the R-4 District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(4) The sign regulations for the R-4 District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
F. Supplementary regulations for high-rise apartments. In addition to the
height and area regulations of the R-4 District, the following
regulations shall apply specifically to high-rise apartments:
(1) An accessory parking structure, limited to two stories above
ground, may be permitted to cover an additional 20% of the site
area. An underground parking garage upon the roof of which is
situated permanent lawns, gardens and recreation areas shall not
be deemed a building in the computation of lot coverage. Parking
areas and access drives shall not be permitted to cover more than
35% of the site area.
(2) The minimum distance between more than one high-rise structure
on a site shall be equal to 20 feet.
(3) Unless otherwise provided as a conditional use, all parking spaces,
if leased or sold, shall be leased or sold only to the tenants of the
building, and if leased, the leasing fee shall be included in the
rental fee for the apartment.
(4) There shall be no parking permitted on the access drives of any
high-rise development.
(5) All parking areas maintained as a part of a high-rise development
shall be so lighted as to provide not less than 1 1/2 footcandle of
illumination at all times in all parts of such areas.
(6) Widths of rights-of-way and construction of primary access drives
shall conform to prevailing City street standards.
§ 51-95 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-95
C:348
(7) All public utility facilities installed within a high-rise development
or in connection with a high-rise development, including but not
limited to electrical wires, telephone wires, sewerage pipes,
gaslines and waterlines, shall be installed beneath the surface of
the ground. All costs shall be borne by the developer or owner(s).
(8) Sewage disposal facilities shall be installed according to the
requirements of the City of East Orange Department of Public
Works, all costs being borne by the developer or owner.
(9) All principal buildings or parts of buildings in the high-rise
development shall be constructed of Class A fire-resistive
construction.
(10) All fire protection measures and alarm systems shall be installed
according to the requirements of the City of East Orange Fire
Department, all costs being borne by the developer or owner(s).
(11) The owner(s) of the high-rise development shall be responsible for
the collection and disposal of garbage therein. No incinerators
shall be permitted or maintained as part of a high-rise
development. Processing shall be by a hydraulic compaction unit
and garbage so compacted shall be removed regularly, all costs
being borne by the apartment owner(s).
(12) Outdoor usable open space.
(a) Outdoor usable open space, which includes balconies, rooftop
patios and lawn area, shall be provided as specified in Table
51-95.2.
Table 51-95.2: Required Outdoor Usable Space for
High-Rise Multifamily Structures
Number of Dwelling
Units
Required Outdoor Usable Open
Space Per Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Up to 75 40 per unit, 625 minimum
From 76 to 150 30 per additional unit
Over 150 25 per additional unit
(b) The approval of the Site Plan Review Committee shall be
required for the size, shape and location of such space.
(13) Commercial service facilities.
(a) High-rise apartment developments may include commercial
service facilities therein primarily for the benefit of the tenants
of the apartment, provided that the facility shall meet the
following standards:
§ 51-95 CHARTER § 51-95
C:349
§ 51-96. R-O District (High-Rise Multifamily Structures, High-Rise
Offices).
[1] It is in its entirety physically separate from any living unit,
with an independent entrance to common hallways,
corridors or the exterior of the premises.
[2] There is no advertising or display attracting attention to
the premises other than to meet the minimum
requirements of any statute or ordinance and except a
nameplate of the size utilized for professional offices.
[3] Such facility shall be located only in the basement or at the
first-floor level of the premises.
[4] Such facility shall be of a kind and type which is an
appropriate amenity to a multifamily residential building,
shall contain no stock-in-trade for display or sale, and shall
be equivalent or comparable to the following types of
establishments: dry-cleaning or laundry drop without
equipment, barbershop, beauty parlor, health club or
grocery.
[5] No facility shall be permitted in any apartment building or
project containing fewer than 100 dwelling units, nor shall
any such individual establishment exceed 500 square feet
in area.
[6] Permission to operate such facility shall be conditioned on
the owner and operator agreeing that such facility shall
not be operated except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
[7] There shall be provided two parking spaces per employee
of such facility in apartment buildings which are designed
to serve primarily the use of tenants.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the R-O District.
B. A building or premises in the R-O District shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) All uses permitted in the R-4 District.
(2) High-rise business, professional and governmental offices.
C. Conditional uses. All conditional uses permitted in the R-4 District shall
be permitted, with the same conditions and regulations, in the R-O
District.
§ 51-95 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-96
C:350
D. Accessory uses. Community facilities developed as accessory uses to a
high-rise multifamily dwelling, parking areas and parking structures
shall be permitted as accessory uses.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for high-rise multifamily structures within
the R-O District are contained in Table 51-96.1.
Table 51-96.1: Bulk Requirements for High-Rise
Multifamily or Office Structures
Minimum lot area (square feet) 20,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 130
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Minimum/maximum yard depth,
front (feet)
In accordance with § 51-87
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
10
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
15
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 1/3 of building height
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 60%
Minimum building height (stories) 6
Maximum building height (stories,
feet)
20, 230
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
100
(2) The bulk requirements for business, professional and governmental
offices, including drive-in banks, but excluding other drive-in
establishments, within the R-O District are contained in Table
51-96.2.
Table 51-96.2: Bulk Requirements for Non-High-Rise Office
Structures
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be larger than
3,500
Minimum lot width (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be wider than 30
§ 51-96 CHARTER § 51-96
C:351
Table 51-96.2: Bulk Requirements for Non-High-Rise Office
Structures
Minimum lot depth (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted to
retain their size and dimension,
but lots created through
subdivision shall be deeper than
95
Minimum/maximum yard
depth, front (feet)
Shall be in accordance with
§ 51-87
Minimum yard width, each
side (feet)
3
Minimum yard depth, rear
(feet)
25% of lot depth*
Maximum lot coverage
(percent)
50%
Maximum building height
(stories)
3
Maximum building height
(feet)
35
Maximum density (dwelling
units per acre)
37
Maximum floor area ratio —
NOTE:
* Need not exceed 45 feet.
(3) The parking and loading requirements for the R-O District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(4) The sign regulations for the R-O District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
F. Supplementary regulations for high-rise multifamily dwellings. Highrise
multifamily dwellings in the R-O District are subject to the same
supplementary regulations which apply in the R-4 District.
G. Supplementary regulations for high-rise office structures. In addition to
the height and area regulations of the R-O District, the following
regulations shall apply specifically to high-rise office structures:
(1) An accessory parking structure, limited to two stories above
ground, may be permitted to cover an additional 20% of the site
area. An underground parking garage upon the roof of which is
situated permanent lawns, gardens and recreation areas shall not
be deemed a building in the computation of lot coverage. Total
§ 51-96 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-96
C:352
§ 51-97. CCC District (Continuing Care Community).
coverage by principal buildings, accessory buildings, parking areas
and drives shall not exceed 75% of the site area.
(2) The minimum distance between a high-rise structure and another
structure on any site shall be equal to 1/2 the height of the taller
structure.
(3) There shall be no parking permitted on the interior streets and
access drives of any high-rise office development.
(4) All parking areas maintained as part of a high-rise development
shall be so lighted as to provide not less than one footcandle of
illumination at all times in all parts of such areas.
(5) Widths of rights-of-way and construction of primary interior streets
shall conform to prevailing City street standards.
(6) All public utility facilities installed within a high-rise development
or in connection with a high-rise development, including but not
limited to electrical wires, telephone wires, sewerage pipes,
gaslines, waterlines and cable television, shall be installed beneath
the surface of the ground, all costs being borne by the developer or
owner.
(7) Sewage facilities shall be installed according to the requirements
of the City of East Orange Department of Public Works, all costs
being borne by the developer or owner.
(8) All principal buildings or parts of buildings in the high-rise office
development shall be constructed of Class A fire-resistive
construction.
(9) All fire protection measures and alarm systems shall be installed
according to the requirements of the City of East Orange Fire
Department, all costs being borne by the developer or owner.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the CCC District.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
(1) Uses permitted in the R-3 District.
(2) SCC or CCRC uses, as defined in § 51-5.
C. Conditional uses. The conditional uses allowed in the R-3 District shall
be permitted as conditional uses in the CCC District, subject to the
approval of the Planning Board and in accordance with the standards
contained in Article XXIII (§ 51-118) of this chapter.
D. Accessory uses.
§ 51-96 CHARTER § 51-97
C:353
(1) The following accessory structures and uses shall be permitted
within principal buildings for the SCC and CCRC permitted uses:
physical therapy facilities, recreation and entertainment facilities,
libraries, food preparation facilities, dining facilities, linen service
facilities, nursing services, housekeeping services, security
facilities, administrative offices, staff facilities, storage and
maintenance facilities, chapels, temporary guest lodging facilities,
parking facilities, barbershops and beauty parlors, facilities for the
sale of sundries, personal articles, newspapers, food and similar
convenience products to the residents, and such other uses as are
customarily associated with and subordinate to the principal
permitted uses. Outdoor recreation facilities shall also be
permitted. Except as may otherwise be authorized, all accessory
facilities, functions and services shall be for the exclusive use and
benefit of the residents of the City.
(2) Accessory uses as provided in the R-3 District shall be permitted for
permitted R-3 uses in the CCC District.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for any use permitted or conditionally
permitted in the R-3 District located within the CCC District shall
be those that apply in the R-3 District.
(2) The bulk requirements for the principal buildings for SCC or CCRC
uses within the CCC District are contained in Article XVI (§§ 51-83
through 51-91) of this chapter and in Table 51-97.1.
Table 51-97.1: Bulk Requirements for SCC and CCRC Uses
Minimum lot area (acres) 8
Minimum lot width (feet) 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Minimum yard width, front (feet) 50
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
*
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
**
Minimum yard width, corner side
(feet)
50
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 40
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 25%
Maximum building height (stories) 4
Maximum building height (feet) 45
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
65***
§ 51-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-97
C:354
Table 51-97.1: Bulk Requirements for SCC and CCRC Uses
Maximum floor area ratio 1.0
NOTES:
* Greater of 20 feet or 1/3 of building height.
** Greater of 40 feet or 1/3 of building height.
*** 65 dwelling units per acre or 65 beds per acre.
(3) Accessory structures and buildings shall comply with the bulk
requirements for principal buildings, except that one-story
accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard setback of 20
feet. Accessory uses shall be constructed and managed as part of
the SCC or CCRC development to provide services to residents and
their guests and shall not be for the general public. No exterior
signs shall be permitted, beyond those allowed and specified for the
CCC District. No one accessory use shall have a floor area greater
than 1,000 square feet.
(4) The parking and loading requirements for the CCC District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements. In addition, the
provisions of § 51-143 shall apply to permitted accessory uses for a
SCC or CCRC permitted use.
(5) The sign regulations for the CCC District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
(6) The site plan standards as enumerated in Articles XIII (§ 51-75),
XIV (§§ 51-76 through 51-79) and XV (§§ 51-80 through 51-82) shall
be deemed the minimum requirements for all site plan and
subdivision applications unless otherwise indicated.
F. Supplementary regulations for SCC or CCRC uses.
(1) Senior care communities and continuing care retirement
communities shall be permitted, subject to the following additional
requirements:
(a) A continuing care retirement community (CCRC) use or a
senior care community (SCC) use must be age-restricted as set
forth in § 51-5; must include independent living units in singlefamily,
two-family or multifamily structures; and must also
include assisted living units and nursing care units.
(b) The SCC or CCRC shall also include facilities and
arrangements for providing continuing care and meals for
residents, with or without common dining facilities, and may
involve accessory services customarily incidental to a
continuing care retirement community.
§ 51-97 CHARTER § 51-97
C:355
(c) A CCRC or SCC use shall be designed and intended to and shall
offer or provide, as a minimum, services to meet the daily
physical needs of elderly persons, as follows:
[1] Medical care.
[2] Service of three meals a day.
[3] Maid and cleaning service of individual dwelling units.
[4] Regular local transportation to and from community
facilities and shopping areas.
[5] Janitorial service of common areas and maintenance of
facility grounds.
(d) The combined number of assisted living units and nursing care
units shall not be less than 25% nor more than 40% of the total
number of independent living units.
(e) For purposes of these permitted uses:
[1] An "independent living unit" is a dwelling unit in a SCC or
CCRC development which is unrestricted except as to an
age requirement for occupancy.
[2] An "assisted living unit" is a unit in an assisted living
facility which is licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Health to provide housing and congregate dining and to
assure that assisted living services are available when
needed to adult persons unrelated to the proprietor. Such
units shall offer, as a minimum, one unfurnished room, a
private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the
unit entrance. "Assisted living" is a level of care between
nursing care and independent living and includes a
coordinated array of supportive personal and health
services available 24 hours per day to residents who have
been assessed to need these services. Assisted living is
intended to promote resident self-direction and
participation in decisions that emphasize independence,
individuality, privacy, dignity and homelike surroundings.
[3] "Nursing care units" are beds in a nursing facility that is
licensed by the New Jersey State Department of Health to
provide health care under medical supervision and
continuous nursing care for 24 or more consecutive hours
to patients who do not require the degree of care and
treatment which a hospital provides and who, because of
their physical or mental condition, require continuous
nursing care and services above the level of room and
board.
(f) There shall be no parking area in the front yard.
§ 51-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-97
C:356
(g) There shall be a variety of design, architectural modes and
setbacks for the purpose of presenting an aesthetically
desirable overall effect over the entire development, with
varied elevations and appearances and without excess
uniformity.
(h) The minimum room size of any room, except kitchens and
bathrooms, shall be 120 square feet, excluding closets or
storage space. Each apartment unit shall have a minimum of
500 square feet.
(i) Minimum outdoor usable open space shall be provided for each
dwelling unit or nursing home bed, as provided in Table
51-97.2.
Table 51-97.2: Required Outdoor Usable Open Space for
SCC and CCRC Use
Number of Beds or
Units
Required Outdoor Usable Open
Space Per Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Up to 75 120 per unit
From 76 to 150 90 per additional unit
Over 150 75 per additional unit
(j) In addition to the standards and criteria set forth in this
chapter, a SCC or CCRC development shall be designed
especially for this age group, incorporating necessary safety
and convenience features. In general, the site amenities are
more critical than for multifamily projects, since residents will
spend nearly all their time at the complex. Yards and passive
recreation areas shall be fully landscaped. There shall be a
composition of small, intimate yard and court areas for a
variety of passive activities. Safety must be emphasized in the
design. Particular attention shall be given to pedestrian use.
Vehicular circulation drives shall be separated from pedestrian
walks. Abrupt grades shall be avoided, and all changes in
grades in the walk system shall be accomplished by ramps. Full
compliance with all state and federal accessibility
requirements, including the Americans With Disabilities Act, is
also required.
(k) Any applicant for CCRC or SCC development shall comply with
the applicable provisions and procedures contained in Article
VIII (§§ 51-48 through 51-49), Article IX (§§ 51-50 through
51-51), Article X (§§ 51-52 through 51-59), Article XI (§§ 51-60
through 51-66) and Article XII (§§ 51-67 through 51-74).
(l) A certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the completion
of each primary building, provided that the installation of all
§ 51-97 CHARTER § 51-97
C:357
utilities, sidewalks, parking areas, roads and landscaping
affecting the particular structure is satisfactory and has met all
requirements as herein specified.
(m) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
XXIV (§§ 51-147 through 51-165) of this chapter. Parking may
be in the rear of each primary building or in a central parking
area provided off the driveway, street or roadway or in a
garage, where provided, or in a detached garage to the rear of
the residential dwellings.
(n) Driveways shall not be less than 12 feet wide in one direction
of travel or 20 feet wide in dual direction of travel. Such
driveway may be placed on the perimeter of the site and shall
not be closer than 10 feet to any dwelling unit or buildings.
Ingress or egress in the rear of the property or on either side of
the property may be used as a common passage to parking or
to a garage or the central parking area so provided. In addition
thereto, there shall be a safety and buffer area of not less than
10 feet in width separating the main entrance of each building
from any driveway or parking area to provide a landscaped or
paved area for pedestrian use which connects each residential
building with the public street.
(o) No interior roadway within the complex shall be less than 28
feet wide. Where a cul-de-sac is provided, a diameter of not
less than 90 feet shall be required.
(p) The developer or developers, sponsor or sponsors, owner or
owners of any CCRC or SCC development shall make proper
and adequate provisions for the installation of roads, drives,
walkways, parking facilities, water, sewerage and drainage
facilities and such other desirable and necessary facilities in
accordance with the requirements of the Planning Board or
other municipal authority or agency having jurisdiction,
control and supervision over the respective requirements
herein mentioned. The installation of any and all improvements
herein required shall be the responsibility of the owner,
owners, developer, developers, sponsor or sponsors, and no
building permit shall be issued unless and until the owner,
owners, developer, developers, sponsor or sponsors shall, in
accordance with the applicant, post the necessary bond to
secure the installation of all site improvements necessary,
including fire hydrants as may be required by the Fire
Department of the City.
(q) In any CCRC or SCC development, all public utilities on the
site, including but not limited to electrical wires, telephone
wires, sewerage pipes, gaslines and waterlines, shall be
installed beneath the surface of the ground.
§ 51-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-97
C:358
(r) No building or part hereof shall be erected more than 300 feet
in clear distance from a street or roadway.
(s) No building or part thereof shall be erected more than 300 feet
in clear depth from a fire hydrant located either on a street
bounding the lot or project of which the building is a part or
located within the lot or project area itself. Every such fire
hydrant shall have a minimum barrel diameter of 4 1/2 inches
and a connecting main of six inches in diameter.
(t) No portion of the building below the first story shall be used for
dwelling purposes, except that a basement, where the floor is
less than three feet below grade, may contain living quarters
for the superintendent of the buildings and his/her family and
for other employees of the building owner, and such a
basement shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of
height regulation under this section.
(u) Owners of CCRC or SCC developments shall be responsible for
the collection and disposal of garbage, recycling and refuse.
(v) An accessory parking structure, limited to two stories above
ground, may be permitted to cover an additional 20% of the
site area. An underground parking garage upon the roof of
which is situated permanent lawns, gardens and recreation
areas shall not be deemed a building in the computation of lot
coverage. Parking areas and access drives shall not be
permitted to cover more than 35% of the site area.
(w) Distance between buildings. No building shall be located
closer to another building than the height of the taller building,
but in no event less than 25 feet.
(x) No principal building shall be located within 75 feet of a
residential district line.
(y) All parking spaces, if leased or sold, shall be leased or sold only
to the residents of the CCRC or SCC development, and if
leased, the leasing fee shall be included in the rental fee for the
apartment.
(z) There shall be no parking permitted on the access drives.
(aa) Documentation. Prior to site plan approval for a SCC or CCRC
use, appropriate deed restrictions limiting the use of the
property to the approved uses, as defined in this section, shall
be prepared by the applicant, reviewed for compliance by the
Planning Board and recorded in the County Hall of Records.
(bb) One assisted living facility, one senior citizen building and one
nursing home facility shall be built on a site before an
§ 51-97 CHARTER § 51-97
C:359
application for a second principal building of any type may be
submitted to the Planning Board.
(cc) Each component of a CCRC development shall be subject to all
of the requirements of the State of New Jersey relating to each
particular permitted use. To qualify as a CCRC, the applicant
must demonstrate that the continuing care retirement
community has received or will be able to receive a certificate
of authority from the State of New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, pursuant to the Continuing Care
Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure
Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 et seq.).
§ 51-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-97
C:360
ARTICLE XVIII
Commercial Districts
[Amended 12-6-2013 by Ord. No. 16-2013]
§ 51-98. Establishment of commercial district classifications and
boundaries.
§ 51-99. Use regulations for commercial districts.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this article or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this article are the district
regulations for the City of East Orange commercial districts.
B. Commercial corridors. There are hereby established two commercial
corridors, which shall be considered the prime commercial districts
within the City of East Orange, and which shall be identified on the
Zoning Map as follows:
CBD (Central Avenue, Central Business District)
MSE (Main Street Entertainment District)
C. Pocket commercial districts. There are hereby established two types of
commercial pocket districts, which shall be provided throughout the
City at key nodes and locations and intended to provide for commercial
uses that serve the surrounding neighborhoods, and which shall be
identified on the Zoning Map as follows:
C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial Districts)
C-2 (Gateway Commercial Districts)
A. There is hereby established the following "Schedule A - Table of Use
Regulations for Commercial Districts," which identifies the permitted
nonresidential uses within the City's commercial districts.73 The
permitted uses are classified based on NAICS codes (North American
Industrial Classification System) established by the United States
Census for classification of businesses. Land use definitions under the
NAICS shall apply when interpreting land uses within the matrix.
B. For the purposes of this matrix, the following abbreviations shall apply:
P1 indicates the use is permitted on the ground floor and floors
above.
P2 indicates the use is permitted on floors above the ground floor, but
not the ground floor.
C indicates the use is conditionally permitted.
NP indicates the use is not permitted.
73.Editor's Note: Schedule A: Table of Use Regulations for Commercial Districts is attached
to this chapter.
§ 51-98 CHARTER § 51-100
C:361
§ 51-100. CBD District (Central Avenue, Central Business District).
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the CBD District.
B. Permitted uses. All buildings or premises in the CBD District shall be
used only for one or more of the purposes contained herein, provided
they meet the performance standards contained in § 51-116. Any of
these uses may be in combination of the same. By way of example, a
food store may also provide restaurant services. Only the following
uses, however, are permitted:
(1) Commercial uses in accordance with Schedule A.74
(2) Low-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-3 District.
(3) Mid-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-4 District.
(4) Apartment dwelling units above first-story commercial units.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses
in the CBD District:
(1) Outdoor dining as accessory to a table-service restaurant.
(2) Accessory parking areas other than on the same lot with the
principal use.
D. Prohibited uses. Any use that is not specifically permitted or
conditionally permitted is prohibited.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for the CBD are contained in Table 51-100.
Table 51-100: Bulk Requirements for CBD District
Lot Size Requirements by
Development Type
Low- or Mid-Rise
Commercial or Low- or
Mid-Rise Mixed-Use
Commercial/Residential
Structures
Area (square feet) 1,000
Width (feet) 20
Yard requirements (feet)
Front, minimum and
maximum shall be in
accordance with § 51-87
*
74.Editor's Note: Schedule A: Table of Use Regulations for Commercial Districts is attached
to this chapter.
§ 51-100 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-100
C:362
§ 51-101. MSE District (Main Street Entertainment).
Table 51-100: Bulk Requirements for CBD District
Lot Size Requirements by
Development Type
Low- or Mid-Rise
Commercial or Low- or
Mid-Rise Mixed-Use
Commercial/Residential
Structures
Side, one 0
Side, both 0
Side, corner shall be in
accordance with § 51-87
*
Rear 0
Building requirements
Height (feet) 65 feet at lot line with street,
but an additional 25 feet of
height is permitted that shall
be stepped-back at least 10
feet from the front wall of the
lower part of the building
Stories 7
Maximum dwelling units per
acre (also regulated by
§ 51-112)
100
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the MSE District.
B. Permitted uses. All buildings or premises in the MSE District shall be
used only for one or more of the purposes contained herein, provided
they meet the performance standards contained in § 51-116. Any of
these uses may be in combination of the same. By way of example, a
food store may also provide restaurant services. Only the following
uses, however, are permitted:
(1) Commercial uses in accordance with Schedule A.75
(2) Low-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-3 District.
(3) Mid-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-4 District.
(4) Apartment dwelling units above first-story commercial units.
75.Editor's Note: Schedule A: Table of Use Regulations for Commercial Districts is attached
to this chapter.
§ 51-100 CHARTER § 51-101
C:363
§ 51-102. C-1 District (Neighborhood Commercial).
C. Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses
in the MSE District:
(1) Outdoor dining as accessory to a table-service restaurant.
(2) Accessory parking areas other than on the same lot with the
principal use.
D. Prohibited uses. Any use that is not specifically permitted or
conditionally permitted is prohibited.
E. Additional requirements. The bulk requirements for the MSE District
are contained in the Table of Bulk Requirements for Main Street
Entertainment (MSE) District.76
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the C-1 District.
B. Permitted uses. All buildings or premises in the C-1 District shall be
used only for one or more of the purposes contained herein, provided
they meet the performance standards contained in § 51-116. Any of
these uses may be in combination of the same. By way of example, a
food store may also provide restaurant services. Only the following
uses, however, are permitted:
(1) Commercial uses in accordance with Schedule A.77
(2) Low-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-3 District.
(3) Mid-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-4 District.
(4) Apartment dwelling units above first-story commercial units.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses
in the C-1 District:
(1) Outdoor dining as accessory to a table-service restaurant.
(2) Accessory parking areas other than on the same lot with the
principal use.
D. Prohibited uses. Any use that is not specifically permitted or
conditionally permitted is prohibited.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for the C-1 are contained in Table 51-102.
76.Editor's Note: The Table of Bulk Requirements for Main Street Entertainment (MSE)
District is attached to this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: Schedule A: Table of Use Regulations for Commercial Districts is attached
to this chapter.
§ 51-101 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-102
C:364
Table 51-102: Bulk Requirements for C-1 District
Minimum lot area (square feet) Existing lots shall be permitted
to retain their size and
dimension, but lots created
through subdivision shall be
larger than 2,200 square feet
Minimum lot width (feet) Existing lots shall be permitted
to retain their size and
dimension, but lots created
through subdivision shall be
wider than 20 feet
Minimum lot depth (feet) —
Minimum yard depth, front
(feet)
Shall be in accordance with
§ 51-87
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
Zero, but if any side yard is
provided, it shall be at least 3
feet wide.
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
—*
Minimum yard depth, rear (feet) 10
Maximum building height
(stories)
3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum density (dwelling
units per acre)
35
Maximum floor area ratio —
* Average of buildings within 200 feet on each side. Minimum of
five feet required if there are no existing buildings within 200
feet of the property on the same side of the street.
(2) The parking and loading requirements for the C-1 District are
contained in §§ 51-163 and 51-164, Off-street parking
requirements, and Off-street loading requirements, respectively.
(3) The sign regulations for the C-1 District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
F. Supplementary regulations.
(1) Curb cuts shall be confined to that necessary for access to off-street
parking facilities as required herein.
(2) No building in the C-1 District shall have more than 40% of the first
floor devoted to storage purposes incidental to the primary use.
§ 51-102 CHARTER § 51-102
C:365
§ 51-103. C-2 District (Gateway Commercial).
(3) The partial conversion of any building or premises for use as a
business is prohibited.
(4) No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type
retail use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club
or charitable or philanthropic institution.
(5) Security gates when installed on commercial buildings shall be at
least 75% open area to permit observation of the building interior.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the C-2 District.
B. Permitted building types. Building types permitted in the C-2 District
shall conform to the standards that are applicable to buildings in the
C-1 District; however, the following building types specified below may
also be constructed:
(1) Gateway liner/podium building.
(a) General provisions. Gateway liner/podium buildings are
buildings with part of the first level, at the building's rear, used
as an indoor parking area and/or the rear yard area used for
parking with the front of the first floor of the building used for
commercial purposes. The minimum depth of this front area is
40 feet from the streetline. The garage area shall be enclosed
by walls at areas where the exterior of the building is visible to
a public street. A portion of the front of the first floor may be
used for a vehicle pass-through area to provide access from the
street to the indoor parking area. The maximum width of such
a pass-through is 22 feet. The second floor (and higher floors, if
applicable) are above all or some of the parking spaces. This
building type is typically mixed-use.
(b) Plans and specifications. Refer to Table 110.A for permitted
quantities and dimensions.
Table 110.A: Specifications for Gateway Liner/Podium
Building
Lot width 50 feet
Lot depth 100 feet
Setbacks:
Front (minimum/maximum) 0 feet
Side (minimum) 0 feet or greater than 3
feet
Rear (minimum) 15 feet
§ 51-102 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-103
C:366
Height:
Stories (minimum/maximum) 2/5
Height in feet (maximum) 65 feet
Height of first story
(minimum/maximum)
10 feet/16 feet
Parking:
Location Rear structure
Access, mid-block lot Passage through building
(maximum 22 feet wide)
Access, corner lot Side street
Building width (minimum) 80% of lot
Lot coverage (maximum) 90%
(2) Gateway mixed-use building.
(a) General provisions. A multistory building with multiple
dwellings or offices in upper stories and retail or service uses
on the ground floor. Residential uses may not be placed on the
ground floor. Often, these buildings have common walls on one
or both side lot lines.
(b) Plans and specifications. Refer to Table 110.B for permitted
quantities and dimensions.
Table 110.B: Specifications for Gateway Mixed-Use
Building
Lot width As exists, or minimum 20
feet if being subdivided
Lot depth (minimum) As exists, or minimum 100
feet if being subdivided
Setbacks:
Front (minimum/maximum) 0 feet/0 feet
Side (minimum/maximum) 0 feet/15 feet
Rear (minimum/maximum) 20 feet
Height:
Stories (minimum/maximum) 2/4
Height in feet (maximum) 70 feet
Height of first story
(minimum/maximum)
10 feet/17 feet
Parking:
Location Rear, side
§ 51-103 CHARTER § 51-103
C:367
Table 110.B: Specifications for Gateway Mixed-Use
Building
Access, mid-block lot Adjoining lot if easement
available
Access, corner lot Side street
Building width (minimum) 80% of lot
Lot coverage (maximum) 90%
(c) Other provisions.
[1] Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified
in Article XXIV (§§ 51-147 through 51-165).
[2] Signage requirements are specified in Article XXV
(§§ 51-166 through 51-170).
(3) Existing buildings.
(a) General provisions. Existing buildings within the C-2 Districts
are permitted to retain their existing configuration in order to
continue to be used for their current purpose or to be
adaptively reused for a use permitted in this district. The
following bulk standards shall apply to additions or alterations
to these buildings.
(b) Plans and specifications. Refer to Table 110.C for permitted
quantities and dimensions.
Table 110.C: Specifications for Existing Buildings if
They Are Being Enlarged
Setbacks:
Front (minimum/maximum) 0 feet
Side (minimum) 0 feet or greater than 3
feet
Rear (minimum) 15 feet
Height:
Stories (minimum/maximum) 2/6
Height in feet (maximum) 70 feet
Height of first story
(minimum/maximum)
10 feet/16 feet
Parking:
Location Rear structure
Access, mid-block lot Passage through building
(maximum 22 feet wide)
Access, corner lot Side street
§ 51-103 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-103
C:368
Building width (minimum) 80% of lot
Lot coverage (maximum) 90%
C. Permitted uses. All buildings or premises in the C-2 District shall be
used only for one or more of the purposes contained herein, provided
they meet the performance standards contained in § 51-116. Any of
these uses may be in combination of the same. By way of example, a
food store may also provide restaurant services. Only the following
uses, however, are permitted, subject to the building type:
(1) Commercial uses in accordance with Schedule A.78
(2) Low-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-3 District.
(3) Mid-rise dwellings subject to the regulations of the R-4 District.
(4) Apartment dwelling units above first-story commercial units.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Taxi stands.79
E. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Parking lots.
F. Prohibited uses. Any use not expressly permitted is prohibited in the
C-2 District.
G. Additional requirements.
(1) Bulk requirements within the C-2 District are specified by building
type in § 51-87.
(2) The parking and loading requirements for the C-2 District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(3) The sign regulations for the C-2 District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
(4) Security gates when installed on commercial buildings shall be at
least 75% open area to permit observation of the building interior.
78.Editor's Note: Schedule A: Table of Use Regulations for Commercial Districts is attached
to this chapter.
79.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-103 CHARTER § 51-103
C:369

ARTICLE XIX
Industrial Districts
§ 51-104. IND District (Industrial).
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the IND District.
B. Permitted uses. All buildings or premises in the IND District shall be
used only for the following purposes:
(1) Industrial and light industrial uses, including manufacturing,
assembling, processing and warehousing which meet the
performance standards contained in Article XXIX (§§ 51-183
through 51-199).
(2) Dwelling quarters for a caretaker or watchman.
(3) High technology facilities.
(4) Laboratory testing and research facilities in the biotech,
pharmaceutical and similar type industries, provided no hazardous
materials, liquids or gases are used or produced in such a facility.
(5) "Green collar" industrial uses, such as those researching,
producing, distributing or selling clean energy products.
(6) Warehouses.
(7) Senior housing for persons at least 62 years of age and related
facilities.
(8) Any use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
(9) Assembly of dry goods or nonperishable items.
(10) Food processing, storage or distribution.
(11) Laundry facility, wholesale or retail.
(12) Automobile parts sales (inside retail store only).
C. Conditional uses. In the IND District, the following uses shall be
permitted conditional uses, subject to the approval of the Planning
Board and subject to the standards contained in Article XXIII (§ 51-118)
of this chapter:
(1) Retail sales of a factory outlet nature.
(2) Commercial parking lots and structures.
(3) Accessory parking lots or garages located on a lot other than the
location which the principal use is located but no further than 200
§ 51-104 CHARTER § 51-104
C:371
feet from the principal use, except where shared parking is
provided pursuant to § 51-162.
(4) Supermarkets.
(5) Public utility installations.
(6) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities.
(7) Billboards.
(8) Auto repair garages, body shops and auto painting.
(9) Colleges and universities.80
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted within
the IND District:
(1) Parking garages.
(2) Parking lots.
E. Prohibited uses. No building or premises in the IND District shall be
used for any purposes not specifically permitted or conditionally
permitted. Additionally, the following uses are also expressly
prohibited:
(1) No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be
erected or structurally altered for any dwelling purpose, except
that dwelling quarters may be established in connection with any
industrial establishment for necessary watchmen or caretakers
employed upon the premises.
(2) No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type
retail use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club
or charitable or philanthropic institution.
(3) Any use involving outdoor storage, outdoor product processing, or
substantial outdoor waste disposal.
(4) Drive-through establishments, including but not limited to retail,
banking or auto establishments with drive-through service.
(5) Business or vocational schools.
(6) Sexually oriented businesses.
(7) Bars, nightclubs and dance halls without noise-mitigation measures
that comply with state and local standards (65 decibels at property
line).
(8) Massage facilities/massage parlors.
80.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-104 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-104
C:372
(9) Restaurants that are takeout only.
(10) Through-window retail or restaurant.
(11) Outdoor storage.
(12) Automobile alarm, stereo installation.
(13) Check cashing establishment not within bank, pharmacy or grocery
store.
(14) Bail/bonds.
(15) Pawn shops.
(16) Gun stores and ammunition retailers.
(17) Tattoo/body piercing establishments.
(18) Computer server housing facility.
(19) Lumberyard.
(20) Operation facilities for taxicab, bus, ambulance.
(21) Taxi/limousine parking staging facilities.
(22) Heliport.
(23)Kennel, animal boarding/sheltering.
(24) Self storage.
(25) Truck terminal.
(26) Utility (transformer).
(27) Vehicle towing facility.
(28)Waste transfer station.
(29) Materials salvage yards, junkyards, dumps.
(30) Facilities that provide congregate living arrangements that provide
shelter or lodging for profit or charity, with or without meals,
including homeless shelters, rooming houses, hotels without
private bathrooms, or halfway houses.
(31) Facilities for treating or sheltering people with communicable
diseases, not in hospitals.
(32) Philanthropic institutions providing social services.
(33) Boardinghouse or rooming house.
(34) Drug or alcohol treatment facilities.
§ 51-104 CHARTER § 51-104
C:373
§ 51-105. IND-1 District (Mixed Industrial/Commercial).
(35) Methadone clinics.
(36) Soup kitchens, except as operated by a house of worship on its own
property.
(37) Nail salons.
(38) Hair-braiding establishments.
(39) "Dollar stores."
F. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for the IND District are contained in Table
51-104.
Table 51-104: Bulk Requirements for IND District
Minimum lot area (square feet) 10,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Minimum front yard depth (feet) 0
Minimum yard width, one side
(feet)
10
Minimum yard width, both sides
(feet)
10
Minimum width, rear (feet) 10
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 80%
Maximum building height (stories) 5
Maximum building height (feet) 55
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
—
Maximum floor area ratio —
(2) The parking and loading requirements for the Industrial District
are contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(3) The sign regulations for the IND District are contained in XXV
(§§ 51-166 through 51-170) of this chapter.
(4) A screened buffer of at least 25 feet wherever residential uses abut
an industrial land use or zone. Fencing and landscaping must be
adequate in order to shield the industrial building from the
residential structure to the greatest extent possible.
§ 51-104 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-105
C:374
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this section are the district
regulations for the IND-1 District.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
(1) Any use permitted in the IND Industrial District.
(2) High-technology facilities.
(3) Laboratory testing and research facilities in the biotech,
pharmaceutical and similar-type industries.
(4) "Green collar" industrial uses, such as those researching,
producing, distributing or selling clean energy products.
(5) Light manufacturing and assembly uses.
(6) Senior housing for persons at least 62 years of age and related
facilities.
C. Conditional uses. In the IND-1 District, the following uses shall be
permitted conditional uses, subject to the approval of the Planning
Board and subject to the standards contained in Article XXIII (§ 51-118)
of this chapter:
(1) Supermarkets.
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District.
(2) Any accessory use permitted in the IND Industrial District.
E. Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited:
(1) Any use prohibited in the IND District.
(2) Expansion of or increase in density or intensity of use of existing
nonconforming industrial uses.
F. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements of the IND-1 District shall be consistent
with the bulk requirements of the IND District.
(2) The parking and loading requirements for the IND-1 District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(3) The sign regulations shall be consistent with those sign regulations
of the IND District, contained in Article XXV (§§ 51-166 through
51-170) of this chapter.
§ 51-105 CHARTER § 51-105
C:375
(4) A screened buffer of at least 25 feet wherever residential uses abut
an industrial land use or zone. Fencing and landscaping must be
adequate in order to shield the industrial building from the
residential structure to the greatest extent possible.
§ 51-105 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-105
C:376
ARTICLE XX
Institutional Districts
§ 51-106. INST District (Institutional, Medical Related,
Cemeteries).
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this article or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this article are the district
regulations for the INST District.
B. Permitted uses. A building or premises in the INST District shall be
used only for the following purposes:
(1) Hospitals of less than 50 beds, except those primarily for the care
or treatment of mental illnesses, contagious diseases and alcohol or
drug addicts.
(2) Clinics of less than 10,000 square feet in floor area, except those
primarily for the care or treatment of alcohol or drug addicts.
(3) Nursing homes of fewer than 25 beds.
(4) Medical and dental offices of less than 20,000 square feet in floor
area.
(5) Medical-related retail and service establishments, including
drugstores, medical supply stores, opticians, surgical supply
stores, medical and dental laboratories.
(6) Eating and drinking establishments, except fast-food eating
establishments.
C. Conditional uses. In the INST District, the following uses shall be
permitted as conditional uses, subject to approval of the Planning Board
and subject to the standards contained in Article XXIII (§ 51-118) of this
chapter:
(1) Hospitals of 50 beds or more, except those primarily for the care or
treatment of mental illnesses, contagious diseases and alcohol or
drug addicts.
(2) Clinics of 10,000 square feet of floor area or more, except those
primarily for the care or treatment of alcohol or drug addicts.
(3) Nursing homes of 25 beds or more.
(4) Medical and dental offices of 20,000 square feet of floor area or
more.
(5) Child-care centers.
(6) Transitional residential facilities.
(7) Funeral homes.
§ 51-106 CHARTER § 51-106
C:377
(8) Cemeteries.
(9) Boardinghouses and lodging houses.
(10) Senior care community (SCC) and continuing care retirement
community (CCRC) uses.
(11) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities.
(12) Colleges and universities.81
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Garages, parking structures and parking lots.
(2) Cafeterias related to a permitted conditional use.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) The bulk requirements for hospitals of 50 beds or more, clinics,
public utility installations, commercial parking lots and structures,
off-site accessory parking lots and structures within the INST
District are contained in Table 51-106.1.
Table 51-106.1: Bulk Requirements for Hospitals and
Related Uses
Minimum lot area (square feet) 10,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Minimum width, front (feet) Average of buildings within
200 feet on each side
Minimum width, one side (feet) 10
Minimum width, both sides (feet) 20
Minimum width, corner side (feet) 10
Minimum width, rear (feet) 10
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 50%
Maximum building height (stories) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
—
Maximum floor area ratio —
(2) The bulk requirements for nursing homes of less than 25 beds
within the INST District are contained in Table 51-106.2.
81.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-106 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-106
C:378
Table 51-106.2: Bulk Requirements for Nursing Homes
(less than 25 Beds)
Minimum lot area (square feet) 7,500
Minimum lot width (feet) —
Minimum lot depth (feet) —
Minimum width, front (feet) Shall be in accordance with
§ 51-87
Minimum width, one side (feet) 6
Minimum width, both sides (feet) 18
Minimum width, corner side (feet) 10
Minimum width, rear (feet) 20
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 35%
Maximum building height (stories) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
—
Maximum floor area ratio —
(3) The bulk requirements for medical and dental offices of less than
20,000 square feet of floor area within the INST District are
contained in Table 51-106.3.
Table 51-106.3: Bulk Requirements for Medical and Dental
Offices
(less than 20,000 square feet)
Minimum lot area (square feet) 10,000
Minimum lot width (feet) —
Minimum lot depth (feet) —
Minimum width, front (feet) Shall be in accordance with
§ 51-87
Minimum width, one side (feet) 10
Minimum width, both sides (feet) 20
Minimum width, corner side (feet) 10
Minimum width, rear (feet) 10
Maximum lot coverage (percent) 50%
Maximum building height (stories) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
—
Maximum floor area ratio —
§ 51-106 CHARTER § 51-106
C:379
(4) The bulk requirements for medical-related retail and service
establishments; nursing homes of 25 beds or more with nurses'
residence; medical and dental offices containing 20,000 square feet
or more of floor area; restaurants; day nurseries; day-care centers;
transitional residential facilities; funeral homes; cemeteries;
rooming houses, boardinghouses and lodging houses; and any
other conditional uses not otherwise specified within the INST
District are contained in Table 51-106.4.
Table 51-106.4: Bulk Requirements for Specified Use
Minimum lot area (square feet) —
Minimum lot width (feet) —
Minimum lot depth (feet) —
Minimum width, front (feet) Shall be in accordance with
§ 51-87
Minimum width, one side (feet) —
Minimum width, both sides (feet) —
Minimum width, corner side (feet) —
Minimum width, rear (feet) —
Maximum lot coverage (percent) —
Maximum building height (stories) —
Maximum building height (feet) —
Maximum density (dwelling units
per acre)
—
Maximum floor area ratio —
(5) The parking and loading requirements for the INST District are
contained in § 51-164, Off-street parking requirements, and
§ 51-165, Off-street loading requirements.
(6) The sign regulations for the INST District are contained in Article
XXV (§§ 51-166 through 51-170).
§ 51-106 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-106
C:380
ARTICLE XXI
Transit Village District (TVD) Areas
§ 51-107. Transit Village Districts (TVD) as special zoning areas;
purpose.
§ 51-108. Subzones.
This article shall establish development regulations applicable to any
development in the Transit Village Districts and shall provide for separate
standards for different development subzones within. These development
zones shall be designated as:
A. The general purpose of the TVD is to implement the mixed-use element
of the City Master Plan and establish the Brick Church Train Station as
the prominent feature of a planned city center. The specific purposes
are:
(1) To provide for land uses and facilities beneficial to both the
community and to transit users;
(2) To increase use of the rail station;
(3) To concentrate a mix of retail, office, residential, public and open
space uses within walking distance of each other and the rail
station to optimize the convenience for residents, shoppers,
commuters and employees and to reduce auto traffic by providing
an environment conducive to pedestrians, bicyclists and transit
users;
(4) To provide for land uses that will generate and encourage transit
ridership;
(5) To revitalize the areas in the vicinity of the transit station and
enhance economic vitality through zoning policies that enable the
redevelopment of buildings and properties through private
investment;
(6) To provide for the safe and efficient flow of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, emphasizing a pedestrian-oriented environment;
(7) To provide for visual amenities and to reinforce a sense of place or
center;
(8) To develop appropriate standards to facilitate transit-appropriate
development densities and intensities of the land uses in the
Transit Village Districts.
B. The provisions of this article apply only to parcels located within the
boundaries of the Transit Village Districts.
A. Village Core (VC).
§ 51-107 CHARTER § 51-108
C:381
§ 51-109. Zoning Map updated.
The boundaries of the TVD zones are delineated on the Zoning Map, which
is hereby updated. The modifications to be made to the Zoning Map are
displayed in the map entitled "Proposed Transit Village District" within the
ordinance.
§ 51-110. Applicability of development regulations.
All development regulations are to remain in full force and effect except
where they are hereby superseded by the requirements herein.
§ 51-111. Use regulations.
In order to further the purposes of the Transit Village District, only the uses
set forth in the following sections are allowed in each TVD zoning district as
listed below.
B. Evergreen Square (ES).
C. Main Street Entertainment (MSE).
D. Central Avenue Entertainment (CAE).
E. TR-2.
F. TR-3.
G. TR-4.
H. T-RO.
I. North Walnut Street Area (NW).
J. Lower Main Street Area Phase 2 Plan (LM).
A. Village Core. This section supersedes the applicable development, use
and bulk standards in the "The Urban Renewal Plan (Code #213), The
Muir's Berkeley Area Redevelopment Plan for the Brick Church Urban
Renewal Project, City of East Orange, New Jersey (Federal Project
Designation Number) (NJR-154)," as well as the entirety of §§ 50-172
through 50-174 of the Land Use Ordinance of the City of East Orange.
Only the following uses are permitted:
(1) Mixed use. Any combination of any permitted uses below, subject to
the following: for any new or renovated structure with frontage on
Main Street, 100% of the front facade at ground level shall contain
retail or commercial service uses. The depth of the area of the
structure devoted to such uses shall be no less than 40 feet from
the front facade, and each such establishment shall have its
primary entryway on Main Street.
§ 51-108 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-111
C:382
(2) Residential uses. Uses only in the form of multifamily structures,
townhouses and residential units located on floors above retail
establishments. If the property has frontage on Main Street/Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard in the VC or MSE Zone or on
Central Avenue in the CAE zone, residential uses are only
permitted on upper floors above permitted commercial
establishments or in the rear section of the first floor of such
building behind permitted commercial establishments and at least
40 feet from the street line of the above-referenced streets.
(3) Retail sales. Sales, including apparel stores, art supply stores,
bakeries, camera stores, candy stores, convenience stores,
department stores, drugstores, electronics stores, fabric stores,
factory outlet stores, florists, food stores, furniture stores, gift
stores, hardware stores, hobby stores, jewelry stores, music stores,
pet stores, sporting goods stores, stationary stores, toy stores, and
outdoor kiosks and street vendors; but excluding the following:
auto sales or rentals of any kind; sexually oriented businesses of
any kind including the sales of lingerie or underclothing as the
primary business (more than 15% of inventory); any retail store
that sells goods through a partition, window or metal grille; gun,
weapon or ammunition establishment; pawn shop; lumber;
salvaged or used goods other than antiques; automobile parts; and
establishments of the type commonly known as "dollar stores,"
defined as stores using a price amount in their name and/or selling
a variety of low-cost household goods such that the majority of
store inventory is: a) sold under a generic or private label, often
specially manufactured for such stores, using cheaper ingredients
and processes than products intended for the mass market; b) was
manufactured for a foreign market but was then re-imported for
sale in this country; or c) purchased from another retail store or
distributor as discontinued and discounted merchandise.
(4) Retail services. Services, including dry cleaners, opticians, shoe
repair, tailors and dressmakers, and travel agencies; but excluding
massage parlors, philanthropic or charitable services, car wash or
automobile wash facilities, automobile repair facilities, gas
stations, funeral homes, self-storage facilities, nail salons, hairbraiding
establishments, boardinghouses or rooming houses,
computer server hosting facilities and tattoo parlors.82
(5) Restaurants. Full-service restaurants with table-side service selling
food and/or beverages, which may include outdoor dining patios,
but excluding restaurants with drive-through windows, indoor or
outdoor walk-up windows, or counter service.
(6) Cafes. Coffee houses and pastry/desert cafes or bakeries with
highly decorated seating areas, artwork displays, and wireless
Internet service for customers. Counter-service transactions are
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-111 CHARTER § 51-111
C:383
only permitted for sandwich, salad, soup, desert and beverage
sales. The open counter area where customers interact with
employees shall be at least 10 feet wide.
(7) Offices. General, professional, governmental and medical offices,
but excluding drug or alcohol treatment facilities and veterinary
facilities. Such uses are not permitted in any part of a structure
located at the ground floor or within 40 feet of the streetline with
Main Street/Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard.
(8) Financial institutions. Banks and savings and loan institutions with
no more than 25 linear feet of street frontage, but excluding checkcashing
businesses.
(9) Recreation facilities. This includes health clubs and gyms.
(10) Parking structures. Structures with only indoor or elevated deck
parking, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) One hundred percent of the front facade facing Main Street/Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard shall contain commercial
uses on the ground floor and residential or commercial uses on
the upper floors. The minimum depth of area required to be
devoted to nonparking uses shall be 40 feet from the streetline
with Main Street/Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard at the
ground floor and 20 feet at the upper levels.
(11) Public facilities. Municipal offices, police station, fire station,
library, post office, train station, museum, publicly owned parking
facilities, and similar uses that directly serve the public, but
excluding facilities such as a public works garage, water treatment
plant, electric transformer station, and uses of a similar nature.
(12) Open space. Publicly or privately owned open spaces, such as parks
and plazas, available to the general public.
(13) Public/private partnerships. Developments in conjunction with
public agencies such as NJDOT (such as a commercial structure
over Route 280, subject to the provisions above) and New Jersey
Transit (such as retail under the elevated railroad viaduct).
(14) Entertainment venues. Developments including concert halls,
performing arts centers, theaters with operations in accordance
with City ordinances, and bars and nightclubs that contain
noiseproofing insulation to ensure that no noise in excess of 60
decibels is audible anywhere outside the confines of the
establishment, but excluding sexually oriented businesses.
(15) Art galleries.
(16) Live-work spaces. Developments which include residential units
with accommodation for a permitted commercial or art studio use
within that unit.
§ 51-111 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-111
C:384
(17) Art and dancing schools.
B. Evergreen Square (including the Evergreen/Halsted Commercial
District Redevelopment Plan). The uses listed herein are the only
permitted uses in the Evergreen Square Zone as well as the area under
the land use control of the Evergreen/Halsted Commercial Area
Redevelopment Plan (also known as Zoning District UR-2), for which
Section III entitled "Land Use Provisions for the Evergreen/Halsted
Commercial District" is hereby superseded by the list of permitted uses
contained herein.
(1) Hotels. Any building having sleeping rooms that are provided for
hire with meeting facilities. Any hotel permitted by this chapter
shall meet the following criteria:
(a) It shall not be a permanent/primary residence for its users.
(b) It shall not contain a self-service guest laundry.
(c) No guest shall use the hotel as his residential address.
(d) Minimum rental period for each nonmeeting room or room
containing a bed shall be 24 hours, maximum period is a total
of three months.
(e) All rooms shall only have access by way of a common lobby and
hallway. There can be no direct access to a room from a
parking space by way of an outside doorway at the room or
direct access to a garage. "Motels" or "motor hotels" shall not
be permitted.
(f) Minimum guestroom size shall be 150 square feet, and
minimum bathroom size for each room shall be 60 square feet.
(2) Mixed use. Any combination of any permitted uses below, subject to
the following: For any new or renovated structure with frontage on
Evergreen Place, 100% of the front facade at ground level shall
contain retail or commercial uses. The depth of the area of the
structure devoted to such uses shall be no less than 40 feet from
the front facade, and each such establishment shall have its
primary entryway on Main Street.
(3) Restaurants. Full-service restaurants with table-side service selling
food and/or beverages, which may include outdoor dining patios,
but excluding restaurants with drive-through windows, indoor or
outdoor walk-up windows, or counter service.
(4) Offices. General, professional, governmental and medical offices,
but excluding drug or alcohol treatment facilities and veterinary
facilities. Such uses are not permitted in any part of a structure
located at the ground floor within 40 feet of the streetline with
Main Street/Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard or Central
Avenue.
§ 51-111 CHARTER § 51-111
C:385
(5) Financial institutions. Banks and savings and loan institutions with
no more than 25 linear feet of street frontage, but excluding checkcashing
businesses.
(6) Recreation facilities. Health clubs and gyms.
(7) Parking structures. Structures with only indoor or elevated deck
parking, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) One hundred percent of the front facade facing Main Street/Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard shall contain commercial
uses on the ground floor and residential or commercial uses on
the upper floors. The minimum depth of area required to be
devoted to nonparking uses shall be 40 feet from the streetline
with Main Street/Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard at the
ground floor and 20 feet at the upper levels.
(8) Public facilities. Municipal offices, police station(s), fire station(s),
library(ies), post office(s), train station(s), museum(s), publicly
owned parking facilities, and similar uses that directly serve the
public, but excluding facilities such as a public works garage, water
treatment plant, electric transformer station and uses of a similar
nature.
(9) Open space. Publicly or privately owned open spaces, such as parks
and plazas available to the general public.
(10) Public/private partnerships. Developments in conjunction with
public agencies such as NJDOT (such as a commercial structure
over Route 280, subject to the provisions above) and New Jersey
Transit (such as retail under the elevated railroad viaduct).
(11) Residential uses. Developments only in the form of multifamily
structures, townhouses and residential units located in mixed-use
structures. One-, two- or three-family structures are only permitted
on lots with frontage only on Webster Place, Berwyn Street or
Hampton Terrace. Multifamily uses are permitted throughout the
Evergreen Square Area.
(12) Live-work uses. Suites that accommodate the combination of
residential use with office or art studio uses within the same unit.
(13) Banquet facilities, provided there is soundproofing to ensure that
sound levels above 65 decibels are not audible outside the
structure.
(14) Retail and service establishments on the first floor of structures
with frontage only on Evergreen Place, Freeway Drive, and Halsted
Street. Sales, including apparel stores, art supply stores, bakeries,
camera stores, candy stores, convenience stores, department
stores, drugstores, electronics stores, fabric stores, factory outlet
stores, florists, food stores, furniture stores, gift stores, hardware
§ 51-111 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-111
C:386
stores, hobby stores, jewelry stores, music stores, pet stores,
sporting goods stores, stationary stores, toy stores, and outdoor
kiosks and street vendors; but excluding the following: auto sales
or rentals of any kind; sexually oriented businesses of any kind
including the sales of lingerie or underclothing as the primary
business (more than 15% of inventory); any retail store that sells
goods through a partition, window, or metal grille; gun, weapon or
ammunition establishment; pawn shop; lumber; salvaged or used
goods other than antiques; automobile parts; and establishments
of the type commonly known as "dollar stores," defined as stores
using a price amount in their name and/or selling a variety of lowcost
household goods such that the majority of store inventory is: a)
sold under a generic or private label, often specially manufactured
for such stores, using cheaper ingredients and processes than
products intended for the mass market; b) was manufactured for a
foreign market but was then re-imported for sale in this country;
or c) purchased from another retail store or distributor as
discontinued and discounted merchandise. Services, including dry
cleaners, opticians, shoe repair, tailors and dressmakers, and travel
agencies; but excluding massage parlors, philanthropic or
charitable services, car wash or automobile wash facilities,
automobile repair facilities, gas stations, funeral homes, selfstorage
facilities, nail salons, hair-braiding establishments,
boardinghouses or rooming houses, computer server hosting
facilities and tattoo parlors.
C. Main Street Entertainment (MSE) District. The permitted uses listed
below in this section are the only permitted uses in the Main Street
Entertainment (MSE) District. This section supersedes the portions of
the section entitled "Land Use and Zoning Plan" that are entitled
"Principal Permitted Uses," "Principal Conditional Uses," and
"Accessory Uses" in the document entitled "City of East Orange Lower
Main Street Redevelopment Plan."
(1) All uses permitted in the Village Core as well as public schools are
permitted in this zone; however, residential-only uses are only
permitted on lots that only have frontage on North Walnut Street,
North Arlington Street, or William Street. If the property has
frontage on Main Street/Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard in
the VC or MSE Zone or on Central Avenue in the CAE Zone,
residential uses are only permitted on upper floors above permitted
commercial establishments or in the rear section of the first floor of
such building behind permitted commercial establishments and at
least 40 feet from the street line of the above-referenced streets.
D. Central Avenue Entertainment District. The permitted uses listed below
in this section are the only permitted uses in the Central Avenue
Entertainment (CAE) District.
(1) All uses permitted in the Village Core.
§ 51-111 CHARTER § 51-111
C:387
E. Established transit village neighborhoods. These areas are zoned TR-2,
TR-3, TR-4 and TR-O.83
(1) TR-2 shall have the exact same permitted land uses as the R-2
Zoning District as stated in § 51-93 of this chapter.
(2) TR-3 shall have the same permitted land uses as the R-3 Zoning
District as stated in as stated in § 51-94 of this chapter, except
where noted in Subsection E(5) below.
(3) TR-4 shall have the same permitted land uses as the R-4 Zoning
District as stated in as stated in § 51-95 of this chapter except
where noted in Subsection E(5) below.
(4) T-RO shall have the same permitted land uses as the R-O Zoning
District as stated in § 51-96 of this chapter, except where noted
Subsection E(5) below.
(5) The following are exceptions to the provision of the "Land Use
Ordinance of the City of East Orange" and are applicable only to
the TR-3, TR-4 and T-RO Zones where a project is subject to the
standards contained in these sections: § 51-94F(5), the required
outdoor open space per dwelling unit requirement shall be 75
square feet per dwelling unit regardless of the number of dwelling
units; § 51-93E(5) shall read: "Maximum density shall not exceed
52 apartment units per acre."
F. North Walnut Street Area (NW) shall have the same permitted land uses
as are currently permitted in the North Walnut Street Redevelopment
Plan. In addition, loft-style apartment buildings shall be permitted
within the entire plan area, and the bulk and parking standards for lowrise
and mid-rise apartments within the TVD zoning regulations of this
chapter shall override bulk standards of the North Walnut Street Area
Redevelopment Plan for loft-style apartment buildings.
G. Lower Main Street Area Phase 2 Plan (LM2) shall have the same
permitted land uses as are currently permitted in the Lower Main
Street Area Phase 2 Plan.
H. In all TVD zoning districts, except TR-2, TR-3 and TR-4, health spas and
therapeutic massage businesses are conditional uses.84
I. Uses that are prohibited in all TVD zones. Notwithstanding the
provisions above, the following uses are specifically prohibited in the
TVD zoning and redevelopment districts:
(1) Drive-through establishments, including but not limited to retail,
banking or auto establishments with drive-through service.
(2) Business or vocational schools.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
84.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-111 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-111
C:388
(3) Sexually oriented businesses.
(4) Bars, nightclubs and dance halls without noise-mitigation measures
that comply with state and local standards (65 decibels at property
line).
(5) Massage facilities/massage parlors.
(6) Restaurants that are takeout only.
(7) Wholesale bakeries.
(8) Through-window retail or restaurant.
(9) Funeral homes.
(10) Liquor stores.
(11) Outdoor storage.
(12) Automobile service, fuel, car wash.
(13) Automobile, sale and repair.
(14) Automobile alarm, stereo installation.
(15) Billboards.
(16) Check-cashing establishment not within bank, pharmacy or
grocery store.
(17) Bail/bonds.
(18) Pawn shops.
(19) Gun stores and ammunition retailers.
(20) Tattoo/body piercing establishments.
(21) Computer server housing facility.
(22) Surface parking areas, unless accessory to a permitted principal
use and at the rear of a lot behind buildings or constructed by the
City of East Orange or New Jersey Transit.
(23) Elevated walkways or skyways between buildings and/or parking.
(24) Lumberyard.
(25) Manufacturing facility.
(26) Operation facilities for taxicab, bus, ambulance.
(27) Taxi/limousine parking staging facilities.
(28) Heliport.
§ 51-111 CHARTER § 51-111
C:389
§ 51-112. Bulk regulations.
Bulk and density requirements within the TVD shall be in accordance
with the following schedule which applies to the subzoning districts and
supersedes the bulk standards of the applicable redevelopment plans.85
All bulk standards in the TVD apply only to new structures or additions.
Existing structures are entitled to retain their existing bulk configuration,
(29)Kennel, animal boarding/sheltering.
(30) Self storage.
(31) Truck terminal.
(32) Utility (transformer).
(33) Vehicle towing facility.
(34)Waste transfer station.
(35) Materials salvage yards, junkyards, dumps.
(36) Laundry facility, wholesale.
(37) Facilities that provide congregate living arrangements that provide
shelter or lodging for profit or charity, with or without meals,
including homeless shelters, rooming houses, hotels without
private bathrooms, or halfway houses.
(38) Facilities for treating or sheltering people with communicable
diseases not in hospitals.
(39) Philanthropic institutions providing social services.
(40) Boardinghouse or rooming house.
(41) Drug or alcohol treatment facilities.
(42) Methadone clinics.
(43) Soup kitchen, except as operated by a house of worship on its own
property.
(44) Nail salons.
(45) Hair-braiding establishments.
(46) "Dollar stores."
J. No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type retail
use, office use or residential use may be used as a house of worship,
club or charitable or philanthropic institution.
85.Editor's Note: The Table of TVD Bulk Regulations is attached to this chapter.
§ 51-111 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-112
C:390
but residential conversions in existing structures are required to comply
with the maximum dwelling units per acre limits.
§ 51-113. Parking.
A. In all zones of the TVD, the front setback of a new structure shall match
the shorter front setback of the two closest principal buildings on each
side of the project site on the same block frontage as the site. Bay
windows, porches and balconies can extend into the front yard but not
into the right-of-way. Through lots shall use the frontage where
buildings have a shorter front yard as their reference front yard. Lots
on vacant blocks shall use a standard of six feet. The second frontage
for a corner lot shall have a setback of six feet or less. Compliance with
§ 51-87 is also required.
B. No new construction shall encroach within three feet of another
building's windows or other fenestrations nor block emergency access
to those fenestrations. In cases where the side yard setback is to be
zero, the setback area from that adjacent building's fenestrations shall
only extend from the location of the fenestration to the rear of the new
structure.
A. Parking requirements within the TVD zones shall be in accordance with
the following schedule:
(1) Residential use: the greater of 0.5 space per bedroom or one space
per dwelling unit.
(2) Nonresidential: one space per 1,000 square feet of GFA. Retail/
restaurants exempted.
(3) Existing buildings that are renovated and put to or converted to a
permitted use are exempt from minimum parking requirements;
however, no existing parking at such site is permitted to be
removed.
(4) New construction on preexisting (nonsubdivided) lots smaller than
5,000 square feet if the construction site has frontage on Central
Avenue or Main Street/Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard or if
the lot is smaller than 2,000 square feet anywhere else in the
district are exempt from minimum parking requirements; however,
no existing parking at such site is permitted to be removed.
B. Shared parking. For mixed-use developments, a shared parking
approach to the provision of off-street parking shall be required where
feasible, as determined by the approving agency. The methodology used
by the developer to calculate the number of parking spaces required
shall be the greater total from formulas A and B, whereby "r" equals
required residential parking and "f" equals required nonresidential
parking.
(1) Formula A: 0.6r+1f.
§ 51-112 CHARTER § 51-113
C:391
§ 51-114. Design regulations.
(2) Formula B: 1r+0.5f.
C. Under no circumstances shall any parking be located in the front yard
of any structure. No front yard pavement is permitted other than for the
minimum area needed for pedestrian walkways and for a vehicle
circulation way to connect any indoor, rear yard, or side yard parking
areas of a structure directly to the street. In the TVD, the maximum
width of a paved vehicle circulation way or driveway within a front yard
is 10 feet if it serves a parking area for 10 or fewer vehicles and 20 feet
if it serves a parking area with more than 20 vehicles. Section 51-71D
shall not apply to the TVD.
D. Driveways shall be positioned to minimize interference with on-street
parking. The minimum distance between driveways shall be 18 feet;
however, driveways for two adjacent properties can be paired close
together with a maximum distance of seven feet between each driveway
in the pair, but such pairs shall be a minimum of 18 feet away from
another driveway or driveway pair.
A. District enhancement improvements. All projects within the TVD shall
provide the following district enhancement improvements, unless the
applicant can demonstrate that a design waiver is warranted due to the
physical limitations of the site and/or area or an abundance of related
improvements already in place.
(1) Transit wayfinding signage. At least one of the following must be
provided to highlight transit service in the area: directional signage
to bus routes or train stations; up-to-date timetables or a vicinity
map; or advertisements for major attractions that are accessible by
transit.
(2) Bicycle amenities. Appropriate space for storage of bicycles, such
as racks or lockers, and clear signage directing users to them, in
accordance with the following schedule: one bicycle space per
residential unit; three bicycle spaces per 5,000 square feet
nonresidential.
(3) Sidewalk. Building entries must be oriented to a public sidewalk.
(4) Public areas. Plazas or other open space, where appropriate,
proportionate to the size and scale of the project, which may
provide space for transit-convenience retail, such as a coffee kiosk,
etc. This is only required on lots larger than 20,000 square feet.
(5) Landscaping. Street trees and decorative tree grates shall be
provided for every 25 feet of road frontage. Planters, flower
baskets, or similar landscape accents that do not impede
pedestrian circulation shall be provided. All street tree wells shall
measure four feet by eight feet and shall be paved with
cobblestone.
§ 51-113 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-114
C:392
(6) Lighting. Decorative streetlighting, compatible with other
streetlighting in the district, including a banner identifying the
transit district, i.e., Village Core, and also capable of adding
decorative attachments such as flower pots and/or holiday lights.
(7) Artwork. Space for a mural, sculpture or other form of artwork,
preferably by local artists.
(8) Street furniture. Benches or other amenities for pedestrian seating,
refuse containers, bollards, etc.
(9) Architectural enhancements. Awnings, blade signage, gooseneck or
other decorative building lighting.
B. Minimum glazing requirements.
(1) No existing window visible to a public street is permitted to be
removed or reduced in size or transparent glazing area.
(2) For new structures or for areas of addition to existing structures,
the following minimum amounts of transparent fenestration are
required:
(a) Ground-floor commercial area street-facing walls: minimum
75% of wall area between grade and the ceiling level of the
first floor; but for corner buildings, the secondary facade is
permitted a minimum glazing area of 50%.
(b) All street-facing front walls on any structure except for groundfloor
commercial areas referenced above: minimum 25% of
wall area.
(c) Street-facing side or rear walls for corner buildings or throughlot
buildings: minimum 15% of wall area.
(d) Non-street-facing walls: minimum 10% of wall area unless
applicable building code requires a lower percentage of wall
area; in which case, the maximum permitted fenestration area
shall be required.
C. Sustainability guidelines. This plan encourages the use of green rating
systems to incorporate sustainable design measures into development.
Rating systems include the LEED (Leadership in Energy and Efficiency)
rating system developed by the USGBC (United States Green Building
Council) and the ENERGY STAR rating system, a joint program of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Department of Energy.
(1) All new buildings and rehabilitated buildings are encouraged,
although not required, to obtain a LEED certification or equivalent.
(2) Newly constructed homes are encouraged to earn the ENERGY
STAR rating.
§ 51-114 CHARTER § 51-114
C:393
(3) New commercial/industrial buildings are encouraged to earn an
ENERGY STAR rating. A building must score in the top 25% based
on the EPA's National Energy Performance Rating System.
(4) All buildings that are newly constructed or rehabilitated are
encouraged to use ENERGY STAR products for: sealing/insulating,
roofing, windows/doors, heating and cooling, plumbing and
lighting.
(5) All new buildings must incorporate the 2009 IECC for low-rise
residential buildings and the 2007 ASHRAE 90.1 standards.
D. The architectural design guidelines shall include:
(1) Building placement, massing and architecture shall be organized
and designed as a contextual whole. The architectural facades shall
be varied, yet may maintain common elements of design
throughout the overall TVD to ensure a cohesive architectural
character. The first-story "street level" shall be differentiated from
the upper stories on the facade through fenestrations and
treatments so as to give visual interest from the street.
(2) The entire TVD shall be subject to the City of East Orange Property
Maintenance Code and all upkeep and enforcement actions
established by that code.
(3) The front facade of a building shall not have large expanses of
blank or featureless walls.
(4) Awnings are encouraged to create a pedestrian-level feel to the
neighborhood despite the height of the buildings.
(5) Mirrored glass at street level shall be prohibited.
(6) A new building shall respect and take into account the adjacent
existing building's facade composition, such as cornice, soffit line,
fenestration, floor-to-floor elevation, size, scale and setbacks, to
enhance the visual relationship.
(7) All pedestrian entrances and walkways shall be well-lit and
separate from service entrances.
(8) Satellite dishes, barbed wire, television and radio antennas, rooftop
mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from any public
street. None of these shall be located on the front facade of a
building or any area visible from a public street.
(9) Buildings shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing from
all viewing points and shall be oriented toward the street so as to
provide a continuous and varied streetscape. Aluminum or vinyl
"clapboard" or "dutchlap" style siding is prohibited as an exterior
wall material on any wall visible from a public street. Additionally,
direct-applied finish system (DAFS), exterior insulation and
§ 51-114 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-114
C:394
§ 51-115. Commercial signage.
The following regulations apply to signs in the TVD.
finishing system (EIFS), or similar materials are prohibited as
exterior materials.
E. The streetscape design guidelines shall include:
(1) There shall be a unified and detailed streetscape plan prepared for
the redevelopment area, which takes into consideration the
surrounding streetscape plans for the other redevelopment areas.
(2) Street trees should be planted at regular intervals and no further
than 35 feet on center from each other. Other streetscape
amenities such as decorative benches, trash receptacles,
pedestrian bollards, clear signage including "wayfinding" signage,
and light poles shall be included in the streetscape.
(3) Any proposed development shall comply with § 51-193,
Landscaping, and any tree protection ordinance and/or
landscaping ordinance adopted by the City.
A. General provisions.
(1) Applicability. The regulations set forth in this article are not
applicable to traffic regulatory or traffic safety signs on private
property which are deemed unnecessary for public safety or to
signs on the interior of a structure which are not visible to outside
view.
(2) Sign area. Except where otherwise indicated, the "sign area" shall
be construed to mean the aggregate area of all signs on the lot.
(3) Abandonment. At the termination of a business, commercial or
industrial enterprise, all signs pertaining thereto shall immediately
be removed from the public view. Responsibility for violation shall
reside with the property owner, according to the latest official tax
roll listings.
(4) District standards. Business establishments which are located
within districts where a unified theme is encouraged or where
specific design standards are established may be permitted to vary
from the requirements of this article, subject to study by the Site
Plan Review Committee and to review and approval by the Planning
Board. In considering such signs, the Planning Board shall use the
following criteria:
(a) The aesthetic appearance shall be compatible with the
neighboring signs and facades.
(b) The proposed signs shall not contribute to undue visual
confusion.
§ 51-114 CHARTER § 51-115
C:395
(c) The proposed signs shall conform to any design concept
established for the specific area.
(d) The proposed signs shall match, complement or otherwise be
compatible with the existing architectural features of the
building and shall not clash, cover, obscure or interfere with
these features.
(5) Street address. The street address shall be displayed prominently
in Arabic numerals, facing the street, and shall be of a size and
placement visible and legible to police, fire and emergency services
personnel.
(6) Reflective paint. Reflective, neon or iridescent paint is prohibited
for signs.
(7) Damaged and weathered signs. Any sign where elements of the
display area or panel are visibly cracked, broken or discolored,
where the support structure or frame members are visibly
corroded, bent, broken, torn or dented, or where the message can
no longer be read under normal viewing conditions shall be
immediately repaired or removed and replaced with a conforming
sign.
(8) Construction signs. One nonilluminated construction sign, not
exceeding 16 square feet in area, shall be permitted on
construction sites, provided that it shall be removed within seven
days after the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy.
B. The following types of signs are specifically prohibited:
(1) Signs with statements, words or pictures of any obscene, indecent
or immoral character, such as would offend public morals or
general standards of decency.
(2) Signs which simulate or include official traffic signs or signals or
which contain words such as "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger,"
"warning" or like words or designations.
(3) Illuminated signs in which the colors of red, green or amber are
used and which are located within a radius of 100 feet of a traffic
signal.
(4) Signs which are internally and/or externally illuminated by
rotating, flashing or intermittent lights, including digital or video
displays and signs which move and rotate in any manner or which
have such components, except that signs not exceeding four square
feet which denote time-and-temperature changes are permitted.
(5) Any sign which obscures a sign displayed by a public body or which
obscures the motorist's view of oncoming traffic.
§ 51-115 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-115
C:396
(6) Signs and decorations which utilize or take the form of banners,
pennants, printed sails, series of posters, ribbons, streamers,
strings of light bulbs, spinners, balloons or other stationary or
moving devices, except as permitted as temporary signs.
(7) Signs painted directly on the outside of buildings.
(8) Signs used to advertise garage sales, yard sales, rummage sales,
flea markets or other such activities, except that one such sign may
be displayed on the subject property for a period not to exceed 14
days.86
(9) Temporary signs mounted, stapled, nailed, pinned, taped, glued or
otherwise affixed to the exterior walls of buildings and privately
owned fixtures.
(10) A-frame signs, except those which are approved as temporary
signs.
(11) Signs which are erected, attached to or constructed on the roof of
any building or structure.
(12) Private signs located within the street right-of-way or which are
attached to public utility poles, lampposts, public signs or like
structures.
(13) Signs which are affixed to other signs.
(14) On-site and off-site business signs that are portable signs held by
hand, including but not limited to banners, pennants, placards,
posters and spinners.
(15) All other sign types, uses and purposes not explicitly permitted.
C. Supplementary regulations for certain uses.
(1) Hotels and motel inns may have one identification sign for each lot
frontage, but not more than two. Such sign shall not exceed an area
of 150 square feet.
(2) A theater may be allowed:
(a) A marquee sign, which shall not exceed 100 square feet in
aggregate area and five feet in height. Said sign shall be
limited to letters used for identifying the name of the theater
and the current or coming attractions to be played therein.
(b) Two outdoor display cases, which shall not exceed 20 square
feet each and 10 feet in height.
(3) A commercial establishment on the second floor of a building may
have:
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-115 CHARTER § 51-115
C:397
(a) One window sign.
(b) Window signs shall be no more than 20% of the total window
area.
(c) Temporary window signs are not permitted.
D. Permitted sign types. The sign types in this section shall be permitted in
the City of East Orange, subject to applicable regulations contained
elsewhere in this article.
(1) Monument sign.
(a) Monument signs are only permitted in the VC, MSE, CAE and
ES zones in the TVD.
(b) Components.
[1] Monument signs shall consist of a solid structural base
with a framework of the same material. Monument signs
have a message area that consists of individual letters that
are externally illuminated.
[2] Street address. Number and street name required for all
monument signs.
(c) General provisions.
[1] Monument signs for businesses or shopping centers shall
be permitted where the primary street frontage is greater
than 50 feet. One monument sign is permitted per street
frontage.
[2] The base of the sign shall be landscaped. Landscaping
shall not obscure text. Landscaping shall not block sight
lines of the driveway or circulation aisles.
[3] A monument sign shall use between 5% to 10% of its area
for address identification. Letters and numbers shall be at
least six inches high and be legible from the street.
[4] Monument signs shall be designed to match or
complement the colors and architectural features of the
adjacent building; incorporate similar architectural
elements at top, sides or base to frame the sign.
Monument signs shall include a cap.
[5] If a monument sign contains listings for multiple tenants,
the information shall be presented in a clear and
consistent manner. Color, font size, and style shall be
coordinated across a monument sign.
(d) Placement.
§ 51-115 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-115
C:398
[1] Monument signs shall be placed in the front yard area at
least five feet distant from the site's principal building.
Monument signs shall not block sight lines at the driveway
or circulation aisles.
[2] No portion of the monument sign shall be located within
the public right-of-way.
(e) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
[1] Refer to the table below for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-115.1: Monument Signs
Quantity 1 per street frontage;
2 maximum
Area Maximum 80 square feet
a. Width Maximum 10 feet
b. Height Maximum 8 feet
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 2 feet
e. Clearance n/a
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Minimum 6 inches
(2) Wall-mounted sign.
(a) Wall-mounted signs are permitted in all zones where
commercial uses are permitted.
(b) Components.
[1] Components of wall-mounted signs shall include the
letters, background, lighting and an optional logo. Wallmounted
signs shall be of the following construction types:
[a] Cut-out letters. Letters are individually attached to the
wall or on a separate background panel and shall be
externally illuminated.
[b] Channel letters. Each letter has its own internal
lighting element, individually attached to the wall or
onto a separate background panel. The letter shall be
translucent or solid to create a backlit "halo" effect.
[c] Flat panel. The letters are printed or etched on same
surface as the background, which is then affixed to the
wall and shall be lit externally.
§ 51-115 CHARTER § 51-115
C:399
(c) General provisions.
[1] All businesses are permitted one wall-mounted sign. A
business may have one additional wall sign where it has a
secondary street frontage, but in no case shall a business
have more than two wall-mounted signs in total. Where a
business is allowed more than one wall-mounted sign,
each sign shall be on a separate facade.
[2] Wall-mounted signs shall consist of the name and logo of
the business.
[3] Height and width shall be measured using smallest
rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of
letters, logo and background.
[4] Wall-mounted signs shall not be wider than building face
or tenant space.
[5] Wall-mounted signs shall not project vertically above the
roofline.
[6] Where multiple wall-mounted signs are present on a single
building (i.e., for retail tenants in a shopping center),
signage shall be coordinated in terms of scale, placement,
colors and materials.
[7] Wall-mounted signs shall be illuminated at least from dusk
to dawn. External lights shall be shielded from direct view
to reduce glare.
[8] Electrical raceways, conduits and wiring shall not be
exposed.
(d) Placement.
[1] Wall-mounted signs shall be placed where the
architectural features suggest the best placement for
signage. They shall be vertically aligned with the center of
an architectural feature such as a storefront window, entry
portal, or width of a bay or overall retail space.
[2] Placement of wall-mounted signs shall be compatible with
existing architectural features such as bays, openings,
pilasters, etc. They shall not interrupt or obscure these
features or cause visual disharmony.
[3] Wall-mounted signs are not permitted above the ground
floor of buildings.
(e) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
[1] Refer to the table below for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
§ 51-115 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-115
C:400
Table 51-115.2: Wall-Mounted Signs
Quantity of signs 1 per business; 2 for corner
properties
Sign area 1.5 square feet per linear foot
of building front
a. Width Maximum 90% of width of
building front
b. Height Maximum 24 inches
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 7 inches
e. Clearance Minimum 7 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Maximum 18 inches
(3) Awning sign.
(a) Awning signs are permitted in zones of the TVD where
commercial establishments are permitted.
(b) The following awning sign types are permitted:
[1] Shed and patio awnings with or without signbands.
[2] Long dome awnings with or without signbands.
[3] Dome awnings with or without signbands or marquee.
[4] Marquee awnings.
[5] Gable awnings.
(c) The following awning sign types are prohibited:
[1] Waterfall and multilevel waterfall awnings.
[2] Box awnings.
(d) General provisions.
[1] Awning signs shall contain the business name, logo and
street address.
[2] The height of the valance of an awning sign shall not
exceed 12 inches.
[3] Letters, numbers and graphics may be printed only on the
valance portion of the awning sign and must be between
five inches to 10 inches in height and cover no more than
70% of the valance area. A logo may be printed on the flat
§ 51-115 CHARTER § 51-115
C:401
surfaces of a shed awning sign. The size of the logo shall
not exceed more than 50% of the area of the flat surface.
[4] Awning signs shall be made of a high-quality canvas,
woven acrylic, or similar material. Vinyl, plastic, Mylar and
other shiny or glossy materials are prohibited. "Egg crate"
undersides to awning signs are prohibited.
[5] Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated or backlit.
[6] Awning signs shall be colored or patterned so as to match
or complement the architecture or the brand of the
business.
[7] Where multiple awning signs are present on a single
building (i.e., for multiple retail tenants in a shopping
center), awning signs shall be coordinated in terms of
scale, colors, materials and placement.
[8] Torn or damaged awning signs shall be repaired or
replaced immediately.
(e) Placement.
[1] Awning signs shall not obscure architectural features such
as pilasters, friezes, roof eaves, roofs, etc. Where possible,
they shall be contained within a storefront window bay.
Awning signs that span continuously across the entire face
of the building's facade are discouraged.
[2] Awning signs shall not extend beyond the width of the
building or tenant space. Awning signs shall not project
above the roofline or extend into the floor above.
[3] No portion of an awning sign shall be less than seven feet
above the surface over which it projects or project more
than four feet into a public right-of-way.
(f) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
[1] Refer to the table below for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-115.3: Awning Signs
Quantity 1 per window or storefront
bay
Area n/a
a. Width Maximum equals width of
building front
b. Height n/a
c. Valance height Maximum 12 inches
§ 51-115 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-115
C:402
Table 51-115.3: Awning Signs
d. Depth/projection Maximum 4 feet
e. Clearance Minimum 7 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Minimum 5 inches;
maximum 10 inches
(4) Window sign.
(a) Window signs are permitted in all zones where commercial
establishments are permitted.
(b) Components. Window signs shall be of the following
construction types:
[1] Poster or placard. A sign printed on paper, card stock or
other material which is affixed to the window or placed
against it.
[2] Label applique letters. A sticker that is applied to the
window. Label appliques shall consist of individual letters
or graphics with no background.
[3] Painted letters. Painted directly on the window.
[4] Hanging sign. Signs that are hanging from the ceiling
behind the window. Usually these signs require electricity
for illumination. Examples include neon signs or an
internally illuminated box or cabinet sign.
[5] Video display sign. Signs consisting of electronically
generated text and images displayed on a computer
monitor, television screen, LCD photo frame, or similar
device.
[6] Door sign. Signs applied to the glass portion of an
entrance doorway.
[7] Neon sign.
(c) General provisions.
[1] Window signs shall not interfere with the primary function
of windows, which is to enable passersby and public safety
personnel to see through windows into premises and
product displays.
[2] Window signs shall be no larger than 25% of the total area
of the glass panel onto which they are applied.
Commercial, office or institutional establishments on the
second floor of a two-story building are permitted to have
§ 51-115 CHARTER § 51-115
C:403
window signs that shall be no larger than 25% of the
total area of the glass panel onto which they are applied.
Window signs are not permitted above the ground floor of
buildings three stories and higher.
[3] Merchandise or other objects that are located inside
within three feet of the window and that are not part of a
commercial window display shall be considered window
signs, subject to the provisions of this regulation.
[4] A door sign shall be no larger than 25% of the area of the
door onto which it is applied.
[5] Neon signs shall be no larger than two square feet. The
dimensions of neon signs shall be included in calculations
of window sign areas.
[6] Neon lights outlining windows are prohibited.
[7] Letters on window signs, including neon signs and door
signs, shall not be taller than eight inches.
[8] Video display signs are permitted only behind and facing
the inside of ground-floor windows.
[9] Video display signs shall be no larger than 2.5 square feet.
The dimensions of video displays shall be included in the
calculations of window sign areas.
[10] Video display signs shall present a static display and shall
not change more frequently than 20 seconds and shall not
flash or include animations other than fades, dissolves or
wipes through black.
[11] Audio speakers or any form of sound emanating from video
display devices is prohibited.
[12] Except for neon signs and video display signs, where
permitted, and ambient lighting, window signs shall not be
illuminated.
(d) Placement.
[1] Window signs shall be applied to or placed facing the
interior side of the window.
(e) Permitted quantities and dimensions. Refer to the table below
for permitted quantities and dimensions
§ 51-115 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-115
C:404
Table 51-115.4: Window Signs
Quantity See § 51-115D(4)(c), General
provisions
Area See § 51-115D(4)(c) , General
provisions
a. Width n/a
b. Height n/a
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection n/a
e. Clearance n/a
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Maximum 8 inches
(5) Projecting sign.
(a) Projecting signs are permitted in all zones where commercial
establishments are permitted.
(b) Components. Components of projecting signs shall include the
letters, background, lighting and an optional logo. Permitted
projecting signs are classified into the following construction
types:
[1] Cut-out letters. Letters are individually attached on a
panel; shall be externally lit.
[2] Flat panel. The letters are printed or etched on same
surface as the background, which is then affixed to the
wall; shall be externally lit.
(c) General provisions.
[1] Businesses shall be permitted one projecting sign where
its primary frontage is no more than five feet from the
front setback line. Businesses that have a secondary
frontage on another street that is no more than two feet
from the side setback line shall be permitted to have one
additional projecting sign on that facade.
[2] Projecting signs shall be on a single plane and project at a
90° angle from the face of the building. Signs may be
double-sided.
[3] Projecting signs shall be permitted only for businesses that
have a primary entrance on the ground floor.
[4] Mounting hardware, such as supports and brackets, shall
be simple and unobtrusive or be highly decorative, but
§ 51-115 CHARTER § 51-115
C:405
must complement the design of the sign, the building, or
both.
[5] For buildings with multiple signs (e.g., for multiple retail
tenants in a shopping center), mounting hardware or sign
shapes, sizes and colors shall be coordinated.
(d) Placement.
[1] Projecting signs shall not extend beyond the top of the
roofline.
[2] On multistory buildings, projecting signs shall not extend
above the bottom of the second-floor window sills, unless
placed above a marquee sign.
[3] No portion of a projecting sign shall be less than eight feet
above the surface over which it projects or project more
than four feet from the wall on which it is attached into a
public right-of-way.
(e) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
[1] Refer to the table below for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-115.5: Projecting Signs
Quantity 1 per facade;
2 maximum
Area 16 square feet
a. Width Maximum 4 feet
b. Height Maximum 4 feet
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 4 feet
e. Clearance Minimum 8 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Maximum 8 inches
(6) Temporary sign, freestanding.
(a) Freestanding temporary signs are permitted in all zones where
commercial establishments are permitted.
(b) Components. Sandwich boards or A-frame signs. A
freestanding, double-sided temporary sign is placed at the
entrance to a business in a primarily pedestrian environment.
It is convenient to move and store and be placed outside on a
day-to-day basis and removed at the close of business each day.
§ 51-115 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-115
C:406
(c) General provisions.
[1] One A-frame sign (also known as "sandwich board") shall
be permitted for each business. A-frame signs should be
made of high-quality materials and be weather-durable. Aframe
signs shall not exceed 42 inches in height or 26
inches in width.
[2] A-frame signs shall not be placed more than five feet from
the building wall.
[3] A-frame signs shall be stored inside when the business is
not open or when the sign is not in use. A-frame signs shall
also be stored inside during high winds or other weather
conditions that might pose a hazard to public safety.
(d) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
[1] Refer to the table below for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-115.6: Freestanding Temporary Signs
Quantity 1
Area 8 square feet
a. Width Maximum 26 inches
b. Height Maximum 42 inches
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 5 feet
e. Clearance n/a
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height n/a
§ 51-115 CHARTER § 51-115
C:407

Part 4
Performance Standards And Conditions
ARTICLE XXII
Performance Standards and Other Requirements
§ 51-116. Performance standards.
A. The following performance standards and limitations shall apply to all
buildings and premises in the City:
(1) Any use established in any district shall meet all the requirements
of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, as amended and
augmented by regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted; the
New Jersey Noise Control Act of 1971, N.J.S.A. 13:1G-1 et seq., as
amended and augmented by regulations now in effect or hereafter
adopted; the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act of 1977,
N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., as amended and augmented by
regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted; and all other
applicable state and federal environmental control legislation.
(2) All drainage discharge and other disposal of liquids and solid
matter shall be so designed as to comply with all existing City
ordinances, to avoid accumulation of such matter on the premises,
and to eliminate the diversion of the same into adjoining properties
or public areas.
(3) No use shall be permitted which causes radioactivity in violation of
Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations,
Standards for Protection Against Radiation, dated June 16, 1957, or
any subsequent revision or amendment thereto.
(4) No noise shall be permitted which is greater than that permitted by
the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the City.
(5) No use shall be permitted which does not conform to the provisions
of Chapter 94, Air Pollution, of the Code.
(6) No use which creates a hazard due to risk of fire or explosion shall
be permitted.
(7) No violation which is detectable without instruments at the
property line shall be permitted.
(8) No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from light or from hightemperature
processes, such as combustion or welding, visible at
the property line shall be permitted.
(9) No use which impairs radio or television reception in the vicinity
shall be permitted. No amateur radio operations shall be permitted
in any residential property.
§ 51-116 CHARTER § 51-116
C:409
(10)No use which creates any noxious odor or fumes, detectable at any
point outside the structure in which the use is enclosed, shall be
permitted.
(11)No exterior storage exposed to view from adjoining premises,
public rights-of-way or parking areas utilized in conjunction with
buildings on the premises shall be permitted.
(12)No use which creates any other nuisance or hazard which is
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare shall be permitted.
B. Enforcement of performance standards. Satisfactory evidence shall be
presented to the Administrative Officer that the proposed use shall
conform to the performance standards above. The Administrative
Officer may obtain expert advice, at the expense of the applicant,
regarding performance standards.
C. In the event of failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
including any conditions of site plan approval and any performance
standards as stated herein, the Construction Official shall take steps as
may be lawful to enforce such provisions.
§ 51-116 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-116
C:410
ARTICLE XXIII
Conditional Uses
§ 51-117. General provisions and requirements.
§ 51-118. Standards for conditional uses permitted in all zones.
The standards for conditional uses permitted in all districts shall be as
follows:
A. The regulations in this article set forth the standards which shall be
used by the Planning Board in reviewing application for conditional
uses. The uses to be considered conditional uses in each zoning district
are set forth in the use regulations for each district.
B. The general standards for the review of all conditional uses shall be as
follows:
(1) The Planning Board shall first determine that the proposed use
shall not be detrimental to health, safety and welfare of the
community; that the proposed use shall be reasonably necessary
for the convenience of the community; that the proposed use shall
not create a fire, traffic or safety hazard; and that the proposed use
or structure shall not have an adverse effect on the neighborhood
in which it is proposed.
(2) Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in
accordance with §§ 51-164 and 51-165 unless a variance is granted
by either the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment.
(3) Where nonresidential structure or parking, loading or recreation
areas adjoin a residential use or residential zone, there shall be a
minimum ten-foot-wide, six-foot-high landscaped strip adjoining
the residential lot line or a semitransparent fence that is a
minimum of five feet tall and maximum of six feet tall. Such fence
shall be 20% to 30% transparent, and chain-link fencing of any type
is not permitted.
(4) The use shall provide safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation with ingress and egress designed to eliminate any
traffic safety hazards entering and exiting the site and shall be so
designed as not to cause traffic congestion on abutting streets.
(5) Review shall be subject to the submission of a site plan to the
Planning Board and approval of the site plan by the Planning Board
and subject to compliance with the performance standards
contained in § 51-116.
A. Public utility installations.
(1) The proposed installation shall meet all the requirements of the
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and its successors.
§ 51-117 CHARTER § 51-118
C:411
§ 51-119. Personal wireless telecommunications facilities.
In districts where conditionally permitted, personal wireless
telecommunications facilities (PWTFs) and personal wireless
telecommunications equipment facilities (PWTEFs) shall be subject to the
following standards:
(2) The proposed installation shall harmonize with the character of the
neighborhood in which it is proposed and shall have adequate
fencing, safety devices, screening, landscaping and front, rear and
side yard setbacks to protect adjoining properties.
(3) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to serve all
employees and service personnel visiting the installation.
(4) Ingress and egress shall be designed so as not to produce a traffic
safety hazard and so as not to cause traffic congestion on the
abutting streets.
B. For any permitted use exceeding a floor area of 50,000 square feet, lot
size of two acres or more, 50 dwelling units or more, or parking for 100
cars or more: The proposed use shall meet the standards set forth
elsewhere in this article and this chapter. In addition, the Planning
Board shall determine that the size and intensity of the use shall not
create an adverse impact on surrounding properties or uses in terms of
traffic congestion, health and safety hazards, maintenance of property
values and preserving the character of surrounding development.
C. The standards most closely approximating the use and location of a
conditional use subject to a use (d) variance shall always apply in
addition to the requirements of the use (d) variance.
A. Location standards.
(1) Locational priority. If needed in accordance with an overall
comprehensive plan for the provision of full wireless
communications service within the East Orange community, PWTFs
and PWTEFs shall be permitted as a conditional use at locations
within the zoning district in order of priority established in this
section. If a similar level of wireless telecommunications services is
able to be provided at a location with a higher priority in another
zoning district, the facilities shall be required to be located in the
zoning district with the higher priority locations.
(a) The first priority location shall be lands or structures owned by
the City of East Orange;
(b) The second priority location shall be on lands or structures
owned by the East Orange School District;
(c) The third priority location shall be co-location on existing
PWTFs (or existing water tanks), provided that the new
§ 51-118 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-119
C:412
installation does not increase the height by more than 10%;
and
(d) The fourth priority location shall be such locations as the
applicant proves are essential to provide required service to
the East Orange community.
(2) Co-location policy.
(a) The Administrative Officer shall maintain an inventory of
existing PWTF locations within or near the East Orange
community.
(b) An applicant proposing a PWTF at a new location shall
demonstrate that it made a reasonable attempt to find a colocation
site acceptable to engineering standards and that
none was practically or economically feasible.
(c) Each applicant for a PWTF shall be accompanied by a plan
which shall reference all existing PWTF locations in the
applicant's City of East Orange inventory, any such facilities in
the abutting towns which provide service to areas within the
City of East Orange, any changes proposed within the
following twelve-month period, including plans for new
locations and the discontinuance or relocation of existing
facilities.
(d) Each application shall include a site location alternative
analysis describing the location of other sites considered, the
availability of those sites, the extent to which other sites do or
do not meet the provider's service or engineering needs, and
the reason why the subject site was chosen. The analysis shall
address the following issues:
[1] How the proposed location of the PWTF relates to the
objective of providing full wireless communication
services within the City of East Orange at the time full
service is provided by the applicant throughout the City of
East Orange.
[2] How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF relates
to the location of any existing antennas within and near
the City of East Orange.
[3] How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF relates
to the anticipated need for additional antennas within and
near the City of East Orange.
[4] How the plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with
the needs of all other providers of wireless communication
services within the City of East Orange.
§ 51-119 CHARTER § 51-119
C:413
(3) The reviewing board may retain technical consultants as it deems
necessary to provide assistance in the review of the site location
alternatives analysis. The service provider shall bear the
reasonable cost associated with such consultation, which cost shall
be deposited in accordance with the City's escrow provisions.
B. Development standards.
(1) The PWTF project design is required to be structurally sound. The
antenna project is to be certified to not create any hazard to the
general public and any inhabitants or occupants of the site in
question or any sites in the vicinity thereof.
(2) The PWTF project, including mountings, wiring and equipment
placed on structures including buildings or structures other than
buildings, shall be camouflaged in a manner deemed appropriate
by the reviewing board. This includes mountings on billboards or
other existing nonbuilding structures.
(3) Any PWTF installation on a structure that is or was constructed
exclusively for the mounting of antennas, such as a tower, shall
meet the following requirements for the antennas and the
structure, and the installation is only permitted in the Industrial
District by conditional use:
(a) The structure shall not exceed a height of 100 feet unless it can
be demonstrated by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the
reviewing board, that a higher height is necessary for the
proposed installation of the PWTF(s) to satisfactorily operate
and is necessary for the co-location of at least three other
carriers on the tower.
(b) The structure and site shall only be permitted in the Industrial
District, and they must be at least 500 feet from any residential
district boundary; commercial district boundary; a school; a
historic district; a public park; or a house of worship. Such
structure must also be out of view from any historic district or
school.
(c) All electronic equipment for such PWTFs shall be kept inside a
structure on the same site as the PWTF structure. This housing
structure shall be less than 15 feet tall; have walls of wood
siding, brick or any other material accepted by the reviewing
board as a typical construction material appropriate for the
section of East Orange in which it is proposed.
(d) The site must be landscaped with densely planted, mature
evergreens that are a minimum of 15 feet tall to screen all
structures, including equipment storage buildings and tower
bases, to the greatest extent possible from public view and
fenced by means of a concealing fence constructed of a longlasting
material acceptable to the reviewing board, such as
§ 51-119 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-119
C:414
PVC pickets, brick wall, or board and batten panels; and the
equipment housing structure shall have less than 360 square
feet of floor area per telecommunications operator. Chain-link
fencing of any form even with privacy slats shall not ever be
used.
(e) Structures for elevating PWTFs above ground level, as well as
the PWTF units, wiring, mounting devices, and accompanying
hardware, shall be designed to blend with the surrounding
area's architecture, environment and landscaping through the
use of structure coloring and camouflaging to disguise the
PWTF for the public's aesthetic benefit. The reviewing board
shall determine whether appropriate attempts have been made
to blend the structure and its features with the surrounding
areas. Appropriate camouflage could include designing the
tower to resemble a tree, church steeple, or other like
structure.
(f) The structure shall not have any lighting or signage other than
safety warnings and lighting that would be required by the
FAA. In such case, strobe lighting shall never be used unless
specifically required by the FAA.
(g) The applicant shall be responsible for all maintenance of its
PWTF's additional hardware, accompanying landscaping,
camouflage, paint, cables, cable trays, conduits and mounting
hardware.
(4) Any PWTFs proposed to be mounted on an existing building or
structure not initially constructed for the mounting of PWTFs shall
meet the following requirements:
(a) PWTFs may only be mounted on a structure that is taller than
55 feet, and they may only be mounted on the part of the
structure that is higher than 45 feet above grade. In the event
that there is no structure of that height within the applicant's
needed coverage area, the applicant must present evidence of
such to the reviewing board in order to gain approval to use a
lower-height structure.
(b) No PWTF shall be mounted higher than the building parapet,
stair or elevator shaft/penthouse, chimney, smokestack or
other part of the structure upon which it is being mounted. The
only exception to this shall apply when the applicant can
provide evidence to the reviewing board that appropriate
broadcasting and reception service is not possible without a
higher mounting configuration such as a mounting on poles or
posts. In such cases, the PWTF units must be set back at least
eight feet from the exterior edge of the part of the building
upon which they are being mounted; the PWTFs and poles and
other mounting hardware must be mounted on a flat surface,
§ 51-119 CHARTER § 51-119
C:415
and the mountings cannot be more than 12 feet tall measured
from the edge of the surface upon which they are being
mounted.
(c) Wall-mounted PWTFs cannot project horizontally beyond the
wall upon which they are being mounted by more than one
foot, and they cannot project beyond the site's property line.
(d) All PWTF units and accompanying infrastructure must be
painted to match any vertical surface upon which they are
being mounted. Any mounted units projecting above the
building on which they are mounted shall be painted light blue.
A color sample (six copies) shall be provided as part of the
application. The exact color must be approved by the reviewing
board. The applicant must maintain the painting and
pigmentation for the duration of the PWTF's existence, and the
PWTF units must be removed if the appearance of the units is
not properly maintained.
(e) Antennas must be spaced and positioned on the building in
such a way as not to interfere with that wall's architectural
design or its decorative features. Antennas must be mounted in
such a way that they are evenly spaced along the building's
wall and they are evenly spaced from corners or other building
features such as windows, brackets or decorative panels. The
reviewing board must determine that the antennas are being
spaced in a pattern that does not disrupt any repetitive
patterns of any wall's or parapet's decorative bracketing,
paneling or window placement. All applicants must submit
detailed facade drawings and photographs of all building views
being affected by the PWTF installation.
(f) All wiring and/or cable tray devices must be positioned in such
a way as not to be visible to the public, unless determined by
the reviewing board that there is no possible position for the
wire tray to not be visible to the public. The applicant may use
external wiring only if he can provide evidence to the central
Planning Board that wiring through the building is not possible
for structural reasons. If external wiring is to be used, it can
only be mounted on outside walls that are not visible from any
public street, park or plaza. Such wiring and/or wire trays must
be painted to match the wall surface upon which they are being
mounted and must be mounted at an area so as not to interfere
with the architectural features of the building. In the instance
that the building upon which antenna mounting being
proposed does not have any wall area that is not visible from a
public street, park or plaza, wiring must be mounted on the
wall that is visible from the street with the least vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
§ 51-119 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-119
C:416
(g) All equipment must be kept inside the building where the
PWTF project is proposed to be conducted. If this is not
possible, the applicant must present reasoning for this to the
reviewing board, and the equipment must then be placed
inside a structure to be placed on a flat part of the building's
roof. The equipment structure must be no taller than 15 feet,
set back at least four feet from all front or side edges of the
roof or any other roof edge that fronts directly on a public
street, built of an exterior construction material with the same
appearance as the exterior walls of the building, and it must
have no more than 360 square feet of floor area. If equipment
were to be placed outside the building or off the roof, it shall be
enclosed in accordance with § 51-119B(3)(c).
C. Noise. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in excess
of the limits set by the local noise ordinance (see Chapter 184, Noise
Pollution), except for in emergency situations requiring the use of a
backup generator.
D. Radio frequency emissions. The FTT gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of
the field of regulation of radio frequency (RF) emission, and PWTFs
which meet the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the
basis of RF impacts. Applicants shall provide current FCC information
concerning PWTFs and radio frequency emission standards. PWTFs
shall be required to provide information on the projected power density
of the proposed facility and how this meets the FCC standards.
E. Structural integrity. PWTFs must be constructed to the Electronic
Industries Association/Telecommunications Industry Association (EIA/
TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel
Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent),
as it may be updated or amended.
F. Maintenance. PWTFs shall be maintained to assure their continued
structural integrity. The owner of the PWTF shall also perform such
other maintenance of the structure and of the site as to assure that it
does not create a visual nuisance.
G. Additional site plan submission requirements. In addition to the
applicable documentation and items of information required for site
plan approval, the following additional documentation and items of
information are required to be submitted to the Planning Board for
review and approval as part of the site plan submission:
(1) All site plan details required by the City's Site Plan Ordinance87
shall be provided and, in addition, shall include the site boundaries;
proposed tower location; existing structures, including accessory
structures; existing and proposed ground-mounted equipment;
vehicular parking and access; uses, structures and land use
87.Editor's Note: See Art. XII, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter.
§ 51-119 CHARTER § 51-119
C:417
designations on the site and abutting parcels; and the setback
distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential
unit, adjacent properties and other towers.
(2) In the case of an antenna mounted on an existing tower, structure
or building, the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the
structure or building, complete details and scaffold drawings of all
fixtures and couplings, and the precise point of all attachments
shall be indicated.
(3) Documentation by a qualified expert regarding the capacity of any
proposed PWTF for the number and type of antennas.
(4) Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed PWTF will
have sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed
antennas and the anticipated future co-located antennas and that
the structural standards developed for antennas by the Electronic
Industries Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunications
Industry Association (TIA) have been met.
(5) A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form which is reviewed and
approved by the Office of Corporation Counsel, indicating that the
applicant will share the use of any PWTF with other approved
providers of wireless communication services.
(6) A visual impact study, graphically simulating through models,
computer-enhanced graphics, or similar techniques, the
appearance of any proposed tower and indicating its view from at
least five locations around and within 2,000 feet of the proposed
PWTF where the PWTF will be most visible. Aerial photographs of
the impact area shall also be submitted. Both existing condition and
proposed after-condition will be required for each view.
(7) A landscape plan drawn to scale generally showing proposed
landscaping, including species type, size, spacing, other landscape
features and existing vegetation to be retained, removed or
replaced. In the case of a tower, year-round evergreen screening to
effectively screen the tower base and equipment buildings and
compound; screening to minimize impact of the tower from nearby
residential properties; and screening to minimize impact on scenic
views identified in the visual impact study.
(8) A determination that the proposed PWTF will not affect navigable
airspace pursuant to the Federal Aviation Administration (CFR Title
14 Part 77.13).
(9) Where new towers or replacements are proposed, a report by a
licensed professional engineer shall be submitted that shall
include:
(a) A detailed description of the proposed facility, tower, antennas,
equipment compound, structures and associated equipment,
§ 51-119 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-119
C:418
including height, design, features, access road and power
lines, if any.
(b) A map (1:100,000 scale) showing the extent of planned
coverage for the PWS within the City and the location and
service of applicant-operated facilities.
(c) Plan and elevation drawings showing the proposed tower,
antennas and their associated equipment. The plan shall have a
scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet,
H. Removal of abandoned PWTFs.
(1) The owner or operator of a tower shall provide to the Director of
Public Works a report every two years from a licensed professional
engineer certifying the structural integrity of the tower or
structure, together with all antennas mounted thereon and
whether they remain in use, and that they meet applicable
minimum safety requirements. Such report shall also be provided
whenever the antenna(s) is modified and shall include a detailed
listing of all antennas and equipment so certified. Vendors shall
also be required to notify the Director of Public Works when the use
of such antennas and equipment is discontinued.
(2) Any PWTF that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned. If there are two or more
users of a single PWTF, then the abandonment shall not become
effective until all users cease using the PWTF for a continuous
period of 12 months. The owner of such PWTF shall remove same
within 90 days of notice from the Administrative Officer that the
PWTF is abandoned. If such PWTF is not removed within said 90
days, the municipality may remove such PWTF at the property
owner's expense.
(3) Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored and revegetated
to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at the time of
approval. The facility owner shall post a bond to cover the cost of
tower removal and site restoration prior to its removal. The amount
of the bond shall be calculated to account for cost escalations.
(4) If the facility is to be retained, the provider(s) shall establish that
the facility will be reused within one year of such discontinuance. If
a facility is not reused within one year, a demolition permit shall be
obtained and the facility removed. At the discretion of the
Administrative Officer, upon good cause shown, the one-year reuse
period may be extended for a period not to exceed one additional
year.
I. Nonconforming PWTFs. PWTFs in existence on the date of the adoption
of this chapter which do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter (nonconforming PWTFs) are subject to the following provisions:
§ 51-119 CHARTER § 51-119
C:419
§ 51-120. Public and private schools.
In districts where conditionally permitted, public and private schools shall
be subject to the following standards:
§ 51-121. Houses of worship and related accessory uses.
In districts where conditionally permitted, houses of worship and related
accessory uses shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) Nonconforming PWTFs may continue in use for the purpose now
used but may not be expanded without complying with this chapter.
(2) Nonconforming PWTFs which are partially damaged or destroyed
due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to their
former use, location and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a
building permit therefor, but without otherwise complying with this
chapter. If this destruction is greater than partial, then repair or
restoration will require compliance with this chapter.
(3) The owner of any nonconforming PWTF may repair, rebuild and/or
upgrade (but not expand such PWTF or increase its height or
reduce its setbacks) in order to improve the structural integrity of
the facility, to allow the facility to accommodate co-located
antennas or facilities, or to upgrade the facilities to current
engineering, technological or communications standards, without
having to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Minimum lot size: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
D. Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
E. Minimum side yard: 15 feet.
F. Minimum rear yard: 10 feet.
G. Maximum height: three stories or 35 feet.
H. Maximum coverage: 50%.
I. The proposed school shall offer a curriculum generally or specifically
meeting the requirement for public education for grades kindergarten
through 12th grade or any part thereof.
J. The proposed school shall meet the site, location and educational
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Education.
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
§ 51-119 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-121
C:420
§ 51-122. Home occupations.88
Home occupations are conditionally permitted within any residence, subject
to the following standards:
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Front yard: 20 feet.
E. Side yard: 15 feet.
F. Rear yard: 10 feet.
G. Height: three stories or 35 feet.
H. Coverage: 35%.
I. No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type retail
use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club or
charitable or philanthropic institution.
J. No building or part thereof designed and built for business, office, retail
or other commercial use may be used as a house of worship, club or
charitable or philanthropic institution.
A. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises
plus one outside employee shall be engaged in the home occupation.
B. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
dwelling structure.
C. The use of the dwelling structure for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by
its occupants, and not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the
principal dwelling structure, not including the cellar or basement, shall
be used for the home occupation.
D. No commercial vehicle shall be kept on the premises in connection with
the home occupation.
E. The dwelling structure shall have no external evidence of a
nonresidential use other than a small nameplate sign not exceeding one
square foot in area, and no display of products shall be visible from the
street.
F. No traffic or parking shall be generated in excess of three passenger
automobiles in addition to those used by the owner, all of which must be
parked off the street in properly designed spaces in the side or rear
yards.
G. There shall be no direct retail sale of goods upon the premises.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-121 CHARTER § 51-122
C:421
§ 51-123. Clubs, charitable or philanthropic institutions.
In districts where conditionally permitted, clubs, charitable or philanthropic
institutions, except as prohibited, shall be subject to the following
standards:
§ 51-124. Commercial service facilities within multifamily
structure.
In districts where conditionally permitted, commercial service facilities
within a multifamily structure shall be subject to the following standards:
H. No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be used that will be
detectable to the normal senses or that will create electrical or radio
interference.
I. There shall be no nuisance element detectable beyond the principal
structure in connection with the home occupation.
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Front yard: 20 feet.
E. Side yard: 15 feet.
F. Rear yard: 10 feet.
G. Height: three stories or 35 feet.
H. Coverage: 35%.
I. No building or part thereof designed and built for storefront-type retail
use or residential use may be used as a house of worship, club or
charitable or philanthropic institution.
J. The operation of penal institutions, hospitals, clinic or facilities for the
care or treatment of mental illnesses, contagious disease and alcohol or
drug addicts shall be prohibited under this conditional use.
A. The entrance to the commercial service facilities shall be from an
interior public area of the building.
B. Any outdoor sign relating to the commercial use shall be a facade sign
only and shall not be more than eight square feet in area.
C. Sufficient parking shall be provided for the commercial service facility
in accordance with this chapter, in addition to the normal requirements
for the multifamily structure.
§ 51-122 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-125
C:422
§ 51-125. Drive-in facilities for any permitted use.
In districts where conditionally permitted, drive-in facilities shall be subject
to the following standards:
§ 51-126. Private commercial parking lots and structures.
In districts where conditionally permitted, private commercial parking lots
and structures not accessory to a permitted use shall be subject to the
following standards:
§ 51-127. Accessory parking areas and structures.
In districts where conditionally permitted, accessory parking areas and
structures not on the same lot as the principal use shall be subject to the
following standards:
A. Lot size, lot width, lot depth, yard requirements, buffers, height and
coverage shall be as per the requirements of the permitted use in the
districts where permitted.
B. All operations connected with the proposed use, including the lining up
of waiting vehicles, shall take place within the confines of the proposed
site. Provision shall be made for egress from the site from one alternate
means in addition to the termination of the drive-in line.
C. The noise levels at the boundary of the lot shall not exceed in intensity
and frequency the noise of street traffic at the adjoining street or
streets.
A. Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. No parking shall extend any closer than five feet to any lot line. Rear
yards, height and coverage: as per the requirements of the district.
A. Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. No parking shall extend any closer than five feet to any lot line.
E. The owner of the principal use to which the parking area is accessory
shall demonstrate that he owns the property designated for accessory
parking use or that he has a lease to rent the property for accessory
parking use, which lease shall extend for at least 10 years.
§ 51-125 CHARTER § 51-128
C:423
§ 51-128. Car sales lots.
In districts where conditionally permitted, car sales lots shall be subject to
the following standards:
§ 51-129. Gasoline stations and vehicle rental facilities.
In districts where conditionally permitted, gasoline stations and facilities
for auto, truck or trailer rental shall be subject to the following standards:
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Maximum coverage by structure: 20%.
E. Maximum height of structure: one story or 20 feet.
F. Driveways and parking areas shall be set back at least five feet from any
property line.
G. No string lighting shall be permitted.
H. Parking: one space per 2,000 square feet of lot area.
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width, including any lot side which permits access: 150
feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Maximum coverage by structure: 20%.
E. Maximum height of structure: one story or 20 feet.
F. Minimum distance of buildings from all property lines other than street
lines: 25 feet.
G. Minimum setback from all street lines: 60 feet.
H. Minimum distance between any building, including accessory use, and
any residential district: 50 feet.
I. Minimum distance between structure of any service station and/or
repair garage and another service station or repair garage or those for
which a building permit has been issued: 300 feet, measured along the
same street line in the same or adjoining block. For similar use
establishment located on opposite sides of the street, the point of
beginning measurement shall be offset to the opposite street.
J. Such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of
any of the following uses (measured along street right-of-way lines): a
§ 51-128 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-129
C:424
§ 51-130. Car washes (auto laundries).
In districts where conditionally permitted, car washes (auto laundries) shall
be subject to the following standards:
public or private school, a public or private park or playground, a
hospital, a house of worship, any place of public assembly or a fire
station or any existing gasoline station or facility for auto, truck or
trailer rental.
K. Minimum distance between gasoline pump islands, compressed air
connection and any street lines: 25 feet.
L. Spacing of access driveways.
(1) Minimum distance between any access driveway and any
residential district: 50 feet.
(2) Minimum distance from adjoining property line: 10 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between access driveways: 30 feet.
M. Hydraulic hoists, pits and all lubrication, greasing, washing and repair
equipment shall be entirely enclosed within buildings.
N. Exterior lighting shall be shielded so that it is deflected away from
adjacent properties and from passing motorists.
O. Wrecked, junked or stripped vehicles or vehicles in an inoperative
condition shall not be permitted.
P. Noise levels at the boundary of the lot shall not exceed in intensity and
frequency the noise of street traffic in the adjoining street or streets.
Q. A buffer not less than six feet in width shall be provided where this use
abuts a side or rear lot line of a residential lot or use. The buffer shall
consist of suitable landscape materials to be maintained at a height of
at least six feet and shall be of a density to effectively shield the use
year-round. A solid fence or wall may be used in combination with plant
materials to provide a dense screen.
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Maximum coverage by structure: 25%.
E. Maximum height of structure: one story or 20 feet.
F. Minimum yard requirements: structure shall be 25 feet from any street
line; 15 feet from any property line.
§ 51-129 CHARTER § 51-130
C:425
§ 51-131. Auto repair garages, body shops and auto painting.
In districts where conditionally permitted, auto repair garages, body shops
and auto painting shall be subject to the following standards:
§ 51-132. Funeral homes.
In districts where conditionally permitted, funeral homes shall be subject to
the following standards:
G. All operations connected with the proposed use, including the lining up
of waiting vehicles, shall take place within the confines of the proposed
site.
H. The noise at the boundary of the lot shall not exceed in intensity and
frequency the noise of street traffic at the adjoining street or streets.
A. Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width, including any lot side which permits access: 100
feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Maximum coverage by structure: 60%.
E. Maximum height of structure: two stories or 25 feet.
F. Minimum distance of buildings from all property lines other than street
lines: 25 feet.
G. A maximum of three cars may be offered for sale, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) A State of New Jersey used car dealer's license shall be displayed.
(2) The title of the vehicle shall be in the proprietor's possession.
(3) A storage area must be provided and shown on a minor site plan
which shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer for review
and approval by the Minor Subdivision and Site Plan
Subcommittee.
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Minimum front yard requirements: 20 feet; except in the INST Zone,
where the front yard setback shall be equal to the average setback of
buildings within 200 feet on either side.
E. Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
§ 51-130 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-132
C:426
§ 51-133. Theaters.
In districts where conditionally permitted, theaters shall be subject to the
following standards:
§ 51-134. Veterinary establishments.
In districts where conditionally permitted, veterinary establishments shall
be subject to the following standards:
§ 51-135. Retail factory outlets and accessory commercial uses.
In districts where conditionally permitted, retail factory outlets and
accessory commercial uses shall be subject to the following standards:
F. Maximum coverage: 35%.
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
D. Minimum front yard requirements: zero feet.
E. Minimum side yard: 15 feet each.
F. Minimum rear yard: 10 feet.
G. Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet if a detached structure;
permitted as part of a taller structure.
H. Maximum coverage: 35%.
A. Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Minimum front yard requirements: zero feet.
E. Minimum side yard: 10 feet each.
F. Minimum rear yard: 10 feet.
G. Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet if a detached structure;
permitted as part of a taller structure.
H. Maximum coverage: 35%.
A. The Planning Board shall determine that there is sufficient parking to
serve the retail factory outlet or commercial use as well as the principal
use.
§ 51-132 CHARTER § 51-136
C:427
§ 51-136. Hospitals.
In districts where conditionally permitted, hospitals of 50 beds or more,
except those primarily for the care or treatment of mental illnesses,
contagious diseases and alcohol or drug addicts, shall be subject to the
following standards:
§ 51-137. Clinics.
In districts where conditionally permitted, clinics of 10,000 square feet of
floor area or more, except those primarily for the care or treatment of
alcohol or drug addicts shall be subject to the following standards:
§ 51-138. Child-care centers.
In districts where conditionally permitted, child-care centers shall be
subject to the following standards:
A. Minimum lot size: two acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
D. Front yard setback: 25 feet.
E. Side and rear yard setback: 1/3 of the building height, but in no case
less than 10 feet.
F. Height: determined by floor area ratio.
G. Maximum coverage: 35%.
H. Floor area ratio: 2.5.
I. Such use shall be subject to all requirements of the State of New Jersey
relating to hospitals.
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Front yard setback: equal to the average setback of buildings within
200 feet on either side.
E. Maximum height: six stories.
F. Maximum coverage: 25%.
G. Floor area ratio: 2.0.
H. Such use shall be subject to all requirements of the State of New Jersey
relating to nursing homes.
§ 51-136 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-138
C:428
§ 51-139. Transitional residential facilities.
In districts where conditionally permitted, transitional residential facilities
shall be subject to the following standards:
§ 51-140. Cemeteries.
In districts where conditionally permitted, cemeteries shall be subject to the
following standards:
A. Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Front yard: equal to the average setback of buildings within 200 feet on
either side.
E. Side yard: 10 feet each.
F. Rear yard: 10 feet.
G. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
H. Maximum coverage: 35%.
I. Such uses shall be subject to compliance with all the requirements of
the State of New Jersey.
J. Any outdoor play areas associated with child-care centers must be
secured, designed and located to assure child safety.
K. There shall be an on-site queuing area for passengers capable of
holding at least four cars.
A. Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Front yard: equal to the average setback of buildings within 200 feet on
either side.
E. Side yard: 10 feet each.
F. Rear yard: 20 feet.
G. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
H. Maximum coverage: 35%.
I. Limit of three patients.
J. There must be a professional supervisor in residence.
§ 51-138 CHARTER § 51-140
C:429
§ 51-141. Colleges and universities.
In districts where conditionally permitted, colleges and universities shall be
subject to the following standards:
§ 51-142. Community residences for developmentally disabled and
shelters for victims of domestic violence.
In districts where conditionally permitted, community residences for
developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic
violence which house more than six residents excluding resident staff shall
be subject to the following conditions:
§ 51-143. Senior care community (SCC) and continuing care
retirement community (CCRC) uses.
In districts where conditionally permitted, SCC and CCRC uses shall be
subject to the following standards:
A. Minimum lot size: 25 acres.
B. Such use shall be subject to all requirements of the State of New Jersey.
A. Minimum lot size: 25 acres.
B. The Planning Board may vary the lot width, depth and yard
requirements, height, coverage and floor area ratio at the time of site
plan review as long as no college or university structure is located
closer than 1/3 the building height or 25 feet to an adjoining residential
lot line or residential zoning district boundary, and provided that all
applicable landscaped buffer requirements are observed.
C. Such use shall be subject to a written report from the East Orange Fire
Department and compliance with the recommendations of that report.
D. Such uses shall be subject to compliance with all the requirements of
the New Jersey Department of Education.
A. Facility shall be located no closer than 1,500 feet of an existing such
residence or shelter.
B. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for residents, resident
staff and visitors.
C. Residents at all such facilities within the City of East Orange shall not
exceed 0.5% of the total City population.
A. Accessory uses as permitted under § 51-97D.
B. Additional requirements as enumerated under § 51-97E.
C. Supplemental regulations as detailed under § 51-97F.
§ 51-140 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-144
C:430
§ 51-144. Taxi stands.
In districts where conditionally permitted, taxi stands for temporary
parking of licensed and insured taxi, limousine and livery car services
may be established for loading and unloading of passengers and their
associated baggage on portions of public streets or facilities or private
areas if permitted by the owner, subject to the approval of the Director of
Public Works.
§ 51-145. Billboards.
In districts where conditionally permitted, billboards may be established
as a principal use or as an accessory use to a principal use that is not a
billboard, and shall be subject to the following standards:
A. Billboards visible from state, interstate and limited access highways
shall be subject to approval by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation pursuant to N.J.A.C. 16:41C-1.1 et seq.
B. No billboard shall be permitted to have a moving, changing or flashing
image by mechanical, digital or electronic means.
C. No billboard shall be permitted to have video, digital or any other form
of electronic changing message.
D. All billboards shall be shielded to prevent light from being directed at
any portion of the main traveled way of the street or highway or, if not
so shielded, be of such low intensity or brilliance as not to cause glare
or impair the operation of a motor vehicle, as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
E. All billboards shall comply with the following additional regulations:
(1) Billboards are to only be permitted in the Industrial District by
conditional use.
(2) No such facility can be erected such that any part of the structure
is in or is positioned to be within the line of sight from any school,
park, historic district, historic structure, residentially zoned
district or redevelopment area.
(3) No such facility can be erected within 1,000 feet (measured in a
straight line) of the border with any facility or district listed in
Subsection E(2) above.
(4) No such facility shall exceed a height of 40 feet from grade at its
highest point for a freestanding unit or unit mounted on a building
wall. Any facility mounted on a building rooftop may not project
more than 20 feet above the height of the building's roof.
(5) No trees or other landscaping features can be removed or
substantially reduced in size in any way to accommodate the
visibility of the billboard.
§ 51-144 CHARTER § 51-145
C:431
§ 51-146. Health spas and therapeutic massage.
In districts where conditionally permitted, health spa and therapeutic
massage uses shall be subject to the following standards:
(6) No billboard shall be located closer than 1,000 feet (measured in a
straight line) from another such billboard.
(7) No such facility shall be allowed to obscure or cover any building's
windows, doorways, architectural trim, nor shall it be located
within five feet of such a building feature.
(8) The maximum permitted advertising area showing in one general
direction (within 45°) shall not exceed 650 square feet for a single
billboard or combination of billboards.
(9) Visual impact on the surrounding areas shall be minimized through
the use of landscaping, berming and grading at the base of the unit.
Dense all-season or evergreen landscaping shall be installed at the
base of any freestanding billboard structure.
(10) The billboard operator or owner shall comply with the Roadside
Sign Control and Outdoor Advertising Act, as contained in N.J.S.A.
27:5-5 et seq., as well as all other regulations, statutes or laws
relating to billboards.
(11) Any existing billboard for which structural changes are made must
comply with all standards and conditions in this statute, or the
billboard must be removed.
(12) All billboards must be properly maintained for safety and aesthetic
value. Any billboard facility that has signs of disrepair, including
but not limited to graffiti, rust, peeling paint, rotten wood, broken
supports or boards, or other signs of disrepair, for a period of more
than 30 days, is not being properly maintained and is defined to be
abandoned.
(13) All billboard operators are required to comply with all other
ordinances and regulations that pertain to billboard licensure,
placement and operations.
(14) Any application for conditional use review for a billboard must
include the same information as would be required for a site plan
review to be deemed complete.
A. Facilities shall be designed and operated under the supervision of a
state-licensed massage, bodywork and somatic therapist.
§ 51-145 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-146
C:432
ARTICLE XXIV
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
§ 51-147. Intent.
All uses and structures shall have sufficient off-street parking and loading
spaces to accommodate vehicles in order to avoid congestion, to promote
the safety and convenience of motorists and pedestrians and to ensure the
continued efficient operation of the uses.
§ 51-148. Off-street parking and loading conformance.
A. No building or premises shall be built or erected, nor shall any building
be altered so as to expand its usable floor area, nor shall the use of any
building or premises be expanded, unless there is provided parking
space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Off-street
loading shall be in conformance with this chapter.
B. If a use is not listed in § 51-164, then the number of required off-street
parking spaces becomes the number of spaces required for the use
which most nearly approximates the proposed use.
C. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be in conformance with the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and federal ADA standards.
D. The standards of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21) (RSIS) apply and may be followed by the
applicant at his option, but he is entitled to be granted a waiver by the
Zoning Officer or Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for any
project that complies with this chapter or any applicable redevelopment
plan or is granted a variance by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment. This waiver can be granted for the following reasons:
(1) The standards herein are consistent with the intent of the Site
Improvement Standards Act.
(2) The standards herein are reasonable and not unduly burdensome.
The standards herein promote uniformity while preserving the
character, nature and look of the unique City of East Orange.
(3) The standards herein meet the needs of public health and safety.
The standards take into consideration local conditions and provide
for adequate parking and design. In addition, alternative means of
transportation (mass transit) reduce auto-dependency and result in
less of a need for parking facilities, which is necessary for
facilitation of the redevelopment of the City of East Orange.
(4) The standards herein take into account existing infrastructure and
surrounding development possibility. The modifications from RSIS
requirements are of critical importance to the retention of the
character of the City of East Orange and will assist in the
continuance of the goal of urban redevelopment.
§ 51-147 CHARTER § 51-149
C:433
§ 51-149. Off-street parking and loading design standards.
Off-street parking and loading design standards are enumerated in Article
XXIX, Design Standards.
§ 51-150. Use of unimproved lots.
No unimproved lot shall be utilized for parking purposes in any district.
§ 51-151. Location of off-street parking, loading, driveways.
§ 51-152. Automotive mechanical lift devices.
A. District regulations. No access to a parking or loading area in a
business or industrial district shall be located within an exclusively
residential district. No off-street parking shall be permitted in any
district where the use which it serves is prohibited.
B. Site location restrictions. Except for driveways to the extent required
for ingress and egress, areas utilized for parking and loading space
shall be positioned in the rear yard or side yard of any site. Parking in
the front yard area of any site is prohibited. Under no circumstances
shall any parking be located in the front yard of any structure. No front
yard pavement is permitted other than for the minimum area needed
for pedestrian walkways and for a vehicle circulation way to connect
any indoor, rear yard, or side yard parking areas directly to the street
with the shortest route possible.
C. Driveways shall be positioned to minimize interference with existing or
potential future on-street parking. The minimum distance between
driveways shall be 18 feet; however, driveways for two adjacent
properties can be paired close together with a maximum distance of
seven feet between each driveway in the pair, but such pairs shall be a
minimum of 18 feet away from another driveway or driveway pair.
D. Location of parking areas in all districts. Required parking for any use
shall be located on the same lot or within 500 feet of the lot on which
the use is located.
A. General automotive lift standards.
(1) Automotive lifts shall be used only as expressly provided in this
section and as part of an approved site plan in the following zoning
districts: C-1, C-2, C-3, IND, IND-1, INST, R-4, R-O, TR-4, TR-O,
CAE, MSE, LM, ES, VC, NW.89
(2) Automotive lifts shall comply with the applicable automotive lift
requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-149 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-152
C:434
(3) Automotive lifts shall comply with noise limitations of the City of
East Orange and the State of New Jersey.
(4) Automotive lifts shall be exempt from the parking dimensions
requirements of this chapter.
(5) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following term
shall be defined as follows:
AUTOMOTIVE LIFT — Equipment designed to deposit motor
vehicles in a parking space or to serve as the mechanism to provide
a parking space by moving motor vehicles vertically and/or
horizontally above floor level on pallets or platforms equipped with
tracks, channels or similar devices to hold the vehicle's wheels, not
the vehicle frame or designated support points, in place while the
vehicle is being moved vertically or horizontally.
B. Usage standards.
(1) Automotive lift usage in East Orange.
(a) Where permitted above, automotive lifts shall only be located
within a fully enclosed building.
(b) Where permitted, automotive lifts may be used to satisfy
minimum off-street parking requirements set forth in this
chapter.
(c) Where automotive lifts are utilized for the purpose of satisfying
minimum parking requirements for commercial use, a
professional valet is required to ensure access to all applicable
parking spaces.
(d) Where automotive lifts are utilized for the purpose of satisfying
minimum parking requirements for residential use, at least one
parking space for each residential dwelling unit in the building
in which it is located shall be provided in a manner that would
not require the moving of another vehicle. In all other
situations, a twenty-four-hour, seven-days-a-week valet
attendant is required. Automotive lifts may be used to satisfy
the remaining parking requirements or parking in excess of the
minimum required standards.
(e) Permitted automotive lifts within residential buildings shall be
operated only by a valet or an attendant employed by the
owner or operator of the building or by an owner or resident of
a dwelling unit within the building whose parking space is
specifically assigned to use that automotive lift.
C. Height standards. Any automotive lift system used for a parking area
shall be limited to the height of the interior space in which it is located.
D. Automotive lift design standards.
§ 51-152 CHARTER § 51-152
C:435
§ 51-153. Attendant parking.
Where the nature of the building and establishment is of a kind where
attendant parking is appropriate, where there is not space sufficient for
standard aisle access to every parking space making tandem or stacked
parking necessary, and the owner or operator has established that such
facility is likely to continue and exist substantially unchanged as it affects
attendant parking for a period of 10 years, and the owner or operator of
the premises has made and will continue to make provision for attendant
parking, then attendant parking shall be permitted, provided that there
shall be submitted to the Site Plan Review Committee or other authority a
workable plan which includes sufficient number of stalls of standard size
to meet the parking standards contained herein and, in addition, sufficient
aisles and turnaround areas to enable attendants to maneuver vehicles in
and out of the area containing the necessary number of parking stalls,
without requiring the attendant to utilize streets, public areas or sidewalks
for maneuvering of vehicles and so that the use of the parking area will not
be hazardous to the pedestrians utilizing the adjoining walkways.
§ 51-154. Nonattendant stacked parking.
§ 51-155. Public parking facilities.
Where a public parking facility is located within 500 feet of a building
or use, and there exists a procedure by which the public parking facility
can be designed or allocated for use in whole or part for occupants or
users of buildings within such 500 feet, the Administrative Officer shall
accept, in lieu of requiring parking, such number of spaces as the governing
body of the public parking authority or agency may allocate for the use of
the subject premises for public parking. The applicant shall present such
proof as may be required to demonstrate that the applicant has met all the
(1) For all automotive lifts, the standards enumerated in the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-12) shall apply.
(2) The applicant shall certify that any permitted automotive lift shall
comply with the most current ANSI/ALI ALOIM, "Safety
Requirements for the Operation, Inspection, and Maintenance of
Automotive Lifts," and provide a plan for ongoing operation,
inspection and maintenance.
A. Nonattendant stacked parking arrangements of up to two spaces deep
are allowable in one-, two- or three-family dwellings.
B. In multifamily structures with four or more dwelling units,
nonattendant stacked parking arrangements can only be used if both
spaces in the tandem pair are assigned to the same dwelling unit.
C. For all other uses, stacked parking requires an attendant to ensure all
vehicle owners have access to remove their automobiles from the
parking facility.
§ 51-152 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-155
C:436
conditions imposed by the public parking authority or agency and that the
spaces will be available for the use of the occupants of the building for a
period of at least 10 years.
§ 51-156. Modifications for special accessory uses.
The Site Review Committee or the Administrative Officer, or both, may allow
partial or total exclusion from floor area total as provided herein for any
special or unusual facility such as employees' lounge, private auditorium,
employees' cafeteria, etc., which serves as an adjunct or accessory to other
uses for which parking is provided and which in itself does not create any
additional attraction for users of or burden on the adjoining parking area or
spaces.
§ 51-157. Parking in residential districts.
§ 51-158. Commercial vehicles of 1/2 ton or less.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the storing or garaging of commercial vehicles
having a capacity of 1/2 ton or less in an enclosed garage.
§ 51-159. Conditional uses.
A conditional use may be granted by the Planning Board to permit certain
required off-street parking spaces to be located elsewhere than on the
same lot with the use to which it is appurtenant, provided that all such
space, through ownership or permanent easement, is under the control
of the owner or operator of the use to which such space is appurtenant.
A. Prohibited parking in residential districts. In a residence district, the
following motor vehicles and boats shall not be parked or left standing
in any yard area or on a driveway:
(1) Unregistered motor vehicles of any type or design.
(2) Buses.
(3) Trucks, tractors and commercial trailers, meaning every motor
vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and
not so constructed as to carry a load other than part of the weight
of the vehicles and load to be drawn.
(4) Trucks, meaning every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property and having a capacity
of more than 1 1/2 tons; provided, however, that this restriction
shall not apply to trucks being used in the rendering of services to
the premises.
(5) Trailers used for dwelling purposes; camping trailers exceeding 18
feet in length.
(6) Boats of any type or design in excess of 18 feet.
§ 51-155 CHARTER § 51-159
C:437
Such required off-street parking shall not be reduced below the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
§ 51-160. Rules governing measurement of floor area.
§ 51-161. Parking space allocations.
Off-street parking spaces required herein shall be used solely for the
parking of passenger automobiles of visitors, patrons, occupants or
employees of the use for which required. In addition to these parking
spaces, there shall be a space for each truck, ambulance, hearse, company
car or other commercial vehicle regularly stored on a lot. Whenever two
standards are applicable, the standard requiring more space shall apply.
§ 51-162. Multiple use of parking space.
For mixed-use developments, a shared parking approach to the provision
of off-street parking shall be required where feasible, as determined by the
approving agency. The methodology used by the developer to calculate the
number of parking spaces required shall be the greater total from formulas
A and B, whereby "r" equals required residential, house of worship or
theater parking; and "f" equals required all other parking.
§ 51-163. Parking in buildings, service stations and at licensed
parking areas.
Parking as part of a main building or accessory building shall be permitted,
provided that the parking facilities shall, upon site plan review, be found to
meet the following standards:
A. For each use within a building, the total floor area related to each use,
excluding basement areas of a building, not used for business shall be
counted separately.
B. Floor area devoted to parking or loading shall not be counted. Floor
area devoted to stairwells, halls, elevators and sanitary facilities,
parking or loading shall not be counted.
A. Formula A: 0.6r+1f.
B. Formula B: 1r+0.5f.
A. The traffic circulation plan shall provide for ingress and egress of
sufficient width, turning radius and limitations as to grade to avoid
hazards to vehicles and passengers utilizing the parking facility.
B. The parking facility and all parts thereof shall be adequately ventilated.
There shall be provisions for exhaust from motor vehicles, and
safeguards shall be taken where necessary to avoid odors penetrating
the residential portions of any building or structure.
§ 51-159 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-163
C:438
§ 51-164. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking spaces shall be required as follows:
Use
Required
Parking
Space(s) For Each
Assisted living facilities 1 3 beds, plus 1 for each 2
employees and staff
Auditoriums with fixed
seating, except those
accessory to houses of
worship and schools,
colleges and universities
1 4 seats
Auto laundry 1 Employee
Boardinghouses and
rooming houses
2 Sleeping room
C. There shall be provisions to insulate the use of the parking facility so as
to avoid noises disturbing to dwelling units in nearby buildings.
D. Where necessary, by reason of elevation, there shall be sufficient
parapets, guardrails or walls to prevent hazards from motor vehicles
being driven or projecting beyond the limits of the parking area.
E. Any outside surface of the parking area and the ingress and egress
therefrom exposed to public view or to windows in the residential
portions of the building shall be so designed and have such
fenestration, use of materials, color or other aesthetic devices as to
provide an attractive facade and exposure in keeping with the
requirements of a new, desirable and modern residential facility.
F. A multiple-deck parking structure or superstructure is a structure of
two or more stories constructed of noncombustible materials with
ramps or elevators and proper ingress and egress facilities, having as a
primary use a parking area for motor vehicles.
G. Where underground or subterranean parking is permitted, the same
may occupy 100% of the entire area of the premises, provided that
suitable ramps shall be erected and shall be approved by the Site Plan
Review Committee and Department of Public Works and presented to
the Construction Official.
H. Parking in the side and rear yard of any building or accessory building
shall be permitted, but parking in the front yard of any structure in any
district is prohibited unless provided for elsewhere in this Code.
I. Parking at any gas service station for a rental fee shall meet the
requirements of this article and the licensing regulations of the City.
J. Licensed off-street parking areas shall be paved, fenced and lighted.
§ 51-163 CHARTER § 51-164
C:439
Use
Required
Parking
Space(s) For Each
Bowling alleys 4 Alley
Clubs and fraternal
organizations
1 500 square feet of floor
area
Dormitories 1 2 residents, unless cars are
not permitted
Eating and drinking
establishments offering
seating and table service,
including luncheonettes,
diners, restaurants and
taverns not offering
entertainment
1 4 seats
Elementary schools 1 Faculty member and
employee
Funeral homes 5 Plus 1 for every 50 square
feet of floor space devoted
to chapel or viewing rooms
Furniture appliance stores,
car sales rooms, wholesale
stores
1 400 square feet of sales
floor area
Gas stations, auto repair
and service garages
1 Employee, plus 1 for every
vehicle in service
Governmental and
municipal offices
1 400 square feet of floor
area
Hospitals and medical
clinics with beds
1 3 beds, plus 1 for each 2
employees and staff
members
Hotels 1 Every 2 sleeping rooms
Houses of worship 1 4 seats
Industrial plants
(manufacturing, processing,
assembly, etc.)
1 2 employees on peak shift
but not less than 1 per
2,000 square feet of floor
area
Industrial warehouses 1 2 employees on peak shift
but not less than 1 per
5,000 square feet of floor
area
Libraries:
Main 1 600 square feet of floor
area
§ 51-164 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-164
C:440
Use
Required
Parking
Space(s) For Each
Branch 1 800 square feet of floor
area
Medical arts building 1 200 square feet of floor
area
Meeting rooms and other
places of public assembly
without fixed seating
1 200 square feet of floor
area
Museums, exhibit halls, art
galleries, community
centers
1 1,000 square feet of floor
area
Nurseries, day-care centers 1 1 employee, plus 1 for
every 5 pupils in excess of
15
Nursing homes Same as hospitals and
medical clinics with beds
Professional offices and
services in apartment
houses
1 Office unit plus dwelling
unit requirement
Professional, business,
commercial and industrial
offices, including financial
institutions, charitable and
philanthropic institutions
1 300 square feet of floor
area
Research and testing labs 1 300 square feet of floor
area
Residential 0.5 Bedroom in a dwelling unit,
but a minimum of 1 space
per dwelling unit
Housing for the elderly 1 3 dwelling units
Retail establishments 1 500 square feet of floor
area in excess of 2,000
square feet
Schools: high schools,
colleges, universities
1 Faculty member and
employee, plus 1 for every
8 students
Service establishments 1 500 square feet of floor
area
Supermarkets 1 500 square feet
Tennis/racquetball courts,
other than municipal
1 Court
§ 51-164 CHARTER § 51-164
C:441
Use
Required
Parking
Space(s) For Each
Theaters 1 4 seats
Transient residential facility
for outpatient care
1 Employee, plus 1 for every
4 residents
Used car lots 1.5 Every car in inventory
Veterinary establishments 1 Treatment room, plus 1
space for each 2 employees
NOTE: When the number of parking spaces results in a fraction, the
fraction shall require one parking space.
§ 51-165. Off-street loading requirements.
Off-street loading spaces shall be required as follows:
Use
Required
Parking
Space(s) For Each
Apartments 1 100 apartments in excess
of 50 apartments
Auditoriums 1 Auditorium
Hospitals, nursing homes
and assisted living facilities
1 100 beds
Hotels 1 100 sleeping rooms
Industrial plants, repair
shops
1 10,000 square feet of floor
space
Restaurants 1 Restaurant larger than
10,000 square feet
Retail and service
establishments
1 Store or group of stores
over 15,000 and less than
30,000 square feet; an
additional 1 space for every
additional 10,000 square
feet
Schools:
0 to 500 students 1 School
Over 500 students 2 School
Wholesale establishment,
industrial warehouse
1 7,500 square feet of floor
space
NOTE: When the number of loading spaces results in a fraction, the
fraction over 1/2 shall require one loading space.
§ 51-164 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-165
C:442
ARTICLE XXV
Signs
§ 51-166. General provisions.
A. Applicability. The regulations set forth in this article are not applicable
to traffic regulatory or traffic safety signs on private property which are
deemed unnecessary for public safety or to signs on the interior of a
structure which are not visible to outside view.
B. Sign area. Except where otherwise indicated, the "sign area" shall be
construed to mean the aggregate area of all signs on the lot.
C. Abandonment. At the termination of a business, commercial or
industrial enterprise, all signs pertaining thereto shall immediately be
removed from the public view. Responsibility for violation shall reside
with the property owner, according to the latest official tax roll listings.
D. District standards. Business establishments which are located within
districts where a unified theme is encouraged or where specific design
standards are established may be permitted to vary from the
requirements of this article, subject to study by the Site Plan Review
Committee and to review and approval by the Planning Board. In
considering such signs, the Planning Board shall use the following
criteria:
(1) The aesthetic appearance shall be compatible with the neighboring
signs and facades.
(2) The proposed signs shall not contribute to undue visual confusion.
(3) The proposed signs shall conform to any design concept
established for the specific area.
(4) The proposed signs shall match, complement or otherwise be
compatible with the existing architectural features of the building
and shall not clash, cover, obscure or interfere with these features.
E. Street address. The street address shall be displayed prominently in
Arabic numerals, facing the street, and shall be of a size and placement
visible and legible to police, fire and emergency services personnel.
F. Reflective paint. Reflective, neon or iridescent paint is prohibited for
signs.
G. Damaged and weathered signs. Any sign where elements of the display
area or panel are visibly cracked, broken or discolored, where the
support structure or frame members are visibly corroded, bent, broken,
torn or dented, or where the message can no longer be read under
normal viewing conditions shall be immediately repaired or removed
and replaced with a conforming sign.
§ 51-166 CHARTER § 51-166
C:443
§ 51-167. Prohibited sign types.
The following types of signs are specifically prohibited in all districts of the
City:
H. Construction signs. One nonilluminated construction sign, not
exceeding 16 square feet in area, shall be permitted on construction
sites, provided that it shall be removed within seven days after the
issuance of the first certificate of occupancy.
A. Signs with statements, words or pictures of any obscene, indecent or
immoral character such as would offend public morals or general
standards of decency.
B. Signs which simulate or include official traffic signs or signals or which
contain words such as "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning"
or like words or designations.
C. Illuminated signs in which the colors of red, green or amber are used
and which are located within a radius of 100 feet of a traffic signal.
D. Signs which are internally and/or externally illuminated by rotating,
flashing or intermittent lights and signs which move and rotate in any
manner or which have such components, except that signs not
exceeding 10 square feet which denote time-and-temperature changes
are permitted.
E. Any sign which obscures a sign displayed by a public body or which
obscures the motorist's view of oncoming traffic.
F. Signs and decorations which utilize or take the form of banners,
pennants, printed sails, series of posters, ribbons, streamers, strings of
light bulbs, spinners, balloons or other stationary or moving devices,
except as permitted as temporary signs.
G. Signs painted directly on the outside of buildings.
H. Signs used to advertise garage sales, yard sales, rummage sales, flea
markets or other such activities, except that one such sign may be
displayed on the subject property for a period not to exceed 14 days.90
I. Temporary signs mounted, stapled, nailed, pinned, taped, glued or
otherwise affixed to the exterior walls of buildings and privately owned
fixtures.
J. A-frame signs, except those which are approved as temporary signs.
K. Signs which are erected, attached to or constructed on the roof of any
building or structure.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-166 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-167
C:444
§ 51-168. Permitted sign types by zoning district.
Permitted sign types shall be permitted in the zoning districts specified in
Table 51-168, subject to applicable regulations contained elsewhere in this
article.91
§ 51-169. Supplementary regulations for certain permitted uses.
L. Private signs located within the street right-of-way or which are
attached to public utility poles, lampposts, public signs or like
structures.
M. Signs which are affixed to other signs.
N. On-site and off-site business signs that are portable signs held by hand,
including but not limited to banners, pennants, placards, posters and
spinners.
O. All other sign types, uses and purposes not explicitly permitted.
A. Hotels and motel inns may have one identification sign for each lot
frontage but not more than two. Such sign shall not exceed an area of
150 square feet.
B. A theater may be allowed:
(1) A marquee sign, which shall not exceed 100 square feet in
aggregate area and five feet in height. Said sign shall be limited to
letters used for identifying the name of the theater and the current
or coming attractions to be played therein.
(2) Two outdoor display cases, which shall not exceed 20 square feet
each and 10 feet in height.
C. A gasoline station may have:
(1) One freestanding or flat sign for each lot frontage but not more
than two signs for one gasoline station. The aggregate area of such
sign shall not exceed 0.5 times the principal lot frontage or 15% of
the facade area and shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
(2) One pump island canopy sign for each pump island. Such pump
sign shall not exceed 10 square feet in area and 15 feet in height
from ground level.
(3) One flat identification sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area.
D. A commercial establishment on the second floor of a two-story building
may have:
(1) One window sign.
91.Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Sign Types by Zone (Table 51-168) is attached to this
chapter.
§ 51-167 CHARTER § 51-169
C:445
§ 51-170. Permitted sign types.
The sign types in this section shall be permitted in the City of East Orange,
subject to applicable regulations contained elsewhere in this article.
(2) Window signs shall be no more than 20% of the total window area.
(3) Temporary window signs are not permitted.
A. Monument sign.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating the dimensions and appearance of
monument signs is to preserve or improve public safety as well as
the aesthetic qualities of the places in which they exist. Regulations
also ensure that the messages on monument signs are clear and not
cluttered by excessive information.
(2) Components.
(a) Monument signs typically consist of a solid structural base
with a framework of the same material. Monument signs have
a message area that consists of individual letters that are
externally illuminated. Internally illuminated cabinets are
prohibited.
(b) Primary tenant or development name: usually the largest name
or logo appearing on a freestanding sign, and placed at the
very top.
(c) Secondary tenants: smaller signs located below the primary
tenant.
(d) Street address: number and street name required for all
monument signs.
(e) Message board. Some uses may employ a message board with
area for temporary banners to advertise events, sales or
attractions. Electronic or manual changeable letters are
prohibited.
(3) General provisions.
(a) Monument signs for businesses or shopping centers shall be
permitted where the primary street frontage is greater than 50
feet and where the setback to the main building is greater than
10 feet. Monument signs shall be placed in the front yard area
at least five feet distant from the site's principal building. One
monument sign is permitted per street frontage.
(b) Nonresidential uses in residential zones are permitted one
monument sign per street frontage.
§ 51-169 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:446
(c) The base of the sign shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall not
obscure text. Landscaping shall not block sight lines of the
driveway or circulation aisles.
(d) Monument signs shall be limited to the name of the business
and street address, with an optional logo and/or message
board. Other messages, including but not limited to list of
services or products, phone numbers, sales or promotions and
slogans, are prohibited unless included within the message
board.
(e) Monument signs for shopping centers with more than one
tenant shall be limited to a maximum of five business names,
including the name of the retail center, if it has one.
(f) A monument sign shall use between 5% to 10% of its area for
address identification. Letters and numbers shall be at least six
inches high and be legible from the street.
(g) Monument signs shall be internally illuminated with letter
cutouts on an opaque background or with directed external
lighting shielded to prevent glare.
(h) Monument signs shall be designed to match or complement the
colors and architectural features of the adjacent building and
incorporate similar architectural elements at top, sides or base
to frame the sign. Monument signs shall include a cap.
(i) If a monument sign contains listings for multiple tenants, the
information shall be presented in a clear and consistent
manner. Color, font size and style shall be coordinated across a
monument sign.
(j) If a monument sign is intended to be seen primarily by
motorists, letter size shall be such that a motorist would not
need to slow down drastically to read the contents of the sign.
(4) Placement.
(a) Monument signs shall be placed in the front yard area at least
five feet distant from the site's principal building. Monument
signs shall not block sight lines at the driveway or circulation
aisles.
(b) No portion of the monument sign shall be located within the
public right-of-way.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.A for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:447
Table 51-170.A: Monument Sign
Quantity 1 per street frontage; 2
maximum
Area Maximum 80 square feet;
see Subsection A(6),
Conditions
a. Width Maximum 10 feet;
see Subsection A(6),
Conditions
b. Height Maximum 8 feet;
see Subsection A(6),
Conditions
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 2 feet
e. Clearance n/a
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Minimum 6 inches
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170A(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions for monument signs for nonresidential uses in
residential zones.
(a) The width of monument signs in residential zones R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-O and CCC shall not exceed eight feet and the height of
such signs shall not exceed six feet.
B. Wall-mounted sign.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating wall-mounted signs is to ensure
proper dimensioning and placement on the building — with respect
to existing architectural features — to maintain or improve public
safety as well as the aesthetic qualities of the place in which they
are located. Lighting of wall-mounted signs is also regulated to
reduce glare.
(2) Components.
(a) Components of wall-mounted signs include the letters,
background, lighting and an optional logo. The simplest wallmounted
signs consist of letters only, mounted directly on the
wall. Wall-mounted signs are only permitted if they are of the
following construction types:
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:448
[1] Cut-out letters. Letters are individually attached to the
wall or on a separate background panel and shall be
externally illuminated.
[2] Channel letters. Each letter has its own internal lighting
element, individually attached to the wall or onto a
separate background panel. The letter shall be translucent
or solid to create a backlit "halo" effect.
[3] Flat panel. The letters are printed or etched on same
surface as the background, which is then affixed to the
wall and shall be lit externally.
[4] Box or cabinet signs are prohibited. This is the type where
letters are printed or etched on a box deep enough to
house internal lighting. The box shall be translucent, and
the letters are silhouetted; or the box shall be opaque and
only the letters are translucent.
(3) General provisions.
(a) All businesses are permitted one wall-mounted sign. A
business may have one additional wall sign where it has a
secondary street frontage, but in no case shall a business have
more than two wall-mounted signs in total. Where a business is
allowed more than one wall-mounted sign, each sign shall be
on a separate facade.
(b) Wall-mounted signs shall consist of the name and logo of the
business. Wall-mounted signs shall not list products, sales or
other promotional messages. Wall signs shall not contain
address information, phone number or other contact
information.
(c) Height and width shall be measured using smallest rectangle
that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters, logo and
background.
(d) Wall-mounted signs shall not be wider than building face or
tenant space.
(e) Wall-mounted signs shall not project vertically above the
roofline.
(f) Where multiple wall-mounted signs are present on a single
building (i.e., for retail tenants in a shopping center), signage
shall be coordinated in terms of scale, placement, colors and
materials.
(g) Wall-mounted signs shall be illuminated at least from dusk to
dawn. External lights shall be shielded from direct view to
reduce glare.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:449
(h) Electrical raceways, conduits and wiring shall not be exposed.
Internal lighting elements shall be contained completely within
the sign assembly or inside the wall.
(4) Placement.
(a) Wall-mounted signs shall be placed where the architectural
features suggest the best placement for signage. They shall be
vertically aligned with the center of an architectural feature
such as a storefront window, entry portal or width of a bay, or
overall retail space.
(b) Placement of wall-mounted signs shall be compatible with
existing architectural features such as bays, openings,
pilasters, etc. They shall not interrupt or obscure these
features or cause visual disharmony.
(c) Wall-mounted signs are not permitted above the ground floor
of buildings.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.B for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.B: Wall-Mounted Sign
Quantity of signs 1 per business; 2 for corner
properties
Sign area 1.5 square feet per linear foot
of building front
a. Width Maximum 90% of width of
building front
b. Height Maximum 24 inches
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 7 inches
e. Clearance Minimum 7 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Maximum 18 inches
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170B(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
C. Awning sign.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating awning signs is to ensure proper
dimensioning and placement on the building — with respect to
existing architectural features — to maintain or improve public
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:450
safety as well as the aesthetic qualities of the place in which they
are located. Awning signs are also regulated to ensure that they are
made of durable materials and are fixed or replaced if damaged.
(2) Components.
(a) The following awning sign types are permitted:
[1] Shed and patio shed awnings with or without signbands.
[2] Long dome awnings with or without signbands.
[3] Dome awnings with or without signbands or marquee.
[4] Marquee awnings.
[5] Gable awnings.
(b) The following awning sign types are prohibited:
[1] Waterfall and multilevel waterfall awnings.
[2] Box awnings.
[3] Translucent awnings that enable internal lighting to make
the awning glow.
(3) General provisions.
(a) Awning signs shall contain no more than two rows of text.
(b) The height of the valance of an awning sign shall not exceed 12
inches.
(c) Letters, numbers and graphics may be printed only on the
valance portion of the awning sign and must be between five to
10 inches in height and cover no more than 70% of the valance
area. A logo may be printed on the flat surfaces of a shed
awning sign. The size of the logo shall not exceed more than
50% of the area of the flat surface.
(d) Awning signs shall be made of a high-quality canvas, woven
acrylic or similar material. Vinyl, plastic, Mylar and other shiny
or glossy materials are prohibited. "Egg crate" undersides to
awning signs are prohibited.
(e) Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated or backlit.
(f) Awning signs shall be colored or patterned so as to match or
complement the architecture or the brand of the business.
(g) Torn or damaged awning signs shall be repaired or replaced
immediately pursuant to § 51-166G.
(4) Placement.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:451
(a) Awning signs shall not obscure architectural features such as
pilasters, friezes, roof eaves, roofs, etc. Where possible, they
shall be contained within a storefront window bay. Awning
signs that span continuously across the entire face of the
building's facade are discouraged. Awning signs that span
corners are discouraged.
(b) Awning signs shall not extend beyond the width of the building
or tenant space. Awning signs shall not project above the
roofline or extend into the floor above.
(c) No portion of an awning sign shall be less than seven feet
above the surface over which it projects or project more than
four feet into a public right-of-way.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.C for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.C: Awning Sign
Quantity 1 per window or storefront bay
Area n/a
a. Width Maximum equals width of
building front
b. Height n/a
c. Valance height Maximum 12 inches
d. Depth/projection Maximum 4 feet
e. Clearance Minimum 7 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Minimum 5 inches; maximum
10 inches
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170C(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
D. Window sign.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating the dimensions of window signs is
to protect public safety by preventing cluttering of storefront
windows and maintaining visibility through storefront windows.
(2) Components. Window signs are classified into the following
construction types:
(a) Poster or placard. A sign printed on paper, card stock or other
material which is affixed to the window or placed against it.
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:452
(b) Label applique letters. A sticker that is applied to the window.
Label appliques shall consist of individual letters or graphics
with no background.
(c) Painted letters. Painted directly on the window.
(d) Hanging sign. Signs that are hanging from the ceiling behind
the window. Usually these signs require electricity for
illumination. Examples include neon signs or an internally
illuminated box or cabinet sign.
(e) Video display sign. Signs consisting of electronically generated
text and images displayed on a computer monitor, television
screen, LCD photo frame or similar device.
(f) Door sign. Signs applied to the glass portion of an entrance
doorway.
(g) Neon sign.
(3) General provisions.
(a) Window signs shall not interfere with the primary function of
windows, which is to enable passersby and public safety
personnel to see through windows into premises and product
displays.
(b) Window signs shall be no larger than 25% of the total area of
the glass panel onto which they are applied. Commercial, office
or institutional establishments on the second floor of a twostory
building are permitted to have window signs that shall be
no larger than 25% of the total area of the glass panel onto
which they are applied. Window signs are not permitted above
the second level of any structure.
(c) Window signs shall be allowed to list services and/or products
sold on the premises or provide phone numbers, operating
hours or other messages, provided that the total aggregate
area of these messages does not exceed the area utilized for
the business identification.
(d) Merchandise or other objects that are located inside within
three feet of the window and that are not part of a commercial
window display shall be considered window signs, subject to
the provisions in Subsection D(3)(b).
(e) Door signs shall be no larger than 25% of the area of the door
onto which it is applied.
(f) The total dimension of all signs, including combinations of
neon signs, posters, etchings, painted letters, etc., shall be
included in total calculations of window sign area.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:453
(g) Neon lights outlining windows are prohibited.
(h) Letters on window signs, including neon signs and door signs,
shall not be taller than eight inches.
(i) Video display signs are permitted only behind and facing the
inside of ground-floor windows.
(j) Video display signs shall be no larger than two square feet. The
dimensions of video displays shall be included in the
calculations of window sign areas.
(k) Audio speakers or any form of sound emanating from video
display devices is prohibited.
(l) Except for neon signs and video display signs, where
permitted, and ambient lighting, window signs shall not be
illuminated.
(4) Placement.
(a) Window signs shall be applied to or placed facing the interior
side of the window.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.D for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.D: Window Sign
Quantity See Table 51-16892
Area See Subsection D(3), General
provisions
a. Width n/a
b. Height n/a
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection n/a
e. Clearance n/a
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Maximum 8 inches
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170D(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
E. Projecting sign.
92.Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Sign Types by Zone (Table 51-168) is attached to this
chapter.
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:454
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating the dimensions and lighting of
projecting signs is to preserve or improve public safety as well as
the aesthetic qualities of the place in which they are located and to
ensure adequate clearance above the public right-of-way.
(2) Components. Components of projecting signs include the letters,
background, lighting and an optional logo. The simplest projecting
signs consist of letters only, mounted directly on a panel. Permitted
projecting signs are classified into the following construction types:
(a) Cut-out or individually shaped letters or symbols. Letters or
symbols are individually attached on a wall or attached to a
panel attached to the wall; shall be externally lit.
(b) Flat panel. The letters are printed or etched on same surface as
the background, which is then affixed to the wall; shall be
externally lit.
(c) Box or cabinet signs are prohibited. These are signs where the
letters are printed or etched on a box deep enough to house
internal lighting. The box shall be translucent, and the letters
are silhouetted; or the box shall be opaque and only the letters
are translucent.
(3) General provisions.
(a) A business shall be permitted one projecting sign where its
primary frontage is no more than five feet from the front
setback line. Businesses that have a secondary frontage on
another street that is no more than two feet from the side
setback line shall be permitted to have one additional
projecting sign on that facade.
(b) Projecting signs shall be on a single plane and project at a 90°
angle from the face of the building. Signs may be double-sided.
(c) Projecting signs shall be permitted only for businesses that
have a primary entrance on the ground floor.
(d) Text and graphics on the projecting sign shall be limited to the
name and logo of the business only. Slogans or text advertising
products or services are permitted if letters are not more than
three inches in height and take up no more than 25% of the
area of the sign. Address labels, operating hours and contact
information are prohibited.
(e) Mounting hardware, such as supports and brackets, may be
simple and unobtrusive or be highly decorative, but must
complement the design of the sign, the building, or both.
(f) For buildings with multiple signs (e.g., for multiple retail
tenants in a shopping center), mounting hardware or sign
shapes, sizes and colors shall be coordinated.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:455
(4) Placement.
(a) Projecting signs shall not extend beyond the top of the roofline.
(b) On multistory buildings, projecting signs shall not extend
above the bottom of the second-floor window sills, unless
placed above a marquee sign.
(c) No portion of a projecting sign shall be less than eight feet
above the surface over which it projects or project more than
four feet from the wall on which it is attached into a public
right-of-way.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.E for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.E: Projecting Sign
Quantity 1 per facade, 2 maximum
Area 8 square feet
a. Width Maximum 4 feet
b. Height Maximum 4 feet
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 4 feet
e. Clearance Minimum 8 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Maximum 8 inches
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170E(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
F. Marquee.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating marquees is to prevent any risk to
public health and safety. Furthermore, marquees are regulated to
permit adequate clearance above the public right-of-way and to
ensure proper dimensioning and placement on the building with
respect to existing architectural features.
(2) Components. Marquees are typically structural features of
buildings. Their components and materials can vary considerably.
Anchors, bolts and supporting rods are part of the interior of
marquees. Signs, typically in the form of channel letters, are affixed
to marquees.
(3) General provisions.
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:456
(a) All marquees, including anchors, bolts, supporting rods and
braces thereof, shall be constructed of incombustible materials
and shall be designed by a structural engineer and approved
by the Building Inspector.
(b) No portion of a marquee shall be less than 10 feet above the
sidewalk.
(c) No marquee shall be permitted to extend closer to the curbline
than three feet.
(d) No marquee shall be wider than the entrance of the building
plus two feet on each side thereof.
(e) Where an entrance consists of multiple adjacent doors, the
multiple doors shall be treated as one single entrance.
(f) Marquees shall be supported solely by the building to which
they are attached, and no columns or posts shall be used as
supports in the required front yard or street right-of-way.
(g) A projecting sign may be placed above a marquee.
(4) Placement.
(a) Marquees shall only be located above the main entrance of a
building.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.F for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.F: Marquee
Quantity 1
Area n/a
a. Width Width of entrance bay
b. Height Maximum 50% of height of
building
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 10 feet
e. Clearance Minimum 10 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height n/a
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170F(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:457
G. Entrance canopy.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating entrance canopies is to ensure
durability and to prevent any risk to public health and safety.
Furthermore, entrance canopies are regulated to permit adequate
clearance above the public right-of-way and to ensure proper
dimensioning and placement on the building with respect to
existing architectural features.
(2) Components. Entrance canopies consist of a canopy of canvas,
cloth, or other materials whose shape is supported by a framework
of rods and held up by posts secured to the ground. The canopy
may consist of a flat front and valances.
(3) General provisions.
(a) Entrance canopies shall be made of canvas, cloth or other
similar materials and of fiberglass, glass or nonferrous metals.
In no case shall entrance canopies include wood or wood
products, vinyl, glossy acrylic, masonite or similar materials.
(4) Placement.
(a) In all cases where an entrance canopy is placed upon, attached
to or forming any part of any building and such awning,
entrance canopy or shelter canopy projects over a sidewalk or
similar place where the public is accustomed to walk, the rigid
or metal parts for any such awning entrance canopy or shelter
canopy shall have a clearance of not less than seven feet from
the sidewalk elevations, and any nonrigid valance of any such
awning, entrance canopy or shelter canopy shall have a
clearance of not less than 6 1/2 feet from sidewalk elevation.
(b) Entrance canopies shall not extend more than eight feet into
the public right-of-way and shall be at least two feet distant
from the street curb.
(c) The name, logo and street address of the establishment shall
be placed on the face or sides of the canopy in letters no taller
than eight inches. Entrance canopies shall not contain a list of
services or products, promotional messages, slogans, address
information, operating hours or contact information.
(d) Entrance canopies installed with sidewalk illumination systems
shall direct light downward.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.G for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:458
Table 51-170.G: Entrance Canopy
Quantity 1
Area n/a
a. Width No wider than width of
entrance bay
b. Height n/a
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection See § 51-170G(4)(b)
e. Clearance Minimum 7 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height Maximum 8 inches
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170G(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
H. Nameplate.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating the sizes, colors and materials of
nameplates is to preserve or improve public safety as well as the
aesthetic quality of the place in which they are located.
(2) Components. Nameplates typically consist of either a panel or
individual letters applied to a building wall.
(3) General provisions.
(a) One nameplate shall be permitted per address.
(b) Nameplates shall not exceed three square feet in display area.
(c) Nameplates shall be constructed of durable materials. Tape
and paper shall not be used to create nameplates.
(d) Nameplates shall include the address number and street in
letters at least six inches in height if a separate address sign is
not provided.
(4) Placement.
(a) Nameplates shall be attached to the wall within 10 feet of an
entrance to the building.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.H for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:459
Table 51-170.H: Nameplate
Quantity 1
Area 3 square feet
a. Width Maximum 18 inches
b. Height Maximum 2 feet
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 3 inches
e. Clearance Minimum 4 feet
f. Apex Maximum 7 feet
g. Letter height n/a
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170H(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
I. Address sign.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating address signs is to protect public
safety by ensuring the visibility of street addresses from the street.
Their sizes, colors and materials are also regulated to preserve or
improve the aesthetic quality of the place in which they are located.
(2) Components. Address signs typically consist of either a panel or
individual letters applied to a building wall.
(3) General provisions.
(a) Address sign numerals applied to commercial, multifamily
residential buildings, institutional, office or industrial buildings
shall be between four and 10 inches tall. Address sign
numerals applied to individual dwelling units shall be at least
two inches tall.
(b) Address signs shall be easily visible by using colors or
materials that contrast with their background.
(c) Address signs shall not be incorporated into other signs except
in the case of address numerals placed on the valance of
awning signs.
(d) Address signs shall be constructed of durable materials. Tape
and paper shall not be used to create address signs.
(4) Placement.
(a) Address signs must be placed in a conspicuous location on the
front of the building, preferably on the primary entrance or
above it.
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:460
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.I for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.I: Address Sign
Quantity 1
Area Maximum 1 square foot
a. Width Maximum 12 inches
b. Height Maximum 12 inches
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 3 inches
e. Clearance Minimum 4.5 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height See Subsection I(3), General
provisions
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170I(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
J. Temporary sign, banner.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating temporary banner signs is to
protect public safety by ensuring that they are removed after a
specified time period. Furthermore, the dimensions of temporary
banner signs are regulated to prevent the signs from cluttering or
obscuring the building facade.
(2) Components. A banner typically consist of a large printed sign,
usually on a weather-durable material like vinyl, to achieve the
same kind of visibility as most wall-mounted signs. Because of its
light weight it can be attached to nearly any surface where a more
permanent wall sign would be difficult or impossible to mount, such
as on highly decorated or ornate surfaces or on fences.
(3) General provisions.
(a) Banners must be temporary and shall not be used in place of or
in addition to other forms of permanent signage.
(b) Banners shall only be permitted to announce events of limited
occurrence or duration, such as sales, grand openings or
change of tenant or for public functions or fund-raising events
for charitable, educational, civic, religious or similar purposes.
(c) Banners may be in place no longer than 30 days in a calendar
year. Days do not necessarily need to be consecutive.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:461
(d) Banners shall not exceed six feet in height or 16 feet in width,
with a maximum area of 32 square feet. Banners shall not be
wider than the building on which it is applied.
(e) Only one banner is permitted to be displayed at a time.
(f) "For sale" or "for lease" banners for buildings or space within
buildings are exempt from the time limit but shall be removed
before or upon sale or lease.
(g) Banners shall be constructed of durable materials that can
sustain winds and inclement weather.
(4) Placement.
(a) Banners for commercial and industrial uses shall be located on
the building. Banners for public and institutional uses may be
located on the building or on premises.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.J for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.J: Temporary Sign, Banner
Quantity 1
Area 32 square feet
a. Width Maximum 16 feet
b. Height Maximum 5 feet
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection n/a
e. Clearance Minimum 8 feet
f. Apex Maximum 16 feet
g. Letter height Maximum 2.5 feet
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170J(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
K. Temporary sign, freestanding.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating temporary freestanding signs is to
protect public safety by ensuring that they are removed after a
specified time period. The dimensions of temporary freestanding
signs are regulated to ensure adequate clearance along the public
right-of-way.
(2) Components. A freestanding, double-sided temporary sign is placed
at the entrance to a business in a primarily pedestrian
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:462
environment. It is convenient to move and store and be placed
outside on a day-to-day basis and removed at the close of business
each day.
(3) General provisions.
(a) One temporary freestanding sign shall be permitted for each
business. Temporary freestanding signs should be made of
high quality materials and be weather-durable. Temporary
freestanding signs shall not exceed 42 inches in height or 26
inches in width.
(4) Placement.
(a) Temporary freestanding signs shall not be placed more than
five feet from the building wall.
(b) Temporary freestanding signs shall be stored inside when the
business is not open or when the sign is not in use. Temporary
freestanding signs shall also be stored inside during high
winds or other weather conditions that might pose a hazard to
public safety.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.K for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.K: Temporary Sign, Freestanding
Quantity 1
Area 8 square feet
a. Width Maximum 26 inches
b. Height Maximum 42 inches
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 5 feet
e. Clearance n/a
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height n/a
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170K(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
L. Temporary sign, window.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating temporary window signs is to
protect public safety by ensuring that they are removed after a
limited time period. The dimensions of temporary window signs are
regulated to prevent cluttering the storefront window.
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:463
(2) Components. Temporary window signs typically are affixed to
windows.
(3) General provisions.
(a) Temporary window signs shall be limited to no more than 20%
of the area of the glass panel on which they are displayed, such
that the aggregate area of permanent and temporary window
signs does not exceed 30% of the glass panel on which they are
displayed. The area of temporary window signs shall not be
included in the calculations of the areas of permanent window
signs.
(b) Temporary window signs may be displayed for a maximum of
30 days in a calendar year. The days do not need to be
consecutive. A "day" shall mean any part of the day for any
duration.
(c) "For sale" or "for lease" signs are exempt from this time limit
but shall be removed before or upon sale or lease.
(d) Temporary window signs may not be illuminated.
(4) Placement.
(a) Temporary window signs shall be affixed to the interior of the
window.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.L for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.L: Temporary Sign, Window
Quantity n/a
Area Maximum 20% of area of
glass panel
a. Width n/a
b. Height n/a
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection n/a
e. Clearance n/a
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height n/a
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170L(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:464
M. Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited throughout the City. Roof-mounted
signs are any signs mounted above the roofline of any structure and
typically feature an externally illuminated flat panel or internally
illuminated letters or images. Any component above a building's
roofline is prohibited.93
N. Message board.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating message boards is to prohibit them
in order to prevent any nuisance or risk to public safety and health
from illuminated messages. Furthermore, the dimensions of
message boards are regulated so that they are proportionate with
the sign framework in which they are installed. Bulletin boards are
not message boards.
O. Outdoor display case.
(1) Intent. The intent of regulating outdoor display cases is to protect
public health and safety by ensuring that their content is
maintained and kept current. Furthermore, the dimensions of
outdoor display cases are regulated so that they do not clutter the
facades of the buildings on which they are mounted.
(2) Components. Outdoor display cases consist of lockable metal or
wood-framed cabinet with transparent windows mounted onto a
building wall.
(3) General provisions.
(a) One outdoor display case is permitted per every 20 feet of
frontage.
(b) Each outdoor display case shall not exceed a total area of six
square feet.
(c) Outdoor display cases are permitted to be illuminated in order
for their contents to be visible in the dark.
(d) The contents of outdoor display cases shall be maintained and
kept current. Faded, torn and outdated contacts shall be
removed and replaced immediately pursuant to § 51-166G.
(e) Theaters are permitted to have greater quantities and
dimensions of outdoor display cases, at the discretion of the
Planning Board.
(4) Placement.
(a) Outdoor display cases shall be attached to the building walls
nearest to the main entrance.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-170 CHARTER § 51-170
C:465
(b) Outdoor display cases shall not be attached to storefront
windows.
(5) Permitted quantities and dimensions.
(a) Refer to Table 51-170.O for permitted quantities and
dimensions.
Table 51-170.O: Outdoor Display Case
Quantity 1
Area Maximum 6 square feet
a. Width Maximum 3.5 feet
b. Height Maximum 3.5 feet
c. Valance height n/a
d. Depth/projection Maximum 5 inches
e. Clearance Minimum 4 feet
f. Apex n/a
g. Letter height n/a
(b) In the event of conflict or inconsistency, specifications in
§ 51-170O(3), General provisions, shall apply.
(6) Conditions.
§ 51-170 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-170
C:466
ARTICLE XXVI
Nonconforming Uses
§ 51-171. Existing nonconforming uses or structures.
Any nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of passage of this
chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so occupied.
Expansion of or increase in density or expansion of existing nonconforming
commercial or industrial uses is prohibited. Any nonconforming use or
structure which is less than 50% destroyed by fire, casualty or act of God
may be repaired, rebuilt and used as before, provided that no increase in
the degree of nonconformity is thereby created. All repairs shall be initiated
within one year after the damage occurs and shall be completed within two
years after such date, or such use may not be rebuilt except as a conforming
use or structure.
§ 51-172. Conversion to conforming use.
If any nonconforming use ceases for a continuous period of one year or
more, or is changed to or replaced by a conforming use, or is moved for any
distance for any reason, the land and building theretofore devoted to such
nonconforming use shall thereupon be subject to all the regulations as to
use for the district in which such land and buildings are located as if such
nonconforming use had never existed and shall be considered to have been
abandoned.
§ 51-173. Repair of buildings housing nonconforming uses.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a
building in which a nonconforming use is conducted.
§ 51-171 CHARTER § 51-173
C:467

Part 5
Improvements
ARTICLE XXVII
Improvement Requirements
§ 51-174. Installation of improvements prior to final approval.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or
shall have furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of
the improvements.
§ 51-175. Observance of requirements.
§ 51-176. Consistency with land use requirements.
The subdivision or site plan shall be consistent in layout or arrangement
with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 51-177. Conditions of site plan approval.
A. The subdivider or developer shall observe the requirements and
principles of land subdivision and site development set in this chapter.
If an Official Map shall have been adopted, the subdivision shall
conform to the proposals.
B. The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles of a
subdivision set forth in this article in the design of each subdivision or
portion thereof. If an Official Map shall have been adopted, the
subdivision shall conform to the proposal and additions shown thereon.
The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school site, public parks and
playgrounds shown on a duly adopted Master Plan shall be considered
in approval of subdivision plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map
exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final
plat in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and shall be of such layout to lend
themselves to the harmonious development of the municipality and
enhance the public welfare in accordance with the design standards in
the following sections.
A. As a condition of site plan approval, the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment may require that the applicant install certain improvements
on the site, and may require the posting of performance guarantee with
the City, consistent with the design standards of this chapter to ensure:
(1) Adequate vehicular and pedestrian circulation to accommodate
prospective traffic into, out of and within the site.
(2) Adequate off-street parking and loading areas.
§ 51-174 CHARTER § 51-177
C:469
§ 51-178. Monuments.
Monuments shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the Map
Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.).
§ 51-179. Easements.
(3) Adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities
and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
(4) Adequate landscaping and any screening necessary to protect
adjoining uses.
B. The City Council may require a developer, as a condition of site plan
approval, to pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable
and necessary street improvements and water, sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements therefor located outside the property limits of
the site plan but necessitated or required by construction of
improvements within such site plan. Such requirements shall be based
on circulation and comprehensive utility service plans and shall
represent the applicant's pro rata share of the total improvements
based on the pro rata share represented by his development compared
to the total area served by the improvements.
C. The City Council may accept a dedication of land for street widening or
other public purposes if offered by the developer and if it will result in a
better designed site plan.
A. Easements of at least 15 feet in width shall be provided for all public
sewers, water mains and other required underground utilities.
B. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a natural stream or
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and of such
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose.
§ 51-177 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-179
C:470
ARTICLE XXVIII
Performance Guaranties
§ 51-180. Performance and maintenance guaranties; release from
liability.
A. Before recording of final subdivision plats, the approving authority may
require and shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted by
ordinance for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance
of contract improvements:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
municipality in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation for improvements it may deem necessary or
appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement, water mains,
stormwater drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, dry wells,
cleanouts, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees,
surveyor's monuments and fire hydrants, as shown on the final map
and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq.), culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices and public improvements of open
space. Performance guaranties required by this chapter shall run
for the period specified by the Office of Comprehensive Planning
but in no case for a term of more than three years.
(2) Provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the Office
of Comprehensive Planning for a period not to exceed two years
after final acceptance of the improvement in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the
utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a
performance or maintenance guaranty to another governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may
be, shall be required by the municipality for such utilities or
improvements.
B. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the Office
of Comprehensive Planning, by resolution, when portions of the
improvements have been certified by the Director of Public Works to
have been completed. The time allowed for installation of the
improvements for which the performance guaranty has been provided
may be extended by said body by resolution. The amount of the
performance guaranty shall be increased or reduced, as the case may
be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as
determined as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or collected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the municipality
§ 51-180 CHARTER § 51-180
C:471
may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof,
complete such improvements.
D. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Office of Comprehensive Planning, in writing, by
certified mail, of the completion of said improvements and shall send a
copy thereof to the Director of Public Works. Thereupon the Director of
Public Works shall inspect all of the improvements and shall file a
detailed report, in writing, with the Office of Comprehensive Planning,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of the
improvements, with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If partial
approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected shall be set
forth. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released
from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for that
portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements
not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guaranty posted may be retained to insure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the governing body to send or provide
notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute
approval of the improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall
be released from all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty for
such improvements.
E. The Director of Public Works shall either approve, partially approve or
reject the improvements and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by
certified mail, of the contents of said report and the action of said
approving authority with relation thereto no later than 65 days after
receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the
improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be
released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except
for that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of the
improvements not yet approved. Failure of the Office of Comprehensive
Planning to send or provide such notification to the obligor within 65
days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements, and
the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability
pursuant to such performance guaranty.
F. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and
upon completion the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Office
of Comprehensive Planning or the Director of Public Works.
H. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Director of Public Works for the foregoing
inspection of the improvements.
§ 51-180 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-180
C:472
§ 51-181. Payment of pro rata share of cost improvements.
§ 51-182. Acceptance of dedication of land by City Council.
The City Council may accept a dedication of land for street widening or
other public purposes if offered by the developer and if it will result in a
better designed subdivision.
I. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development,
the provisions of this article shall be applied by stage or section.
A. The City Council may require a developer, as a condition of subdivision
approval, to pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable
and necessary street improvements and water, sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the property limits of
the subdivision but necessitated or required by construction or
improvements within such subdivision. Such requirements shall be
based on circulation and comprehensive utility service plans and shall
represent the applicant's pro rata share of the total improvements
based on the pro rata share represented by his development compared
to the total area served by the improvement. Where the developer pays
the amount determined as his pro rata share under protest, he shall
institute legal action within one year of such payment in order to
preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and
reasonableness of such amount.
B. The proposed development shall have no adverse effect on existing
municipal utilities. Should additional or improved municipal utilities be
required to prevent such adverse effect, the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment shall forward its recommendation regarding installation of
the necessary improvements to the City Council and shall not issue final
site plan approval until the applicant has entered into agreement with
the City Council regarding installation of or payment for its
proportionate share of such improvements.
§ 51-180 CHARTER § 51-182
C:473

ARTICLE XXIX
Design Standards
§ 51-183. Streets.
A. Streets in the subdivision or land development shall be of sufficient
width and suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency
equipment to buildings and coordinated so as to compose a convenient
system consistent with the Official Map, if any, and the circulation
element of the Master Plan, if any, provided that no street of a width
greater than 50 feet within the right-of-way lines shall be required
unless said street constitutes an extension of an existing street of the
greater width or already has been shown on the Master Plan at the
greater width or already has been shown in greater width on the
Official Map.
B. Right-of-way width for new streets being created.
(1) The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and not be less than the following:
(a) Arterial streets: 80 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(c) Minor streets: 50 feet.
(2) Where a circulation plan element of the Master Plan or a suitable
traffic and engineering study has designed a right-of-way width for
any street, that standard shall be followed.
C. The width of the right-of-way of internal roads, alleys and serviceways
in multifamily, commercial and industrial developments shall be
determined on an individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient
width and of suitable design to safely accommodate the anticipated
peak traffic, parking and loading needs; to provide sufficient access and
turnaround space where needed for firefighting equipment utilized by
the City Fire Department; and to provide sufficient access and egress
for refuse collection.
D. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan shall, where feasible, dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of such streets. If the
subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall
be dedicated.
E. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades for
minor streets shall not exceed 10% nor shall minor streets have a
minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%. Within 50 feet of the intersection
of any such street with a major arterial street, the maximum grade shall
be limited to 2%.
§ 51-183 CHARTER § 51-183
C:475
§ 51-184. Blocks.
§ 51-185. Lots.
F. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
shall be no less than 60°. At the street corners, curbs shall be rounded
with a curve having a radius of not less than 25 feet.
G. Street jobs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
H. Wherever a change of alignment of a street occurs, except at street
intersections, the deflecting street lines shall be connected by a curve
with a radius of not less than 100 feet.
I. A vertical curve of sufficient radius shall be provided at all changes of
grades of streets to provide moving vehicles with a smooth transition
and to allow sufficient sight distance to drivers in order to assure traffic
and pedestrian safety.
J. Dead-end streets or alleys (culs-de-sac) shall be avoided to the extent
feasible but, if needed, shall provide a turnaround at the end with a
radius of not less than 50 feet and tangent, whenever possible, to the
right side of the street and shall, where the street or alley is in excess of
400 feet in length, be subject to a determination by the Planning Board
that the design is such that the firefighting apparatus of the City shall
not be deprived of ready access to structures served by such dead-end
street or alley.
K. The name of any street dedicated for public uses shall be approved by
the City Council, and no undedicated or private street shall be given
any name which will be a duplication of or will tend to create confusion
by the public with any existing street. The extension of an existing
street shall have the same name as the existing street.
L. Proposed streets shall be designed in conformity with the State
Highway Access Management Code under N.J.S.A. 27:7-91, as
amended.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by this chapter
and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic.
B. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot sizes and dimensions shall be not less than the requirements of this
chapter.
B. Insofar as it is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets. Lot lines shall be regular and
§ 51-183 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-185
C:476
§ 51-186. Driveways.
straight, except where the outside perimeter lines of the subdivision
tract make such an arrangement unfeasible, and shall be free from
irregularities and internal jogs, except where actual land conditions
necessitate such delineations.
C. Intersecting curblines on corner lots adjacent to the street lines shall be
rounded with a curve having a radius of not less than 25 feet.
D. Where the City Master Plan shows a proposed widening of an existing
street upon which lots within the proposed subdivision will front, all
setbacks on such lots shall be measured from the new street line as
proposed in the Master Plan.
E. Each new lot resulting from a subdivision shall front on an approved
street at least 50 feet in width.
F. If a lot shall not be proved to be suitable for its intended use due to
factors such as rock formations, flood conditions, topography or similar
environmental circumstances, the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment may, after hearing, withhold approval of the proposed
subdivision creating such lot.
A. Driveway location. All entrance and exiting driveways shall be located
so as to afford maximum safety to and minimum disruption of traffic on
the street. Where practicable, no part of any driveway entrance or exit
to a public street shall be closer than 50 feet to the right-of-way line of
any intersecting street. Where the frontage of the lot is too narrow to
permit the above distance, the driveway shall be located as far from the
intersection as possible but in no case any closer than 25 feet from a
public pedestrian crosswalk.
B. Traffic signs. To facilitate the safe and efficient movement of traffic into
and out of a site, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may
require the installation of specified directional regulatory or advisory
signs or pavement markings at designated locations on the site. Where
required on the site, all devices must conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where required off site on the public
right-of-way, all devices will be installed by the City in accordance with
the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The pro rata
cost of said off-site improvements shall be borne by the developer.
C. Number of driveways. The number of driveways provided from a site
directly to any one street shall not exceed one driveway for a lot
frontage of 100 feet or less, two driveways for lot frontage up to 200
feet and one additional driveway for each 200 feet of lot frontage over
200 feet. Where more than one driveway is permitted, the Planning
Board shall require that each driveway be designated as either an exit
or an entrance where such designation will facilitate vehicle and
§ 51-185 CHARTER § 51-186
C:477
§ 51-187. Sidewalks.
pedestrian movement within the site without hindering traffic
movement on the street.
D. The dimensions of entrance and exit driveways and interior roads shall
be adequate to accommodate the volume and character of vehicles
anticipated to be using the site, but not wider than necessary to
accommodate the expected traffic at a speed of 15 miles per hour. The
required minimum and maximum dimensions are indicated in Table
51-186. All driveways shall require depressed curb construction. All
driveways shall conform to the applicable East Orange standards.
Driveway pavement shall extend to the curb of the street with which it
connects. Provisions must be made for handicapped, barrier-free
construction.
Table 51-186: Required Dimensions for Driveways and Interior
Roads
Driveway Width
One-Way
Operation
(feet)
Two-Way Operation
(feet)
1- to 10-family dwelling Maximum 10 Maximum 10
Over 10-family multiple
dwelling
Maximum 10 Maximum 20
Commercial or industrial 10 to 24 26 to 40
Gasoline station 18 to 25 25 to 35
E. Driveways along state highways shall be designed in conformity to the
State Highway Access Management Code (N.J.S.A. 27:7-91, as
amended).
A. Sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, parallel to the street
within the right-of-way, unless an exception has been permitted to
preserve topographic or natural features or to provide visual interest or
unless the applicant shows that an alternative pedestrian system
provides safe and convenient circulation.
B. Sidewalks shall connect the main entrance of each building with the
street or with the interior road giving access to the building. Interior
roads giving access to buildings shall have a sidewalk on at least one
side of such road. Sidewalks shall further be provided where needed to
protect the safety of pedestrians. All sidewalks shall be constructed to
meet the requirements of the Director of Public Works and the Code of
the City of East Orange. Sidewalks shall be accessible for the physically
handicapped in accordance with the federal Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) requirements.
§ 51-186 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-187
C:478
§ 51-188. Utility and shade tree areas.
§ 51-189. Lighting.
C. Sidewalks shall be surfaced so that they will be easily maintained and
properly illuminated if in use after sunset.
D. The entire route or alignment of sidewalks shall be visible from a street
or other public way.
E. Sidewalks shall have a minimum paved width of four feet. Where
sidewalks abut the curb and cars overhang the sidewalk, sidewalk
width shall be five feet.
F. When dedicated by the property owner to the City as a public walkway,
the sidewalk shall have an easement with a minimum width of 10 feet.
A. Utilities and shade trees shall generally be located within the right-ofway
on both sides of and parallel to the street.
B. Utility and shade tree areas shall have a minimum width of four feet and
shall be planted with grass, ground cover or treated with other suitable
cover material.
A. Lighting shall be provided in accordance with a plan designed by the
utility company and/or with the approval of the Director of Public
Works.
B. Lighting for safety shall be provided at intersections, along walkways,
at entryways, between buildings and in parking areas.
C. Spacing of light standards shall be equal to approximately four times
the height of the light standard.
D. The height and shielding of light fixtures shall provide proper lighting
without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents, and the design of
light standards shall be of a type appropriate to the development and
the municipality.
E. Spotlights, if used, shall be placed on standards pointing toward the
buildings and positioned so as not to blind the residents, rather than on
the buildings and directed outwards which creates dark shadows
adjacent to the buildings.
F. Illumination standards.
(1) Illumination in general. All exterior areas of a site shall be
illuminated at night in accordance with the standards herein. This
shall include, but not be limited to, pedestrian pathways, plazas,
courtyards, building entrances, parking and driveway areas, and
other outdoor spaces commonly used at night. When such areas are
not in active use, lighting shall be sufficient to allow for appropriate
surveillance for crime prevention purposes but shall be designed
§ 51-187 CHARTER § 51-189
C:479
and installed in such a way as to minimize glare or intrusive light
onto adjoining properties.
(2) All wires and cables used for the provision of lighting from
freestanding structures shall be underground.
(3) All exterior lighting fixtures, however mounted, shall be provided
with shields as necessary to confine the illumination to the site
upon which it is located to the standards set forth herein and to
eliminate glare on any adjacent properties and to adjacent streets.
(4) Illumination and design standards.
(a) Illumination levels at the property line of a project shall not be
more than 0.5 footcandle at any point when the project is
located next to any residential use or residentially zoned
property. The illumination levels at the property line of a
project adjacent to any other use shall not be more than 1.0
footcandle.
(b) The spacing between poles illuminating large open areas,
including, but not limited to, surface parking areas or lots,
parks or the grounds of multifamily housing complexes, shall
be no closer than 2 1/2 times the pole height. Light poles must
be positioned to enable walkways to comply with local, federal
or state disabled persons' access legislation.
(c) Illumination levels.
[1] Off-street/surface parking areas or lots as well as private
roadway areas shall comply with the following
requirements: Illumination levels outside the radius of any
light pole (with radius equaling the height of the pole, not
to exceed 30 feet, but no less than 20 feet) shall range
between a minimum of one footcandle and a maximum of
three footcandles.
[2] Access drives for nonresidential uses and multifamily
housing shall be illuminated with at least one footcandle.
[3] Entrances and exits of nonresidential structures and
multifamily housing shall have a minimum illumination
level of three footcandles and a maximum level of five
footcandles.
[4] Single-, two-, three- and four-family residential uses shall
have a maximum illumination level of three footcandles at
the driveway or walkway, but no more than 0.5 footcandle
at any property line elsewhere on the site.
[5] Pedestrian walkways or bikeways shall have an
illumination level ranging between a minimum of 0.5
footcandle and a maximum of 2.5 footcandles.
§ 51-189 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-189
C:480
[6] Exterior stairwells and landings for residential and
nonresidential uses shall have a minimum illumination
level of three footcandles.
[7] Large open areas and the grounds of multifamily housing
complexes shall have a minimum illumination level of 0.5
footcandle and a maximum level of two footcandles.
[8] Canopied areas, such as those found at drive-through
facilities at banks, service stations, car washes, shall have
a maximum illumination level of 15 footcandles with a
maximum-to-minimum illumination level ratio of 2:1.
[9] Display areas at outdoor dealerships for new and used
products, including, but not limited to, automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles and boats, shall have a maximum
illumination level of 15 footcandles for any row or tier of
display that is adjacent to an external road or street, and a
maximum level of 10 footcandles for all other rows or tiers
of display. Entrances and exits shall not exceed 10
footcandles.
[10] Illumination levels for outdoor recreational facilities, such
as, but not limited to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball
fields or tennis courts, shall be determined on a case-bycase
basis by the staff of the approving agency.
[11] For all other outdoor spaces, the minimum illumination
standard shall be 0.5 footcandle. Such illumination shall
be controlled by motion-sensor lighting.
[12] For the parking areas of enclosed parking garages, a
minimum lighting level of two footcandles shall be
maintained.
(d) Architectural lighting.
[1] Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials,
colors, style of buildings or art shall be located, aimed and
shielded so that light is directed only on those features.
Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded so as to minimize
light spill into the sky. Such fixtures shall not generate
excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond
the facade onto neighboring property, streets or the night
sky.
G. Height standards.
(1) Freestanding lights.
(a) In the R-1, R-2, R-3, TR-2 and TR-3 Districts, the maximum
height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the height of the
principal building or 20 feet, whichever is less.
§ 51-189 CHARTER § 51-189
C:481
§ 51-190. Underground wiring.
§ 51-191. Street signs.
(b) In all other districts, the maximum height of freestanding
lights shall not exceed the height of the principal building or 25
feet, whichever is less.
(2) Mounting heights. The mounting height of any building-mounted
light source shall be the lowest height possible to achieve
appropriate illumination, but in no case shall the mounting height
exceed 20 feet above grade.
A. All electric, telephone, television and other communication facilities,
both main and service lines servicing new developments, shall be
provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated public
rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and
practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
B. Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road
widening or an extension of service or other such condition occur as a
result of the subdivision and necessitate the replacement or relocation
of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground.
C. Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the placement
and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of
overhead lines, as follows: Alignments and pole locations shall be
carefully routed to avoid locations along horizons; clearing swaths
through treed areas shall be avoided by selective cutting and a
staggered alignment; trees shall be planted in open areas and at key
locations to minimize the view of the poles and the alignments; and
alignments shall follow rear lot lines and other alignments.
D. Year-round screening of any utility apparatus appearing above the
surface of the ground, other than utility poles, shall be required.
A. Design and placement of traffic signs shall follow the requirements
specified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways, published by the United States Department of
Transportation and adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
B. There shall be at least one street sign at each intersection unless there
is an existing approved street sign to be installed by the Department of
Public Works at the expense of the applicant.
§ 51-189 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-191
C:482
§ 51-192. Off-street parking and loading areas.
C. Site information signs shall follow a design theme related and
complementary to other elements of the overall site design.
A. Dimensions of parking and loading spaces.
(1) Required parking spaces shall have dimensions of at least 8 1/2 feet
minimum width by 18 feet minimum length. When the number of
required spaces results in a fraction, the fraction 1/2 and over
count as one parking space. Required loading spaces shall have a
minimum width of 12 feet, a minimum length of 45 feet and a
minimum clear height of 15 feet.
(2) Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be in conformance with
the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and federal ADA
standards.
B. Aisle widths. The minimum aisle width between two rows of parking
vehicles using the same aisles shall be as follows:
(1) For ninety-degree parking: 24 feet.
(2) For sixty-degree parking: 18 feet.
(3) For forty-five-degree parking: 13 feet.
(4) For thirty-degree parking: 12 feet.
C. Entrances and exits. Entrances and exits to any such parking area shall
be properly marked by an approved sign to show boundaries of
entrance and exit areas and the direction of traffic.
D. Wheel stops; bumpers; curbing. All areas utilized for parking shall have
wheel stoppers, bumpers and curbing to serve as barriers for each stall
to prevent vehicles from moving onto the adjacent landscaped areas,
and all such parking areas shall further be protected by appropriate
barriers to prevent erosion of the landscaped areas under normal
weather conditions.
E. Retaining walls in parking areas. Where, by reason of any construction,
there shall be created a difference in grade between lands of the
adjoining owner along the boundary line of two feet or more, a retaining
wall shall be required along such boundary in conjunction with any
parking area, driveway or loading area.
F. Access to off-street parking; curb cuts. Access to off-street parking
areas shall be limited to several well-defined locations. Each of said
curb cuts shall not exceed the width of its corresponding driveway plus
a two-foot-wide flare at each side. In no case shall there be permitted
unrestricted access along the length of the street or streets upon which
the parking area abuts.
§ 51-191 CHARTER § 51-192
C:483
§ 51-193. Landscaping.
G. Pedestrian walks. There shall be a paved pedestrian walk from any
doorway of any building to the immediately adjacent driveway or
parking area, which pedestrian walk shall be at least four feet in width
and raised at least four inches above the level of the driveway or
parking area.
H. Surfacing markings. The driveway and parking and loading areas shall
be surfaced with concrete or asphaltic mix and shall be clearly marked
to show the parking arrangement.
I. Drainage. All driveway, parking and loading areas shall be constructed
to provide sufficient drainage to prevent an accumulation of water upon
the surface of the lot or from being directed onto the surface of
adjoining lots or public rights-of-way.
J. Landscaping requirements. Parking lot landscaping requirements shall
comply with Article XXIX, § 51-193, Landscaping.
K. Off-street parking requirements are enumerated in Article XXIV,
§ 51-164, Off-street parking requirements.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose: to establish and maintain the maximum sustainable
amount of landscaping and tree cover on public and private lands
in the City of East Orange. It is the purpose of this section to
control soil erosion, sediment damage and related environmental
damage by required adequate provisions for surface water
retention and drainage and for protection of exposed soil surfaces
in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of
the community. Desires in this section are to regulate and control
indiscriminate and excessive cutting of trees within the City;
preserve the maximum possible number of trees in the course of
development of a site; protect specimens of trees; and provide the
replacement of trees. The Council of the City of East Orange does
herein decide and find that trees are among the City's most
valuable assets, greatly enhancing the appearance of the City, and
contribute to its urban environment, character and aesthetics.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AESTHETIC IMPROVEMENT CUT — The removal to the maximum
extent possible of the smallest and poorest specimens of trees so as
to permit land development while retaining the maximum number
of larger and healthier specimens of trees.
PERSON — Includes associations, firms, partnerships and
corporations as well as individuals.
§ 51-192 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:484
REPLACEMENT TREE — A specific plan for replacement of
removed trees in accordance with the provisions of this section.
SHADE TREE — Includes shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery planted or growing upon and in the streets, highways,
public alleys, public places, parks and parkways, except county
parks and parkways, in the City of East Orange.
STREET — Includes streets, roads, roadways, highways, public
alleys, public places, parks and parkways, except county parks and
parkways, within the City of East Orange.
(3) Applicability and exemptions. This section shall apply to all
developers and/or owners of real property involved with the
erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building or structure
as well as the grading in anticipation of such development.
B. Landscaping plans.
(1) Landscaping plans shall be prepared for all development activity as
specified in this section by a certified landscape architect or
qualified professional.
(2) A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application. Landscape plans shall show all existing trees of at least
two-inches-in-caliper diameter and higher. In addition, the plan
shall show all proposed building footprints and all hardscape
surfaces. The landscape plan shall identify the species, varieties,
size at time of planting and quantity of plant materials, ground
cover, natural features such as rock outcroppings and other
landscaping elements. The plan shall identify any existing trees or
vegetation proposed for removal. When existing natural growth is
proposed to remain, the applicant shall include in the plans
proposed methods on the site plan to protect existing trees and
growth during and after construction.
C. Site protection and general planting requirements.
(1) Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of
construction shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to
provide at least four inches of even cover to all disturbed areas of
the development and shall be stabilized for seeding or planting.
(2) Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush,
weed excess or scrap building materials or other debris shall be
removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with local law
and state regulations.
(3) Plant species. The plant species selected should be suitable for the
particular climatic zone in which the development is located.
D. Protection of existing plantings.
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-193
C:485
(1) Maximum effort should be made to save fine specimens (because of
size and relative rarity) whenever possible. Existing trees of sixinch
caliper or over shall not be removed unless they are so located
as to interfere unduly with construction. No materials or temporary
soil deposits shall be placed within four feet of shrubs or 10 feet of
trees designated to be retained.
(2) Protective barriers or tree wells shall be installed around each
plant or group of plants that is to remain on the site. Barriers shall
not be supported by the plants they are protecting but shall be selfsupporting.
Temporary snow fences and silt fences are examples of
acceptable tree protection barriers. They shall be a minimum of
four feet high and constructed of durable materials that will last
until construction is completed.
E. Slope plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or
terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes
steeper than one foot vertically to three feet horizontally shall be
planted with ground covers appropriate for the purpose and soil
conditions, water availability and environment.
F. Residential landscaping standards. Landscaping plans for new or
rehabilitated residential properties shall be reviewed by the Site Plan
Review Advisory Committee and Building Code Official based on the
minimum criteria in this section and, where applicable, conditions of
approval established by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
through the development approval process. The plans shall be
consistent with objectives in the East Orange Master Plan, landscaping
design guidelines and neighborhood character. Minimum criteria:
(1) In the front yard, four shrubs with a minimum height of 36 inches at
the time of planting must be planted for every 10 linear feet of
foundation along the portion of the building facing a public or
private street. The linear foot measurement shall be determined by
rounding up or down to the nearest 10.
(2) In the corner side yard, four shrubs with a minimum height of 36
inches at the time of planting must be planted for every 10 linear
feet of foundation along the portion of the building facing a public
or private street. The linear foot measurement shall be determined
by rounding up or down to the nearest 10.
(3) Planting beds around the perimeter of the building must be
covered with ground cover or mulch.
(4) Meet replacement and new tree planting requirements as
stipulated in this section under Subsection M.
G. Nonresidential landscaping standards. Landscaping standards for
nonresidential buildings shall be subject to the review and approval by
Site Plan Review Advisory Committee and Building Code Official. The
§ 51-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:486
following minimum standards shall be met, unless expressly waived by
the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board. Minimum criteria:
(1) At least 50% of the open space on site shall be landscaped.
(2) One shrub shall be planted for every 50 square feet of the areas
required to be landscaped. For shrubs that measure at less than
five feet in height, minimum installation size shall be two feet tall.
For shrubs that mature taller than five feet in height, minimum
installation size shall be three feet tall.
(3) Foundational plantings of a minimum width of three feet shall be
provided on all sides of the main building except where sidewalks,
driveways or other hardscape abuts the structure. Foundation
plantings shall be comprised of a combination of shade trees,
ornamental trees, shrubs, ground cover or mulch and flowers.
Layered trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover and decorative
hardscape features complementary to the site and building design
should be utilized to enhance the visual character of the project.
(4) Landscaping should be used to soften the appearance of wall
surfaces and fences. Screening materials should provide a clear
line of sight between 32 inches and five feet above grade.
H. Parking lot landscaping standards.
(1) Amount required. Parking lots of five or more spaces shall be
landscaped consistent with the following standards. A planting
island of at least 120 square feet in area and at least six feet in
width shall be provided for every 10 parking spaces, or a
continuous landscape strip at least six feet in width between
parking rows shall be provided at the end of each row of parking
stalls. All landscape islands shall be crowned to allow for positive
drainage. One shade tree shall be provided for every 120 square
feet of landscape island, or one shade tree shall be provided for
every 30 linear feet of continuous landscape strip. Parking lot
street frontage screening and perimeter screening shall be a
minimum of four feet wide.
(2) Planting. Shade trees shall compromise at least 60% of the
landscape material. Ornamental trees, shrubbery, hedges and other
plant materials may be used to supplement trees. Planting required
within the parking lot is exclusive of other planting requirements,
such as replacement or new planted trees.
(3) Location. The landscaping should be located in protected and
public areas, such as long walkways, in center islands, at the end of
bays or in diamonds between parking stalls.
I. Right-of-way landscaping standards. In conjunction with a subdivision,
development or redevelopment of property, the publicly owned right-ofway
shall be restored consistent with the following standards:
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-193
C:487
(1) Graded and sodded. The unpaved portion of a public right-of-way
abutting a parcel shall be fine-graded and sodded.
(2) Street trees. Street trees shall be replaced or planted consistent
with the tree replacement or new planting schedule as identified in
Subsection M(9)(a) or (b).
J. Public right-of-way landscaping standards. Private landscaping shall
not encroach onto the City's right-of-way.
K. Fence landscaping standards. Fences shall be screened from adjacent
rights-of-way consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
L. Buffering specifications.
(1) Buffering shall provide a year-round visual screen in order to
minimize adverse impacts from a site on an adjacent property or
from adjacent areas. It may consist of fencing, walls, plantings and
deciduous berms, boulders, or combinations of these elements, to
achieve the stated objectives.
(2) Buffering shall be required when topographical or other barriers do
not provide reasonable screening and when the Planning Board
determines that there is a need to shield the site from adjacent
properties and to minimize adverse impacts such as incompatible
land uses, noise, glaring lights, traffic and other nuisances to
provide privacy and screening between dwelling units or uses.
Where required, buffers shall be measured from side and rear
property lines, excluding access driveways.
(a) Where more-intensive land uses abut less-intensive uses, a
buffer strip 10 feet in width shall be required. The height of the
buffer shall be a minimum of six feet.
(b) Parking areas, refuse collection and utility areas, loading and
unloading area, outside storage, where permitted, shall be
screened around their perimeter by a buffer strip a minimum of
five feet wide. The height of the buffer screen shall be a
minimum of four feet.
(c) Garages that are within 20 feet of a residential building on
adjoining premises shall, where feasible, be provided with
landscaping or fencing to serve as a screen or buffer from such
residential building.
(3) Plant materials shall be sufficiently large and planted in such a
fashion that operates a visually dense screen at least six feet in
height that shall be produced within three growing seasons. All
plantings shall be installed according to accepted horticultural
standards.
(4) All parking areas with capacity for five or more cars shall be
screened from adjacent properties, and the street landscaping,
§ 51-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:488
shrubbery, flowers, plants or trees which may be expected to form a
year-round dense screen of four feet high shall be erected to screen
the parking or loading areas and the driveways from adjacent
properties and the street.
(5) A mixture of hardy flowers and/or shrubs, plants, ornamental,
deciduous trees may be planted. The area between trees shall be
planted with shrubs or ground cover or covered with mulch.
(6) Planting shall be watered and maintained regularly and in a
manner appropriate for the specific plant species through the first
growing season, and dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the
applicant during the next planting season. No buildings, structures,
storage of materials or parking shall be permitted within the buffer
area. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of all debris,
rubbish, weeds and tall grass.
M. Trees on public and private property.
(1) Location. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all public
streets in accordance with the approved landscape plan. Trees
shall either be massed at critical points or spaced evenly along the
street, or both. Trees on private property shall not encroach in the
public right-of-way and shall be situated in a suitable location.
(2) Planting shade or ornamental trees on public highways. No shade
or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted by anyone but a
representative of the Public Works Department or its designated
agent in any of the public highways of this City.
(3) Tree and bush size and spacing. Trees and shrubs shall be planted
according to the following spacing requirements:
(a) Trees.
[1] Small trees which have an ultimate height of 25 feet shall
be planted 15 to 20 feet intervals on center.
[2] Medium trees which have an ultimate height of 26 to 40
feet shall be planted 20 to 35 feet intervals on center.
[3] Large trees which have an ultimate height greater than 40
feet shall be planted 25 to 45 feet intervals on center and
shall not conflict with driveways, fire hydrants, light or
utility poles, and shall be spaced according to existing
trees if applicable.
(b) Bushes.
[1] Small shrubs, minimum 24 inches high, planted three feet
on center.
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-193
C:489
[2] Large shrubs, minimum 36 inches high, planted three feet
on center.
(4) Preferred tree list. Preferred trees for private and public property
shall include the following species, types and sizes:
Species
Height
(feet)
Street trees
Red maple — Acer rubrum
(Armstrong) or (October Glory) or (Red
Sunset)
50+
Sweetgum — Liquidambar styraciflua
(Rotundiloba)
40+
Green ash — Fraxinus pennsylvanica
(Marshall's Seedless) or (Urbanite®
Seedless)
70
Japanese zelkova — Zelkova serrata
(Village Green) (Green Vase)
50 to 60
Redspire pear — Pyrus calleryana
(Redspire)
25 to 30
Sugar maple — Acer saccharum
(Goldspire)
35 to 40
Crimson king norway maple — Acer
plantanoides (Crimson King)
30 to 40
Green pillar pin oak 50 to 60
Bloodgood london plane tree 70
Fastigiate golden rain tree 35
Redmond linden 65 to 75
Trees on private property
Katsura tree — Cercidiphyllum
japonicum
50
Chinese fringetree — Chionanthus
retusus
25
Fringetree — Chionanthus virginicus 20
Yellowwood — Cladrastis lutea 40
Washington hawthorne — Crataegous
phenopyrum
25
Silverbell — Halesia carolina 30
Sourwood — Oxydendrum arboreum 30
Hedge maple — Acer campestre 25
§ 51-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:490
Species
Height
(feet)
Kousa dogwood — Comus kousa and
Comus kousa (Milky Way) and Comus
kousa (Summer Stars)
25
Schumard oak — Quercus imbricaria 60
Sawtooth oak — Quercus acutissima 50
Northern red oak — Quercus rubra
(Borealis)
75 to 95
(5) Planting specifications. All trees shall have a minimum caliper of
three inches, and they shall be nursery-grown, of substantially
uniform size and shape, and have straight trunks. Trees shall be
properly planted and staked and provision made by the applicant
for regular watering and maintenance until they are established.
Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the owner during the next
planting season.
(6) Trees on subdivisions. For major and minor subdivisions, a tree
replacement/planting plan must be submitted in a narrative form
with tree details sufficient to identify existing and proposed trees.
Tree plan must indicate how the project will meet the requirements
of this section. For residential subdivisions, a copy of the tree
protection and/or replacement plan shall be forwarded to the
Property Maintenance Department and the Department of Public
Works.
(7) Evaluation criteria used for saved trees. Trees to be saved on a
property should be evaluated using the following criteria in priority
order:
(a) Species and condition (maintain slower-growing trees in good
condition).
(b) Long-term suitability of the tree for its present location.
(c) Soil erosion prevention and reduction of stormwater runoff.
(d) Ability to moderate temperature changes, provide shade and
reduce wind forces.
(e) Ability to screen noise and visual improprieties or ability to
enhance property.
(f) The number of other trees growing under the same conditions,
and the precedent that would be set by removing the tree in
question.
(g) Length of time to mitigate losses.
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-193
C:491
(h) Expected long-term maintenance costs for a tree compared to
other trees of the same age/size.
(i) Impact on property values and aesthetics.
(8) Evaluation criteria used for tree removal. Trees to be removed on a
property should be evaluated using the following criteria in priority
order:
(a) Tree is dead.
(b) There is a clear and reasonable risk of failure that could cause
injury or property damage, including existing utility service,
and corrective measures are not feasible and/or tree is a safety
hazard.
(c) Tree is in poor condition with several dead branches or major
cracks.
(d) Contagious and fatal disease is present as determined by the
Shade Tree Division.
(e) Tree has a greater than 45° lean toward traffic or another
target, or it creates an unsafe vision clearance for pedestrians
or vehicular traffic.
(f) There is the potential of the tree to damage existing or future
hardscape features such as driveways or sidewalks.
(9) Replacement and new tree planting calculation schedule.
(a) Replacement trees on property with existing trees that are
equal to or greater than three-inch caliper shall be as follows:
Percentage of Trees
Removed from Project Area
Permitted for Development
Percentage of Removed
Trees to be Replaced
(using trees with a
minimum three-inch
caliper)
80% to 100% 80%
60% to 79% 60%
40% to 59% 40%
20% to 39% 20%
(b) New tree plantings on property with no trees which are equal
to or greater than three-inch caliper shall be planted as
follows:
§ 51-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:492
Square Footage Size of Lot
Permitted for Development
(square feet)
Minimum Number of New
Trees Planted
(minimum three-inch
caliper)
2,000 to 9,000 4
9,001 to 20,000 8
20,001 to 60,000 12
60,001 to 100,000 12
100,001 or larger 20
(10) Guarantees. All replacement and new tree plantings shall be
guaranteed for two years from the date of final inspection to and
development approval for the project. The entire site shall have a
survival rate of 85% or more.
(11) In-lieu fees. In lieu of planting all replacement trees required on
the site, the board shall permit the applicant to contribute an
amount equal to the current cost of each replacement tree not
planted to a fund established by the City for environmental
programs such as tree preservation, tree plantings or other
comparable environmental planting projects as recommended by
the Shade Tree Division. The developer may apply this option to up
to 40% of the required number of replacement trees. All requests to
make contributions in lieu of planting replacement trees in excess
of 40% of the required number of replacement or new tree
plantings must be approved by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
(12) Applicant waivers. Where an applicant claims that the cost and/or
area dimensions of the property in which the required number of
replacement trees, as determined by the formula in Subsection
M(9) of this section, would impose a hardship, the board may, in its
discretion, reduce the required number of replacement trees by no
more than 10% of the total obligation as determined by Subsection
M(9) of this section. In support of such a claim, the applicant shall
submit written cost estimates from three sources for board review.
Each estimate shall include the species, size, number and price of
the replacement trees. As to each request for relief pursuant to this
subsection, the board shall consider the following:
(a) Unique natural features such as topography, drainage, aquifer
recharge soils, wetlands and floodplains, stands of rare or
substantially mature trees, and the like.
(b) Sufficient mature trees and vegetation exist on the site in a
manner that the intent of this section is satisfied.
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-193
C:493
(c) Installing plant material would compromise the health, vitality
or ecology of the existing vegetation on the site or on
neighboring sites.
(d) The location of necessary improvements.
(e) The extent of lands to be dedicated to the City.
(f) The legal status of the applicant, such as profit-making,
nonprofit, charitable, or quasi-municipal volunteer
organizations, such as fire companies and rescue squads.
(g) Whether the relief can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair
the intent and purpose of this section.
(13) Alternative compliance. As another method of alternative
compliance, the City will accept donations to the East Orange Tree
Replacement Planting Fund, which will be used for the sole
purpose of planting trees on public property in the same areas of
the City as the project site. This alternative compliance option shall
be used in the following instances: 1) board denies applicant's
request for a waiver of requirements of this section; or 2) developer
voluntarily seeks to contribute to the East Orange Tree
Replacement/Planting Fund. In no instance, shall more than 40% of
the required site tree plantings be met through this alternative
compliance. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to
survive must be planted on the project site in question.
(14) Fund administration for East Orange Tree Replacement/Planting
Fund. The East Orange Tree Replacement Fund will be
administered by the Department of Public Works collaboratively
with the Finance Department.
(a) The Department of Public Works will be responsible for
collecting in-lieu-of fees for required tree plantings of this
section. The Department of Public Works is required to deposit
these funds in the Tree Replacement/Planting Fund account
designated by the City's Finance Department. Off-site
replanting funds shall be used for street tree, landscaping
projects, and for tree care, maintenance and preservation
techniques throughout the City of East Orange.
(b) The predominate intent of the off-site replanting account is to
be used for public City projects. These funds shall not be used
to satisfy landscaping permit requirements for developments.
(c) The following prioritization for the allocation of funding from
the Tree Replacement/Planting Fund shall be utilized: 1)
maintenance and preservation of any City-owned tree within
residential and commercial zoned areas; 2) planting new trees
and landscaping projects on City-owned property; 3) planting
§ 51-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:494
trees and landscaping on property owned by a nonprofit
organization when a substantial public benefit is provided.
(d) Expenditures for projects shall be in accordance with the City
procurement policies and procedures.
(e) A yearly report by the Department of Public Works shall be
submitted to the City Administrator, showing amounts
collected, amount spent, and the types and locations of trees
planted. The report will be made available to the Mayor, City
Council and the general public upon request.
(15)Off-site planting. If trees are to be planted at another location, the
following criteria must be observed: The off-street location should
be in the same area of the City as the project site and should be
selected by joint consultation between the developer and the Public
Works Department. If they are unable to agree upon a mutually
acceptable site, then the Site Plan Review Advisory Committee
shall provide the final location recommendation.
(16) Replacement plan changes. Any substantial change in a tree
replacement plan stated within site plans submitted pursuant to
this section shall necessitate the submission of a revised plan to the
Site Plan Review Advisory Committee for full review and approval.
(17) Certificate of occupancy, required landscape plan.
(a) A final certificate of occupancy shall be issued only upon the
completion of plantings in accordance with the approved
landscape plan as determined by the Building Code Official and
the Director of Public Works.
(b) Conditional occupancy permit. A conditional occupancy permit
may be issued in the reasonable discretion of the Building
Code Official of the City of East Orange in the event that, due
to time of year, planting cannot occur; provided, however, that
a cash bond equal to 100% of the cost of the landscaping is
posted to insure installation of the approved landscaping
during the next available planting season. A conditional
occupancy permit may also be issued when City inspection of
the landscaping does not occur within five business days of a
request for a final landscape plan.
N. Tree nuisance and protection.
(1) Dangerous trees. Any tree on private property which overhangs
any sidewalk, street or other public property in such a way as to
impede or interfere with traffic, and any tree or limb which has
become likely to fall on or across any public right-of-way or public
property, shall be trimmed or removed by the owner of the property
on which the trees grows so that the obstruction or danger is
removed. If a determination is made by the Public Works
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-193
C:495
Department that a tree poses an immediate threat to life or limb,
the Building Code Official may order the removal of the portion of
the tree posing the immediate threat.
(2) Nuisance trees. Mulberry, Wild cherry and Sumac ("stink weed")
are nuisance trees that are prohibited from being planted on any
property within the City of East Orange. Nuisance trees identified
in this section shall not be used as replacement trees.
(3) Root pruning procedures. In the event construction makes it
necessary for the roots of any shade tree on public property to be
cut or pruned, the property owner or contractor must remove all
pavement and excavate the soil around the root of the tree,
exposing the root. Property owner or contractor will notify the
Shade Tree Division of the Public Works Department at least 48
hours prior to the commencement of said root pruning work. No
roots of any shade tree shall be cut or pruned by anyone except
Shade Tree Division personnel or except under the direct
supervision of Shade Tree Division personnel. Aesthetic
improvement cuts are encouraged where appropriate. The
property owner or contractor shall obtain all permits necessary for
construction pursuant to the East Orange Building Code prior to
any work commencing.
(4) Protection during construction or repair. In the erection, altering or
the repairing of any building or structure, the person engaged in
such operation shall place such guards around all nearby trees as
will effectually prevent injury to such trees.
(a) No person shall pile any building material or make or mix any
mortar or cement within six feet of any tree.
(b) No person shall operate steam shovels or other implements,
machines or tools in such a manner as to damage or destroy
any tree.
(5) Excavations. Excavations in streets or on other publicly owned
property shall occur in a manner that minimizes injury to any tree.
In cases where excavation may impact the roots or any other part
of a tree, prior written approval from the Director of Public Works
is required prior to excavation to ensure that appropriate steps are
taken to minimize or mitigate the effect of such impact.
(6) Property owner responsibility for trees on property. It shall be the
duty and responsibility of all property owners to maintain the
grounds of maintenance strips on the owner's property, regardless
of whether such property is developed. This maintenance shall
include watering as needed and keeping such strips free from
weeds or any obstructions contrary to public safety. Property
owners shall be responsible for watering mature City street trees
whenever landscaping of the property is changed in such a manner
as to deprive the tree of its normal source of moisture. Such
§ 51-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:496
watering shall be continued during dry weather until the street tree
becomes acclimated to the new environment, but need not exceed
three years.
(7) Notice to owner. Service of notice to an owner or occupant shall be
served by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt
requested. For purpose of this section, an owner shall be defined as
the person to whom the tax bill for the general taxes for the last
proceeding year on the lot or parcel on which the diseased or
infected tree is located was sent.
O. Prohibited activities.
(1) Obstruction of roots of trees. No person shall hereafter place or
maintain upon or under the surface of the ground in any street in
East Orange any cement, stone, flagging or other material or
substance in such manner as to obstruct the free access of air and
water to the roots of any shade tree, and it shall be the duty of any
such person who shall place or cause to be placed any cement,
stone, flagging or other material in or near any such shade tree to
leave at the base of the trunk of any such tree an open space of
ground not less than four feet outside the trunk on all sides. In the
event of the failure of anyone to observe the provisions of this
section after reasonable notice to comply herewith, this section
may, at any time, cause the removal of any stone, cement, flagging
or other substance or materials which have been or may hereafter
be placed around the base of the trunk of any such shade tree in
violation of the provisions of this section.
(2) Cutting trees or protective devices, spraying with chemicals and
attaching fixtures. No person shall cut, prune, break, climb, injure
or remove any shade tree in a public street; or cut, disturb or
interfere in any way with the roots or bark of any shade tree; or
spray with any chemicals or insecticides any shade tree; or place
any rope, sign, poster or other fixture on a shade tree or guard; or
injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect such shade
tree on public highways, provided that nothing herein shall prevent
any governmental agency from tying a public notice upon a tree in
connection with administering governmental affairs.
(3) Damaging or destroying trees. No person shall, by any means or in
any manner, willfully, carelessly or negligently damage or destroy a
shade tree or cause the same to be done by others.
(4) Fires. No person shall make or permit any fire between the
sidewalk and the curb or in any area where a tree or any part
thereof may become injured.
(5) Removing or transplanting trees for personal advantage. If any
person shall request the removal or transplanting of any shade
tree, which removal or transplanting, in the opinion of the
Department of Public Works, is of no advantage to the general
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-193
C:497
public but to the said person requesting the work, then such person
shall pay the cost of such work, said cost to be determined by the
Department of Public Works. Said cost of removal or transplanting
of such shade tree shall be based upon the size and condition of
the tree and on the cost of planting a replacement tree in a new
location, if applicable. A deposit sufficient to cover the cost of said
work shall be made before the work is started.
(6) Tar kettles, road rollers or other machinery. No person shall permit
any tar kettle, road roller or other engine to stand in such a manner
as to injure a shade tree.
(7) Gas, saltwater and weed killers. No person shall use or authorize
any gas, saltwater, brine water, oil, liquid dye, arsenical weed killer
or other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, lead, pour, flow or
drip on or into the soil about the base of a shade tree or into a
sidewalk, road or pavement therein at a point where such
substance may flow, drip or seep into such soil or in any other
manner whatsoever to injure such tree.
(8) Wires, cables and insulators. No person shall, without the
permission of the Public Works Department, attach or fasten any
electric, telephone or telegraph wires, guy wires, cables or
insulators to any shade tree or any device for holding any of the
foregoing to any shade tree.
(a) Every person, firm or corporation having or maintaining any
electric, telephone, telegraph or other wires running through a
public highway or park shall securely fasten and maintain such
wires in such a manner as will safeguard the shade trees
against any damage therefrom and shall make periodical
adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to shade
trees whenever requested by the Public Works Department.
(b) In addition, such trees shall be kept properly trimmed in a
manner that is consistent with City regulations, subject to the
approval of the Director of Public Works, so that no injury shall
be done to either the poles and wires or the trees by their
contact.
P. Tree requests.
(1) Planting shade or ornamental trees on public highways. No shade
or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted by anyone but a
representative of the Public Works Department or its designated
agent in any of the public highways of this City.
(2) Property owner requests on public property. The Public Works
Department or its designated agent will plant a tree for the
property owner upon written request, provided there is sufficient
distance for the future growth of said tree, and the charge shall be
fixed by the Public Works Department.
§ 51-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-193
C:498
§ 51-194. Retaining walls, fences, screen walls, street furniture.
Walls and fences shall be erected where required for privacy, screening,
separation, security or to serve other necessary functions.
(a) Shade trees heretofore planted by the Public Works
Department which have been removed because of disease,
storm damage, accidents or natural causes will be replaced by
the Department at no charge to the property owner, provided
there is a minimum of 30 feet between the trunks of standing
trees and a minimum of 20 feet from streetlighting fixtures on
the same side of the street.
(b) The type and selection of trees to be planted will be
determined by the Public Works Department.
Q. Enforcement. No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere
with personnel from the Public Works Department or its authorized
agents or representatives in the performance of their lawful duties
related to this section.
R. Violations and penalties. Any person found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions of § 51-45, Violations and penalties.94
S. Policies. It is the policy of the City of East Orange to line its streets with
trees and to conduct a consistent and adequate program for
maintaining, planting and preserving these trees. It is also the policy of
the City to encourage new tree planting on both public and private
property and to cultivate a flourishing and diverse urban forest.
A. Design and materials shall be functional; they shall complement the
character of the size and type of building, and they shall be suited to the
nature of the project.
B. No fence or wall shall be so constructed or installed so as to constitute a
hazard to traffic or safety.
C. Walls shall be designed and constructed to meet the requirements of
the Construction Official.
D. Fences shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
E. Street furniture such as, but not limited to, trash receptacles, benches,
phone booths, etc., shall be located and sized in accordance with their
functional need.
F. Street furniture elements shall be compatible in form, material and
finish. Style shall be coordinated with that of the existing or proposed
site architecture.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 51-193 CHARTER § 51-194
C:499
§ 51-195. Flood hazard areas.
Whenever a property is located in a flood hazard area, as defined in the
Federal Insurance Administration, any site plan submitted shall conform to
the Federal Insurance Administration regulations.
§ 51-196. Sanitary sewer system.
All sanitary sewer installations shall be in accordance with the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
§ 51-197. Water supply.
All water mains, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be connected with
the City's water system pursuant to the specifications of the Board of
Water Commissioners and the approval of the Water Engineer and shall be
in accordance with the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C.
5:21).
§ 51-198. Stormwater management.
§ 51-199. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
Soil erosion and sediment control devices of a permanent nature or of a
temporary nature during construction shall be installed in accordance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Soil Conservation Service.
G. Selection of street furniture shall consider durability, maintenance and
long-term cost.
A. Surface runoff. Provision shall be made for safe and adequate drainage
of the surface runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding
and erosion of the property and the property of others will be
prevented. Calculations on which the design of drainage facilities is
based shall be submitted with the site plan.
B. Each development shall be required to provide adequate drainage
facilities along public streets. Where runoff from the development
requires enlargement, modification or reconstruction of existing City
drainage structures, such development shall pay the pro rata cost of
such improvements.
C. All drainage facilities shall be constructed to meet the requirements of
the Director of Public Works.
D. In no case shall drainage of any sort be permitted across the public
walk into the roadway.
§ 51-194 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-199
C:500
ARTICLE XXX
Stormwater Control
§ 51-200. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
("BMPs"). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish proper stormwater
management requirements and controls for major development, as
defined in § 51-201.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of East Orange.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act
or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law, except that, where
any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision
of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
§ 51-200 CHARTER § 51-201
C:501
§ 51-201. Definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
The definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding
definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BMPs — Best management practices as set forth in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual or at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within
boundaries accepted by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (hereinafter "Department") pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries
for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA
Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CITY ENGINEER — The Director of Public Works of the City of East
Orange or his/her authorized representative.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 51-201 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-201
C:502
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any
mining excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by
the Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which
is of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to,
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the
purpose of this definition is the placement of impervious surface or
exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or
removing of vegetation.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that does not ultimately
disturb one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the purpose of
this definition is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/
or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission,
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a
compact form.
§ 51-201 CHARTER § 51-201
C:503
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the City of East Orange, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.), thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future
redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Defined as the geographic application of
the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide
policies, and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
§ 51-201 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-201
C:504
§ 51-202. General standards; design and performance standards for
stormwater management measures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater, or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may
be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood given priority access to state
resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.).
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 51-203. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
§ 51-201 CHARTER § 51-202
C:505
§ 51-203. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this article apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and to maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
C. Stormwater management measures shall be required for minor
developments and shall be developed to address erosion control and
stormwater runoff.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 51-209.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergii (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
§ 51-202 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-203
C:506
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
§ 51-203 CHARTER § 51-203
C:507
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.) and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard, see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
[3] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
§ 51-203 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-203
C:508
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
§ 51-203 CHARTER § 51-203
C:509
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 51-206 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.) and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 51-204, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
§ 51-203 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-203
C:510
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 51-204, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
§ 51-203 CHARTER § 51-203
C:511
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 51-201 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this article and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products. The Soil Conservation District will accept these
plans for review and consideration pursuant to the Agricultural
Projects and Miscellaneous Non-Tillage Agricultural Disturbances
of the New Jersey Soil Conservation District's (c. 251, P.L. 1975)
Administrative Policy and Procedures Manual and determine the
applicability of these provisions to the agricultural development
application, and then recommend the appropriate action.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
§ 51-203 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-203
C:512
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 51-206, or found on the Department's
website at www.nistormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 51-206. TSS reduction
shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in
Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
TSS reduction of 80% for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
§ 51-203 CHARTER § 51-203
C:513
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Infiltration structure 40% to 60%
Extended detention basin 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 51-205C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the TSS removal
rate of 80% shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site, in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 51-206.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated "Category One" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or
§ 51-203 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-203
C:514
in the County Soil Surveys within the associated HUC14 drainage
area. These areas shall be established for the protection of water
quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply
significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those
established Category One waters. These areas shall be designated
and protected as follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
§ 51-203 CHARTER § 51-203
C:515
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a TSS post-construction removal rate
of 95%;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
§ 51-203 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-204
C:516
§ 51-204. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, which may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff
rates and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
§ 51-204 CHARTER § 51-204
C:517
§ 51-205. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: the New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New
Jersey, 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 51-207B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
§ 51-204 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-205
C:518
§ 51-206. Sources for technical guidance.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 51-207.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 51-203 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 51-203 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
§ 51-205 CHARTER § 51-206
C:519
§ 51-207. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625: (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per foot
square.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per foot
square.
(3) For purposes of this subsection, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other features
§ 51-206 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-207
C:520
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 51-207 CHARTER § 51-207
C:521
§ 51-208. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit six copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this section.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval.
(1) The applicant's site development project shall be reviewed as a part
of the subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal
board or official from which municipal approval is sought. That
§ 51-207 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-208
C:522
municipal board or official shall consult the engineer retained by
the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine
if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this
article.
(2) A stormwater management plan that incorporates an outfall to any
municipality-owned storm sewer system, or that will be ultimately
dedicated to the City, shall be subject to review and approval by the
Director of Public Works as well as the appropriate board engineer.
C. Checklist requirements; waiver.
(1) Checklist requirements.
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that a topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map, indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
§ 51-208 CHARTER § 51-208
C:523
§§ 51-202 through 51-205 are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet
the objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention, and emergency spillway provisions
with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and post-development
conditions for the design storms specified in § 51-203 of
this article.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 51-209.
(2) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Director of Public Works, waive submission of
any of the requirements in Subsection C(1)(a) through (f) of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain, and its absence will not materially affect
the review process.
§ 51-208 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-209
C:524
§ 51-209. Maintenance and repair.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 51-200C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C of this
section.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
§ 51-209 CHARTER § 51-209
C:525
§ 51-210. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in § 1-15 of the East Orange City Code. If a
fine greater than $1,250 is imposed, the property owner shall be afforded
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Director of
Public Works or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion,
may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair
for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
(11) A two-year maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 shall be posted for the maintenance of the stormwater
facilities.
(12) Guidelines for developing a maintenance and inspection program
are provided in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual and the NJDEP Ocean County Demonstration
Study, Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual,
dated June 1989, available from the NJDEP Watershed
Management Program.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 51-209 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-210
C:526
a thirty-day period in which to cure or abate the violation and afforded
a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent
determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of said
thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a court
determines that the owner remains in violation or, upon reinspection of the
property, it is determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed.
§ 51-211. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of
existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving,
repairing, reconstruction or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on
private property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such
as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of East Orange so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by City
of East Orange or other public body and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject
to its jurisdiction.
C. Prohibited conduct. No person in control of private property (except a
residential lot with one single-family house) shall authorize the
repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes),
resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion
§ 51-210 CHARTER § 51-211
C:527
or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface
that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that
property unless the storm drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Subsection D
below prior to the completion of the project.
D. Design standard. Storm drain inlets identified in Subsection C above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
section, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash
and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For exemptions to
this standard see Subsection D(3) below.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(c) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels and stormwater
basin floors.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than 7.0 square inches or be no greater than 2.0 inches
across the smallest dimension.
(3) This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the Director of Public Works agrees that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards.
§ 51-211 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-211
C:528
(b) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[1] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars.
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
§ 51-211 CHARTER § 51-211
C:529
Chapter 54
MUTUAL ASSISTANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auxiliary police — See Ch. 14.
Fire Citizens Advisory Council — See Ch. 14A,
Art. IV.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 28.
§ 51-211 EAST ORANGE CODE § 51-211
C:530
ARTICLE I
Supplemental Fire Assistance
[Adopted 9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
§ 54-1. Agreement established.
The following mutual assistance agreement for supplemental fire assistance
among all municipal corporations in the County of Essex is hereby ratified
and approved, and the Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized and
directed to execute said agreement and cause certified copies of the article,
upon its adoption, to be distributed to the other municipalities in Essex
County:
MUTUAL ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT
This agreement made and entered into by and among the Township of
Belleville, Township of Bloomfield, Township of the Borough of Caldwell,
Township of Cedar Grove, City of East Orange, Township of Essex Fells,
Township of Fairfield, Township of Glen Ridge, Township of Irvington,
Township of Livingston, Township of Maplewood, Township of Millburn,
Township of Montclair, City of Newark, Township of North Caldwell,
Township of Nutley, City of Orange, Borough of Roseland, Township of
South Orange, Township of Verona, Township of West Caldwell and
Township of West Orange, all municipal corporations of the State of New
Jersey and being all the municipal corporations situated in the County of
Essex.
WHEREAS, the parties hereto are geographically located in proximity
to each other; and
WHEREAS, it is to the mutual advantage and benefit of the parties
hereto that each of the other parties agree to render supplemental fire
assistance in the event of an emergency, disaster or widespread
conflagration or where it appears that an emergency, disaster or
widespread conflagration may develop which may be beyond the control of
a single party and therefore require the assistance of one or more of the
other parties hereto; and
WHEREAS, municipal corporations of the State of New Jersey are
authorized under N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 to 40A:14-156.4 to provide fire
assistance outside the normal territorial jurisdiction of the municipality;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED in consideration of their
mutual covenants, the parties hereto agree as follows:
1. For the purpose of facilitating the provision of assistance pursuant to
this agreement, the municipal corporations which are parties hereto shall
agree to utilize the Level 1, 2 ,3 system of response for mutual aid.
§ 54-1 CHARTER § 54-1
C:531
2. In the event of an emergency, disaster or widespread conflagration
which is beyond the capacity and facilities of any one of the parties hereto,
the other parties agree to furnish, upon request, fire assistance in coping
with such emergency, disaster or widespread conflagration to the party
requesting such assistance. The assistance requested may be on an actual
or standby basis.
3. The extent of assistance to be furnished under this agreement shall
be determined solely by the municipal party furnishing such assistance,
and it is understood that the assistance so furnished may be discontinued
at the sole discretion of the furnishing party. Prior notification shall be
made to the Incident Commander.
4. Fire officers who shall be commanded by their superior officer to
perform fire duties outside the territorial limits of the municipality which
regularly employs such officers shall be under the direction and authority
of the local commanding officer of the municipality to which they are
called to perform such fire duties, and they shall have the same powers,
authority and immunities as have the members of the fire department of
the municipality in which such assistance is being rendered.
5. All personnel furnished shall work, to the greatest extent possible,
under their own supervisory personnel, and equipment furnished will
ordinarily be operated by personnel of the party furnishing the equipment.
6. It is mutually agreed and understood that the provisions of the
agreement shall be invoked only when, in the opinion of the Incident
Commander, Mayor, Fire Chief, Fire Commissioner or other person or
persons in charge of fire or public safety of the party requesting assistance,
it is deemed necessary to request outside assistance because all of the
normal facilities at their command have been exhausted and outside
assistance is needed to control and suppress an emergency, disaster or
widespread conflagration.
7. It is further agreed and understood that whenever, in the opinion of
the Incident Commander, Mayor, Fire Chief, Fire Commissioner, or other
person or persons in charge of fire or public safety of any party, it is
deemed necessary to request outside assistance, request shall first be
made upon those parties which are within the level of the party requesting
assistance. If sufficient assistance is available from those parties within the
level of the party requesting assistance, no request shall be made upon any
party in any other region.
8. At Level 3 the Essex County Office of Emergency Management Fire
Coordinator shall be notified in anticipation of continued mutual aid.
9. The municipality requesting assistance may, upon request, reimburse
each municipality providing assistance to the extent to which the
municipality providing such assistance cannot obtain reimbursement of
payment for such assistance from any county, state or federal
governmental unit or agency for expenditures actually incurred in
furnishing assistance.
§ 54-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 54-1
C:532
10. The parties hereto shall make request of the Essex County Office
of Emergency Management Fire Coordinator that he serve as Coordinator
among the municipalities which are parties to this agreement for the
purpose of facilitating the provision of assistance pursuant to this
agreement.
11. This agreement shall not be construed as or deemed to be an
agreement for the benefit of any third party or parties, and no third
party or parties shall have any right of action hereunder for any course
whatsoever.
12. Any party to this agreement may withdraw at any time, upon 30
days' written notice to each of the other parties, and thereafter such
withdrawing party shall no longer be a party to this agreement; but this
agreement shall continue to exist among the remaining parties.
13. This agreement shall become effective for each party hereof when
that party by ordinance of its governing body ratifies and approves this
agreement, and authorizes the proper municipal officials to execute the
same, at which time certified copies of said ordinance approving the same
shall be distributed to the other parties.
§ 54-1 CHARTER § 54-1
C:533
Chapter 55
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5. Boards, commissions, committees and
councils — See Ch. 14A.
§ 54-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 54-1
C:534
ARTICLE I
School Traffic Guards
[Adopted 3-25-1968 by Ord. No. 20-1968 as Ch. 2 of the 1968 Code
(Ch. 5, Art. XXVI, of the 1980 City Code); amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I) ]
§ 55-1. Appointment; maximum number.
The Police Chief of the City shall appoint as many school traffic guards as
he shall deem necessary in the City.
§ 55-2. Duties generally; hours of duty.
It shall be the duty of school traffic guards to regulate and control
pedestrian traffic, particularly schoolchildren, at street school crossings,
and to regulate vehicular traffic to the extent that it is necessary to provide
intervals for such pedestrian crossing. The traffic guards shall be employed
on regular school days and during their training period and, unless
otherwise ordered by the Chief of Police, shall perform such duties during
the following hours.
§ 55-3. Qualifications.
To be eligible for appointment as a school traffic guard, an applicant must
not be less than 21 years of age, must be a citizen of the United States,
a resident of the City, of good moral character, able to read and write the
English language understandably. Such school traffic guards shall be in
good health, sound in body and mind and certified to by the Police Surgeon
as being physically capable of performing the duties required.95
§ 55-4. Applications; interviews by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall supply to each applicant for school traffic guard
a blank application form, which shall be filled out by each applicant and
forwarded to the Chief, and if it shall appear from such completed
application that the applicant qualifies as to age, citizenship and residence,
the Chief of Police shall notify such qualified applicant to report to the
Police Surgeon for a physical examination. The Chief of Police then shall
interview such qualified applicant as to character, education and home
responsibilities and render a report to the Chief of Police.
A. Morning: from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
B. Lunch period: from 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
C. Afternoon: from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
95.Editor's Note: As to the Police Department Surgeon, see Art. II of this chapter.
§ 55-1 CHARTER § 55-5
C:535
§ 55-5. Mental and physical examinations by Police Surgeon.
It shall be the duty of the Police Surgeon to examine the mental and physical
fitness of each applicant for the position of school traffic guard instructed
by the Chief of Police to report to him and to submit a report to the Chief of
Police.
§ 55-6. Uniforms.
§ 55-7. Sick leave.
Subject to rules to be adopted by the Police Department, a regularly
employed school traffic guard may be granted sick leave with pay not in
excess of five working days in any year, provided that, if such leave is not
taken in any year, such leave shall not be accumulated and used in any
subsequent year.
A. The City shall purchase uniforms for the school traffic guards to be
employed. A condition of employment shall be that each school traffic
guard shall agree to purchase a uniform from the City at cost thereof
and to pay therefor by semimonthly deductions of $5, to be made by the
City Finance Director, from the wages due, until such time as the
uniform shall be fully paid for and at which time it shall become the
property of the school traffic guard. Until fully paid for, such uniform
shall remain the property of the Police Department.
B. Should any school traffic guard be dismissed or resign at any time
before the uniform has been fully paid for, the sums deducted for the
cost of the uniform shall remain the property of the City, and the school
traffic guard shall forthwith return the uniform to the Police
Department.
C. In addition to wages as fixed by the City, annually, on or about
September 15, each school traffic guard who shall have completed at
least one full year of service prior thereto may receive, upon approval of
the Chief, an allowance for uniforms to be determined by the City.
§ 55-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 55-7
C:536
ARTICLE II
Police Department Surgeon
[Adopted 3-24-1975 by Ord. No. 22-1975 (Ch. 5, Art. XII, of the
1980 City Code)]
§ 55-8. Office established.
There are hereby established the offices of Police Department Surgeon and
Assistant Police Department Surgeon.
§ 55-9. Duties.
The Police Department Surgeon and the Assistant Police Department
Surgeon shall perform such duties as the Board of Police Commissioners96
shall prescribe and such duties as may be required by law.
§ 55-10. Compensation.
Compensation for the Police Department Surgeon shall be established by
the City Council according to law.
§ 55-11. Assistant: service without compensation.
The Assistant Police Department Surgeon shall serve without compensation,
payment of fees or other emoluments.
96.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 14A, Art. X, Police Citizens Advisory Council; Police Director.
§ 55-8 CHARTER § 55-11
C:537

ARTICLE III
Fire Department Surgeon
[Amended 3-24-1975 by Ord. No. 23-1975 (Ch. 5, Art. XIII, of the
1980 City Code)]
§ 55-12. Office established.
There is hereby established the offices of Fire Department Surgeon and
Assistant Fire Department Surgeon.
§ 55-13. Duties.
The Fire Department Surgeon and the Assistant Fire Department Surgeon
shall perform such duties as the Board of Fire Commissioners97 shall
prescribe and such duties as may be required by law.
§ 55-14. Compensation.
Compensation for the Fire Department Surgeon shall be established by the
City Council according to law.
§ 55-15. Assistant: service without compensation.
The Assistant Fire Department Surgeon shall serve without compensation,
payment of fees or other emoluments.
97.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 14A, Art. IV, Fire Citizens Advisory Council; Fire Department.
§ 55-12 CHARTER § 55-15
C:539

ARTICLE IV
Office of Police Department Chaplain
[Adopted 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 12-1987 (Ch. 5, Art. XLIII, of the
1980 City Code)]
§ 55-16. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of Police Department Chaplain.
§ 55-17. Appointment; qualifications; rank. [Amended 11-23-1987
by Ord. No. 32-1987]
There is hereby established the position of Police Department Chaplain.
The Police Department Chaplain shall be appointed by the Mayor subject
to confirmation by the City Council to serve for a term coterminous with
the term of office of the Mayor. The Police Department Chaplain shall be
qualified by experience and training to perform the duties of the office. The
Police Department Chaplain shall hold the rank of honorary Captain.
§ 55-18. Duties.
The Police Department Chaplain shall be available on a twenty-four-hour
basis. The Police Department Chaplain's duties shall include:
§ 55-19. Responsibility of Chief of Police.
It shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police or his designee to notify
the Police Department Chaplain of police officers or inmates experiencing
crisis.
§ 55-20. Compensation.
Compensation for the Police Department Chaplain shall be established by
City Council according to law.
A. Counseling of police officers and inmates generally.
B. Communicating with family members of officers who have been
seriously wounded or killed.
C. Counseling police officers who have been habitually tardy, depressive,
suspected of substance abuse, experiencing marital problems or are
experiencing other forms of crisis.
D. Such other duties as determined by the Police Department.98
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 55-16 CHARTER § 55-20
C:541

ARTICLE V
Supervisor of Public Firesafety Education
[Adopted 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 28-1989 (Ch. 5, Art. XLIV, § 5-239,
of the 1980 City Code)]
§ 55-21. Position created.99
There is hereby created and designated the position of Supervisor, Public
Firesafety Education. The title shall be designated within the Fire
Department for internal purposes as Special Chief of Public Firesafety
Education. The Supervisor named herein shall be appointed by the East
Orange Fire Department and confirmed by the Mayor.
§ 55-22. Duties and responsibilities.
The Supervisor, Public Firesafety Education, under the supervision of the
Chief of the Department, shall perform the following duties and
responsibilities:
A. Administer, supervise and direct the personnel and work of the Public
Safety Education Bureau.
B. Research and develop firesafety programs in the commission and
provide instruction for schools, community organizations, City
employees, etc.
C. Assist and interact on community relations matters in rehabilitation and
counseling juvenile fire setters.
D. Coordinate efforts with various communities throughout in relation to
firesafety.
E. Relay programs to firesafety programs.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 55-21 CHARTER § 55-22
C:543

ARTICLE VI
Community Relations Specialist in Fire Department
[Adopted 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 29-1989 (Ch. 5, Art. XLIV, § 5-240,
of the 1980 City Code)]
§ 55-23. Position created.100
There is hereby created and designated the position of Community
Relations Specialist. The Community Relations Specialist shall be appointed
by the East Orange Fire Department and confirmed by the Mayor.
§ 55-24. Duties and responsibilities.
The Community Relations Specialist, under supervision, shall perform the
following duties and responsibilities:
A. Act as community liaison.
B. Act as spokesperson of the East Orange Fire Department and prepare
press releases.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 55-23 CHARTER § 55-24
C:545
Chapter 56
PARKING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Municipal parking lots — See Ch. 192.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 56-1. Authority established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:11A-1 et seq., and any amendment thereof or
supplement thereto, a body corporate and politic, to be known as the
"Parking Authority of the City of East Orange," is hereby created.
§ 56-2. Powers. [Amended 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014; 7-20-2015
by Ord. No. 31-2015]
The Parking Authority of the City of East Orange is hereby authorized
to exercise powers granted to local parking authorities by an act of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey, provided that no real property shall
be acquired by the power of eminent domain without the consent of the City
Council of the City of East Orange, and provided, further, that the Parking
Authority of the City of East Orange shall set parking rates and maximum
parking times for parking meters, lots and other parking facilities owned or
leased by, or otherwise within the jurisdiction of, the Parking Authority of
the City of East Orange.
§ 56-3. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 13-2007; 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014]
The Parking Authority shall consist of seven Commissioners, one from each
ward of the City, two of which are appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by Council and five appointed and confirmed by City Council via resolution.
The Commissioners who are first appointed shall be designated to serve
one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, from the date of their
appointment, but thereafter, Commissioners shall be appointed as aforesaid
for a term of five years, except all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term.
§ 56-4. Rules and regulations.
The Parking Authority shall make rules and regulations as authorized by
law.
§ 55-24 EAST ORANGE CODE § 56-4
C:546
Chapter 60
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Boards, commissions, committees and
councils — See Ch. 14A.
Court — See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
§ 56-4 CHARTER § 56-4
C:547

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 60-1. Policy established.
The City Council hereby establishes the principles set forth in this chapter
as the personnel policy of the City.
§ 60-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall govern the personnel policies and practices of all City
employees except as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 60-3. Administration to be fair and equitable.
Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale in the City government
by fair administration of this chapter and by every consideration of the
rights and interests of employees consistent with the best interests of the
public and the City.
§ 60-4. Political activities of employees.
§ 60-5. Promulgation of rules and regulations by Mayor.
The Mayor shall promulgate, after securing the advice and
recommendations of the department heads, such other and further
provisions governing personnel administration and operation as he shall
A. No employee shall directly or indirectly use or seek to use his authority
or official influence to control or modify the political action of another
person or during the hours of duty engage in any political activity. At
any other time he may not participate in political activities or
campaigns so as to impair his usefulness in the position in which he is
employed. Nothing in this section shall prevent an employee from
becoming or continuing to be a member of any political party or holding
a position therein, from being a member of any club or organization,
attending political meetings, expressing views on political matters in
private outside of working hours and off City property, or voting with
complete freedom in any election. Employees shall refrain from seeking
or accepting nomination for an elective office of the City, except county
committee posts, without first resigning or obtaining a leave of
absence. Employees shall refrain from making statements for the public
press or at meetings attended by the public for or against any municipal
candidate for public office. This shall not be construed to prevent an
employee or official from making any statement appropriate to the
proper conduct of the City affairs to which his position or office relates.
B. The term "employee," as used in this section, shall include all
compensated personnel of the City except elected officials and
appointive members of boards or commissions whose only
compensation from the City is by reason of such service.
§ 60-1 CHARTER § 60-5
C:549
deem appropriate and necessary. All such regulations shall be in writing and
available on request to any employee asking for a copy of same. Regulations
shall govern such matters as traveling expenses, accident reports, outside
employment, emergency procedures and any other matter governing
responsibilities and benefits of employment not specifically set forth under
this chapter. A copy of such regulations shall be provided every department
head, and a copy shall be filed with the City Council.
§ 60-6. Personnel records. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
A personnel record file shall be kept for each employee in the office of
the Chief Personnel Officer,101 in which shall be retained a copy of all
forms sent to the civil service, all resolutions of the City Council specially
relevant to the particular position or employee (other than general salary
ordinances and resolutions), employee's progress reports and employee's
submittals, records of disciplinary proceedings and such information as is
available pertaining to overtime, tardiness, sick leave, vacation information
and promotional recommendations.
§ 60-7. Efficiency and economy to be promoted.
Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be
established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the
operation of the City government.
§ 60-8. Disciplinary proceedings and hearings by department heads.
A. Unless otherwise ordered by the City Council, all disciplinary hearings,
including those held under Civil Service Rules 58 and 59, shall be
conducted before the department head as the hearing officer. All such
proceedings shall be initiated by a written notice to the employee,
delivered to his or her last home address as shown on the employment
records of the City, with an additional copy sent to any other place
known to the department head where the employee would be likely to
receive the same. For proceedings under Rule 59 or, whenever the
employee so requests in writing addressed to the department head,
under Rule 58, within 10 days after mailing of the notice, a hearing
shall be held by the department head within 30 days from the date of
the original notice. The employee shall be entitled at the hearing to
produce witnesses in his own defense, be represented by counsel and
have access to records as may be necessary to protect his interest, but
not to records involving employees other than himself.
B. The department head shall, within one week from the date of hearing,
cause the employee to be served with a final notice of disciplinary
action setting forth the results of the hearing and the nature of any fine,
demotion, suspension or other penalty imposed. Such final order shall
become effective 14 days from the date of such hearing, unless the
101. Editor's Note: See § 60-13 of this chapter.
§ 60-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-8
C:550
§ 60-9. Appeals to Mayor.
The Mayor shall, within 15 days from the date upon which he receives
notice of appeal in accordance with § 60-8, hold a hearing in which the
employee shall have the same procedural rights as set forth in § 60-8.
The hearing shall consist of a review of the transcript of proceedings
before the department head, unless the Mayor elects to hold a de novo
hearing. Within seven days from the date of such hearing, the Mayor shall
cause the employee to be served with final notice of disciplinary action. All
determinations by the Mayor shall be final, subject to such rights of appeal
as the employee may have to the Civil Service Commission under the rules
of the Commission and statutes governing the same.
§ 60-10. Acting unclassified official. [Amended 4-12-1982 by Ord.
No. 20-1982; 9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 41-1984]
In the event that there shall be a vacancy for any reason in any unclassified
official position as set forth more fully in this Chapter 60, § 60-17, of
the Code of the City of East Orange, the Mayor may appoint an acting
unclassified official for a period not to exceed 45 days to fill the vacancy.
Within 45 days of continuous service of an acting unclassified official,
the appointment of the acting unclassified official shall be reviewed by
City Council. The City Council may determine by resolution to allow the
appointee to continue as an acting unclassified official for a term not to
exceed that set forth in the resolution. Should the City Council fail to act
within 45 days of the date of appointment, or should the City Council
decline to continue the appointment of the acting official, the employment
of the official in the acting position shall terminate automatically. Acting
unclassified officials shall receive compensation as set forth in the annual
City Official Salary Ordinance102 for the vacant City official position.
§ 60-11. Acting division heads.
In the absence of a division head, requiring appointment of an acting
division head, such acting division head shall, after three months of
continuous service in that position, receive compensation of not less than
the minimum established for the range of the division head and not more
than the current salary received by the absent division head, at such annual
rate as may be designated by the Mayor within the aforesaid range.
employee within that time files with the Mayor a notice of appeal from
the decision of the department head as herein provided. In the event
that a notice of appeal is filed with the Mayor, such final order shall
constitute an interim order pending a hearing and determination by
the Mayor. Notwithstanding the rights of appeal to the Civil Service
Commission, the employee may request a hearing by the Mayor, and a
copy of the record of the proceedings before the department head and
the Mayor shall be retained as part of the personnel file.
102. Editor's Note: See § 60-35A.
§ 60-8 CHARTER § 60-11
C:551

ARTICLE II
Personnel Division
[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
§ 60-12. Division established.
There is hereby established within the office of the Mayor a Personnel
Division.
§ 60-13. Chief Personnel Officer; duties. [Amended 5-12-1986 by
Ord. No. 13-1986]
The Director of Administrative Services, in addition to other duties, shall
have the responsibilities as Chief Personnel Officer, subject to supervision
and direction of the Mayor. The duties of the Director, as Chief Personnel
Officer, in addition to the regular duties as Director, shall be to direct and
manage the operation of the Personnel Division, to act as the City's liaison
to the New Jersey Civil Service Commission and to perform such other
functions as the Mayor may direct or as may be required by ordinance,
resolution or state law.
§ 60-14. Duties of Division generally.
The Personnel Division shall:
A. Conduct a continuing evaluation of the various positions in the
classified service as to duties and responsibilities thereof and
classification of the same in the class and salary range most appropriate
thereto.
B. Be in charge of recruiting, screening, hiring, training, orientation and
evaluation of all personnel employed or considered for employment by
the City of East Orange, excluding personnel who are by definition or
law not under the direct control of the City.103
C. Prepare a quarterly report, containing, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Personnel makeup of each City department by enumerating the
employees therein and specifying whether each is a temporary or
permanent employee.
(2) Total annualized payroll by department.
D. Maintain a current list of all vacancies by department, title and job
description.
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which pertained to evaluating classes and salary
ranges, was repealed 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 8-1977, and former Subsections C through H
were redesignated as Subsections B through G, respectively. For current provisions on
evaluation of classes and salary ranges, see Ch. 14A, Art. VIII, Personnel Committee.
§ 60-12 CHARTER § 60-14
C:553
E. Maintain a file on all personnel disciplinary actions completed in the
preceding quarter and those still pending at the date of the quarterly
report.
F. Make recommendations for changes and keep abreast of all current
legislative rules and policy relating to personnel.
G. Prepare and maintain a table of organization for each department,
which shall include job descriptions and all employee positions,
including those enumerated in § 60-17.
§ 60-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-14
C:554
ARTICLE III
Classification and Allocation of Positions
§ 60-15. Applicability. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
All offices and positions of employment in the City are allocated as set forth
in this article.
§ 60-16. Uniform classification and compensation applied to similar
duties. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
Positions in the City government having similar duties and responsibilities
shall be classified and compensated for on a uniform basis.
§ 60-17. Positions in unclassified service.
Exempt services from the provisions of this chapter shall include the
following:
A. All elected officials and members of boards and commissions.
B. The following appointed officers:
(1) The Corporation Counsel, all Assistant Corporation Counsels and
Prosecuting Assistant Counsels.104 [Amended 5-22-1972 by Ord.
No. 16-1972; 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986]
(2) The City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk.105
(3) The Director of Finance.106 [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
19-1986]
(4) The City Treasurer.107
(5) The Director of the Department of Property Taxation and Deputy
Assessor.108 [Amended 5-22-1972 by Ord. No. 16-1972]
(6) The Director of Public Works.109 [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 25-1986]
(7) The Chief of the Police Department.
(8) The Chief of the Fire Department.
(9) The City Collector of Taxes and Revenue.110
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. IV.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. III.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. VI.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. VI.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. VIII.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. IX.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. VII.
§ 60-15 CHARTER § 60-17
C:555
§ 60-18. Positions in classified service. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord.
No. 3-1975]
The classified service shall include all positions not specifically allocated to
the unclassified service.
§ 60-19. Seasonal personnel. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No.
3-1975]
Seasonal personnel shall be persons employed during peak periods and
vacation periods on a temporary basis for all or part of the period
commencing with the Monday of the week in which June 15 shall fall to
(10) The Chief Judge and Judge of Municipal Court.111
(11) The Police Surgeon.112
(12) The Fire Surgeon.113
(13) The Welfare Director.
(14) The Secretary to the Mayor.114
(15) The Water Engineer.
(16) The Library Director.
(17) Model Cities Director. [Added 5-22-1972 by Ord. No. 16-1972]
(18) Director of East Orange Drug Abuse and Alcoholism Control.
[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
(19) Director of Neighborhood Facilities. [Added 1-27-1975 by Ord.
No. 3-1975]
(20) Director of Division of Personnel. [Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No.
3-1975]
(21) Municipal Court Administrator. [Added 10-25-1982 by Ord. No.
27-1982]
(22) Police Department Chaplain.115 [Added 4-27-1987 by Ord. No.
13-1987]
C. Personnel who serve or agree to serve without compensation.
D. Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional services on
a contractual basis.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Court.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Officers and Employees, Art. II.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Officers and Employees, Art. III.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. XIX.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Officers and Employees, Art. IV.
§ 60-17 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-19
C:556
and through Labor Day. Such personnel shall be paid in accordance with
the scale provided in the Salary Ordinance and shall be entitled during
any week in which such person shall be employed on a regular full-time
basis to overtime pay and holiday pay for such holidays as fall within such
week in the same manner as provided in this chapter and by regulations for
permanent employees. Seasonal personnel shall be appointed by the Mayor
upon the request therefor from the respective department heads. Each
department utilizing seasonal personnel shall include in the preparation and
submission of its budget estimate the number of persons to be employed
and number of weeks of employment for each such person. Except as to
the foregoing requirement, seasonal personnel shall be exempted from the
provisions of § C-14D of N.J.S.A. 40:103-5(84), commonly referred to as the
"City Charter."
§ 60-20. Personnel pool. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975;
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986]
The Mayor, by regulation, may designate from time to time classifications
of clerical and secretarial personnel and number of persons to be retained
in each such classification as shall compose a clerical and secretarial pool
for use in common by more than one department of the City. The employees
therein shall be permanent employees and be entitled to all the rights
of other employees having the same classification. Each department
anticipating use of the pool shall include in its budget estimate the
classification of personnel desired and a lump-sum estimate in dollars
(computed on the pay rate in existence for that category at the time of
submission of the budget estimate) of the salary of such personnel
equivalent to the use anticipated of personnel in such classification. The
estimates of each department shall be incorporated in the budget of the
Mayor's Office, Personnel Division, which Division shall also consider such
amounts as may be necessary to provide such personnel with the benefits
to which they are entitled as permanent employees. The Personnel Division
shall be responsible for assigning personnel at the request of departments
in accordance with the budget approved for this purpose for each such
department, and the budget allocation of each such department shall be
charged by the Director of Finance in accordance with the use of pool
personnel by such department. The personnel pool shall for all job titles
included and be used for vacation replacement, sick leave replacement and
peak loan needs of the respective departments.
§ 60-21. Classification for budgetary purposes. [Amended 1-27-1975
by Ord. No. 3-1975]
A. Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, each office,
department, board, commission or agency shall submit with its budget
proposal a schedule containing the number of persons employed or to
be employed during the year for which the budget has been prepared,
and such schedule shall further set forth the title of the office, position
or employment and the salary to be paid for each such office, position or
employment.
§ 60-19 CHARTER § 60-21
C:557
B. The positions and employment for the respective departments shown on
the following schedule shall be exempted from the provisions of
Subsection A of this section, and itemization of the individual positions
need not be submitted as part of the budget. In lieu thereof, the title of
each position shall be set forth with the salary range, accompanied by a
lump-sum appropriation to be utilized and applied for salaries and
wages for the persons hired to fill positions within such title.
Temporary Personnel to be Exempted from Budget Listing
(to be hired as needed within overall budget authorization)
Department
Type of Employment
and Purpose Remarks
Library Junior library clerks as
pages (after school
hours)
Paid on hourly basis
Health Public health physicians
in child health clinics
On call and as needed, as
no specific assignment
can be forecast
Public health physicians
in parochial schools
Public health physicians
— cytology
Public health dentists
Radiologist
X-ray technician
Laboratory assistant
Dental assistant
Recreation Recreation assistants as
sports officials and
leaders
Varying with weather
conditions and program
requirements
Property
maintenance
and
neighborhood
improvement
Code enforcement aid Paid on hourly basis
C. Offices, positions or employment which are paid for or reimbursed out
of funds from sources other than money to be raised and appropriated
from the municipal budget shall be listed to the extent known in
advance on a separate schedule and submitted at the same time as the
budget proposal. Unless otherwise provided by law, any such office,
position or employment shall be set forth and described in any
application for grants or assistance being sought from any public or
private agency and shall be submitted for consideration and approval
§ 60-21 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-21
C:558
§ 60-22. Certain boards, commission and agencies exempt from
classified service. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
Except for compliance with the provisions of § 60-21, any board,
commission or agency which by law is vested with the power and
responsibility for establishing rules and regulations governing employees
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. To achieve maximum
coordination of personnel policies and practices within the City, any such
board, commission or agency shall file with the Secretary of the Personnel
Division a statement of personnel practices and policies pertaining to the
matters set forth in this chapter and regulations promulgated under this
chapter by the Mayor. It shall be the intent and purpose of this section to
encourage each such board, commission or agency to conform its practices
relating to personnel to those established by this chapter and regulations
under this chapter, except where, by the special and unique character
of the respective departments, variation from this chapter is required to
achieve maximum economy or operational efficiency. Where such variations
do occur, the statement filed should set forth the reasons therefor. It is
the further intent and purpose of this section to encourage each such
board, commission or agency to establish annual salary reviews
contemporaneously with that conducted by the Personnel Division.
by the City Council as part of any such application for grant or
assistance.
§ 60-21 CHARTER § 60-22
C:559

ARTICLE IV
Appointments, Promotions and Termination of Employment
§ 60-23. Basis for employment by City generally. [Amended
1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
Employment in the City government shall be based on merit and fitness,
free of personal and political considerations, and without regard to race,
religion, creed or color.
§ 60-24. Use of competitive tests and civil service procedures.
[Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions in the City
government requiring the application of the merit principle shall be based
on systematic tests or evaluations which shall be processed through civil
service procedure where applicable.
§ 60-25. Factors determining continuity of employment. [Amended
1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975]
Continuity of employment covered by this chapter shall be subject to good
behavior, the satisfactory performance of work, the City's need for having
work done and the availability of funds.
§ 60-26. New appointments. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No.
3-1975]
A. Subject to civil service rules, new appointments shall be made by the
Mayor on the basis of background and qualifications for the position to
be filled. Applicants shall be requested to supply any information
pertinent to the applicant's suitability, experience and competence to
perform the duties of the position, on forms devised under the
supervision of the Personnel Division, but the inquiry shall not include
reference to race, religion or political affiliation. Unless otherwise
waived by the Mayor, the department head shall require a physical
examination prior to temporary or permanent appointment. Each
department head shall list and file with the City Clerk as soon as
feasible after adoption of this chapter the titles and positions for which
physical examinations are required, together with a general set of
standards which applicants will be expected to meet pertaining thereto.
New appointees shall commence service at the minimum salary
provided for the range. Where, by reason of competitive conditions or
any special or unusual duties pertaining to the particular position, a
salary higher than the minimum is indicated, a written statement
setting forth the justification therefor shall be submitted to the
Personnel Division for recommendation to the Mayor and City Council
for their consideration prior to appointment.
§ 60-23 CHARTER § 60-26
C:561
§ 60-27. Permanent appointments.
§ 60-28. Promotions.
To the extent practicable and subject to the provisions contained in the civil
service rules, promotions to a higher grade shall be made from personnel
serving in a lower category who can demonstrate their qualifications for
appointment. The employee's progress report shall be reviewed and
considered prior to the making of a promotional appointment. The salary
upon promotion shall be either the minimum salary of the new range or the
old salary of the employee plus 1/5 of the new range, whichever provides
the higher starting salary.
§ 60-29. Termination of employment other than for disciplinary
reasons. [Amended 6-28-1971 by Ord. No. 32-1971]
Termination of employment, other than temporary employment and for
disciplinary reasons, shall be upon a minimum notice of 45 days when
initiated by the City. Termination of temporary employment shall be upon a
minimum notice of 10 days when initiated by the City. All employees shall be
required to provide two weeks' notice. Failure of an employee to provide the
B. Where new appointments are temporary, subject to civil service, then
the employee shall not be entitled for the initial three months to the
benefits provided in this chapter for vacation and sick leave pay.
A. Prior to permanent appointments, the performance and background of
the employee shall be investigated and reviewed. Such appointment
shall be subject to rejection by the department head for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Demonstrated lack of qualifications or fitness, physically, mentally
or emotionally, for the position.
(2) Habitual use of drugs, intoxicants or other habit-forming
substances which would be likely to affect the ability of the
applicant to perform his duties.
(3) Conviction of a criminal offense, disorderly persons act offense or
dishonorable discharge from military service which reflects on his
suitability to perform his duties and work with other employees.
(4) Dismissal from previous employment for misconduct of a character
and nature which casts doubt on his ability to perform his duties
and work with other employees.
(5) Fraud or misrepresentation in securing temporary or permanent
appointment.
B. The department head shall advise the Mayor and City Council of any
information pertaining to the employee which shall bear on his
qualifications or suitability for permanent employment.
§ 60-26 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-29
C:562
requisite notice shall be cause for a disciplinary hearing and withholding
of any moneys due the terminating employee until the outcome of the
hearing and deduction of any fine found due and owing from the moneys
otherwise due the employee. Where the employee submits his resignation in
writing and no disciplinary proceedings are pending, the employee's record
shall show that he resigned in good standing, unless within three days of
receipt of the letter of resignation, or if the resignation is oral, within three
days of the department head having knowledge thereof, the department
head notifies the resignee by letter of his intention to attach to the record
that the resignee is not in good standing and the reasons therefor. The
employee shall have the right to appeal therefrom in the same manner as in
a disciplinary proceeding.
§ 60-29 CHARTER § 60-29
C:563

ARTICLE V
Hours of Work
§ 60-30. Employees working 35 hours per week.
All employees not otherwise provided for under this chapter shall work a
thirty-five-hour week. Except as hereinafter provided, all City offices and
departments shall be open between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.
each weekday. Employees shall be entitled to one hour for lunch.
§ 60-31. Employees working 40 hours per week.
The following employees shall work a forty-hour week, such work schedule
to be from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. each weekday with one hour for lunch,
except where a different workweek or schedule is recommended by the
department head and approved by the Mayor or by the agency responsible
for establishing personnel practices:
§ 60-32. Modification during emergency.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 60-30 and 60-31 above, the Mayor or
the responsible department head may modify the hours of work in order to
meet any emergency necessitating such change in hours.
§ 60-33. Firemen: adoption of schedule.
There is hereby established for the Fire Department of the City, subject
to implementing resolution by the Board of Fire Commissioners, a normal
workweek with an average of 42 hours per week in any eight-week cycle for
the members thereof, in accordance with the following schedule of actual
duties:
Calendar day 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
First battalion D C N N X X X D
Second
battalion
X D D C N N X X
A. All employees hired at an hourly rate, unless otherwise specified or
unless hired temporarily to fill a position which, under § 60-30, has a
workweek of less than 40 hours.
B. All employees of the Street, Sewer and Garbage and Trash Divisions of
the Engineering Department.
C. All employees of the Traffic Division of the Engineering Department
except the Traffic Engineer and Assistant Traffic Engineer.116
D. All watchmen in the Building Maintenance and Operations Department.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Organization, Art. IX, Department of Public
Works.
§ 60-30 CHARTER § 60-33
C:565
Third battalion X X X D D C N N
Fourth
battalion
N N X X X D D C
D - Denotes daytime tour of duty — 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
N - Denotes nighttime tour of duty — 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
C - Denotes changeover from day to night duty
X - Denotes time off duty
§ 60-34. Additional rules and regulations by Board of Fire
Commissioners.
The schedule adopted by the preceding section shall be subject to such
further rules and regulations as the Board of Fire Commissioners117 may
establish governing emergencies and other matters relevant to the
operation of such schedule.
117. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 14A, Art. IV, Fire Citizens Advisory Council; Fire Department.
§ 60-33 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-34
C:566
ARTICLE VI
Salaries, Compensation and Promotions
§ 60-35. Adoption of Salary Ordinance; serving in more than one
position.
§ 60-36. Determination of salary increments and promotions.
[Amended 4-10-1972 by Ord. No. 13-1972; 1-27-1975 by Ord. No.
3-1975; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 8-1977]
Each salary range shall be so established as to contemplate salary
increments in six steps. Salary increments shall not be automatic but shall
be based primarily upon recommendations of the respective department
heads embodied in the employee's progress report to be made annually and
filed with the Personnel Committee no later than October 1 of each year.
The Personnel Committee shall thereupon review the reports, employee's
submittals and other material in the personnel file and make
recommendations for salary increments along with promotions to the City
Council for inclusion in the budget for the subsequent year.
§ 60-37. Annual salary increments.
Annual increments shall be effective as of January 1 of each calendar
year. The annual increment as of January 1 following the initial year of
employment or reemployment shall be determined by multiplying the
regular annual increment by a fraction composed of the number of months
employed during the initial calendar year divided by 12. Where the initial
date of employment occurs on or before the 15th day of the month, the
entire month shall be included in the calculation. Where the date of initial
employment occurs after the 15th day of the month, no credit shall be
extended for employment during the month.
A. The City shall adopt, from time to time, a Salary Ordinance, setting
forth the salaries and hourly rates to be paid to all salaried City officers
and employees and the manner in which such salaries shall be paid. The
Salary Ordinance of the City in effect as of the date of adoption of this
Code shall be continued in effect, unless otherwise modified.
B. Any person who shall be permanently appointed to serve
simultaneously in more than one office, position or employment shall
receive only one salary, which shall be set within the highest range
provided for either or any office, position or employment in which the
person shall serve. If the combined services required of any such
person exceed that necessitated by either or any of the offices, position
or employment considered separately, then the Mayor may, within
budget appropriations therefor, authorize such additional
compensation as is warranted by the total services rendered by such
person.
§ 60-35 CHARTER § 60-38
C:567
§ 60-38. Salary increases. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975;
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 8-1977]
No salary as established in the City budget or fixed in the budget of
any responsible agency as submitted to the Mayor and City Council in
preparation of the City budget shall be increased during the calendar year
except after review by the Personnel Committee and approval by ordinance
or resolution of the Mayor and City Council, such approval being by a vote of
2/3 of the members of the City Council serving in office and not disqualified
from voting thereon. Any provision for retroactive salary shall be applicable
only to those persons currently in the City's employ at the time of the
adoption of such ordinance.
§ 60-39. Longevity pay. [Amended 2-24-1970 by Ord. No. 8-1970;
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]
A. All members of the City's unions who are receiving longevity pay are
subject to the applicable collective bargaining agreements and
personnel policies which shall be revised after negotiation with the City
employees and uniformed personnel and which shall be left on file in
the office of the City Clerk. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No.
52-2016]
B. Other employees. [Added 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 32-1981;
amended 7-19-1982 by Ord. No. 38-1982]
(1) Every nonunion City employee who works regularly 20 or more
hours per week, after serving more than five years, shall be paid
longevity payments at a percentage of his or her base salary in the
following manner: [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
(a) Effective January 1, 1981:
[1] After completion of five years' service: 1%.
[2] After completion of 10 years' service: 2%.
[3] After completion of 15 years' service: 3%.
[4] After completion of 20 years' service: 4%.
(b) Effective January 1, 1982:
[1] After completion of five years' service: 2%.
[2] After completion of 10 years' service: 4%.
[3] After completion of 15 years' service: 6%.
[4] After completion of 20 years' service: 8%.
(c) Effective January 1, 2017, all nonunion employees hired on or
after this date shall not receive longevity payments. All
nonunion employees hired before January 1, 2017, shall be
§ 60-38 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-39
C:568
§ 60-39.1. Continuity of service. [Added 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
32-1981]
Service, as used in this chapter, is determined to be continuous as a regular
employee, provided that any of the following shall not affect continuity of
service for the purpose of this chapter:
§ 60-39.2. Leave of absence without pay. [Added 12-14-1981 by
Ord. No. 32-1981]
Any leave of absence without pay initiated at the request of the employee
shall not be computed as a part of said five years' continuous service.
However, the periods of employment immediately preceding and
immediately subsequent to such leave or leaves of absence shall be
considered to be continuous service within the meaning of this chapter.
§ 60-39.3. Resignation and subsequent reemployment. [Added
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 32-1981]
In the event of resignation of an employee and subsequent reemployment
of said employee by the City, all periods of employment prior to the
reemployment of said employee shall, after five years of continuous service
after such reemployment, be added to the continuous service of such
employee in computing the longevity pay to which such employee shall be
entitled.
§ 60-40. Employees' progress report. [Amended 1-27-1975 by Ord.
No. 3-1975]
An annual record shall be made by each department head on forms to be
devised under the direction of the Personnel Division or by the responsible
agencies as a basis for determining objectively eligibility for annual
increments, promotions and in arriving at any penalty arising out of
eligible to receive longevity payments or continue to receive
longevity payments pursuant to § 60-39B(1)(b).
(2) Longevity payments shall be determined on the basis of the abovelisted
schedule each year as of January 1 and July 1 and computed
on the amount of base salary paid to each employee for said year, as
fixed and determined in accordance with the annual salary
resolution. Longevity payments to each employee paid on an hourly
basis shall be computed each pay period and computed on the
hourly rate during said year as fixed by the annual salary
regulations. [Amended 12-28-1981 by Ord. No. 35-1981]
A. Military service.
B. Illness for which leave of absence or sick leave was granted with pay.
C. Temporary, involuntary separation from employment with the City of
East Orange within a one-year period.
§ 60-39 CHARTER § 60-40
C:569
disciplinary proceedings. The record should include, among other matters,
information pertaining to promptness in reporting to work, diligence,
demeanor, extra duties assumed, initiative and any special courses of
training or self-improvement as related to City employment. The
departmental report shall specify those categories of employment which are
incidental, casual and unpredictable in nature such that persons employed
temporarily in such categories shall, of necessity, be exempted from review
under this chapter and excluded from itemization for budget purposes.
The records shall be confidential except as they may be needed for the
purposes for which they are kept. Any employee shall have the right to
submit in writing any information or data pertaining to his service, conduct,
qualifications or background relevant to his duties, and such information
and data shall be kept in the personnel file and be made available to the
department head, Personnel Division, the Mayor and the City Council or
responsible agency. A copy of all such reports or submittals shall be kept
permanently as part of the employee's personnel file required under § 60-6.
§ 60-40 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-40
C:570
ARTICLE VII
Overtime Work
§ 60-41. When additional compensation payable; amount. [Amended
4-8-1968 by Ord. No. 23-1968]
§ 60-42. Unusual work demands from special projects or
emergencies.
Without regard to the limitations of § 60-41, the Mayor may authorize, to the
extent allowed by law, additional compensation for any employee or official
where justified because of unusual work demands arising out of special
projects not part of the normal duties attendant to the position or office or
out of emergency conditions.
§ 60-43. Compensatory time in lieu of monetary payments.
In lieu of monetary payments otherwise payable, a department head may,
in his discretion, authorize compensatory time (computed by dividing the
monetary payment otherwise due by the regular hourly rate) with pay
where an employee has worked overtime within a calendar month computed
as provided in this chapter. Such compensatory time shall be taken within
30 days of the period during which it was earned and should not be added
to vacation periods.
A. Additional compensation over that provided by the Salary Ordinance of
the City for overtime, when authorized by the department head, shall be
paid to any employee in accordance with the following schedule,
provided that no additional compensation shall be paid any City official,
nor shall any additional compensation be paid any other City employee
whose salary for the year, plus accumulated earnings for overtime as of
the time of payment, shall be $10,000 or more:
(1) For each hour in excess of the regular workday, 1 1/2 times the
hourly rate.
(2) For work on Sundays (including holidays falling on Sunday), except
for employees regularly scheduled to so work, two times the
regular hourly rate; or for other holidays, 1 1/2 times the regular
hourly rate during regular working hours and two times the regular
hourly rate for holiday employment outside regular working hours.
B. Such overtime compensation shall be in addition to the regular
compensation to which the employee would be entitled.
C. For the purposes of this section, employees for whom there is no
prescribed hourly rate shall have an hourly rate computable by dividing
the product of their annual salary by the number of hours in their
normal workweek times 52 weeks.
§ 60-41 CHARTER § 60-44
C:571
§ 60-44. Minimum time for which overtime is paid.
No payments shall be made for overtime of less than 30 minutes of any
one day, but compensatory time as provided under § 60-43 may be provided
therefor.
§ 60-45. Time for reporting work and receiving payment.
All compensatory time shall be taken and all overtime payments shall be
reported, approved and paid within 30 days from the date earned instead of
being permitted to accumulate.
§ 60-46. Monthly reports to Mayor.
Each department shall submit monthly reports to the Mayor indicating the
overtime worked by each employee, the amount of compensatory payments,
the extent of compensatory time authorized and such other and further
information as the Mayor may request.
§ 60-44 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-46
C:572
ARTICLE VIII
Holidays and Leaves of Absence
§ 60-47. Holidays. [Amended 10-26-1970 by Ord. No. 59-1970]
§ 60-48. Personal days. [Added 4-10-1972 by Ord. No. 13-1972;
amended 2-26-1973 by Ord. No. 7-1973; 2-25-1974 by Ord. No.
8-1974]
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the following are the official holidays
with pay to be observed by this City:
New Year's Day
Lincoln's Birthday
Washington's Birthday
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
General Election Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (January 15) [Added 2-26-1973 by Ord.
No. 7-1973]
B. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the following
Monday. If one of the foregoing falls on a Saturday, it shall not be a paid
holiday unless the Mayor shall, in his discretion, declare that the
holiday shall be observed on a preceding day. Any other days or
portions thereof generally observed as holidays by banks in the City
may, at the discretion of the Mayor, be observed as holidays.
C. Effective January 1, 1971, weekend holidays will be observed as
follows:
(1) Washington's Birthday on the third Monday of February.
(2) Memorial Day on the last Monday of May.
(3) Columbus Day on the second Monday of October.
(4) Veterans Day on November 11. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord.
No. 15-1980]
A. Permanent employees entitled to certain days of leaves of absence with
pay during the contract year to attend to necessary personal business
§ 60-47 CHARTER § 60-48
C:573
§ 60-49. Leaves of absence without pay.
Leave of absence without pay may be granted by a department head with
the approval of the Mayor upon good and sufficient reason for a period
of one month or less. Leave of absence in excess of one month, but not
to exceed six months, shall be granted only with the approval of the City
Council, upon written request therefor setting forth the reason by the
department head, with the consent and approval of the Mayor. Renewals
thereof, not to exceed an additional six months upon the recommendation
of the department head with the approval of the Mayor, may be granted by
resolution of the City Council.
§ 60-50. Maternity leave.
Pursuant to § 60-49, maternity leave without pay may be granted for a
period not to exceed six months by a department head. Upon certification by
a treating physician, the department head may extend the leave of absence
to 12 months. Maternity leave in excess of the periods set forth in this
section shall be granted only upon the recommendation of the Mayor and
approval by resolution of the City Council.
§ 60-51. Special leave for service-incurred disability. [Amended
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 19-1986]
Where an employee is disabled either through injury or illness as a result
of or arising from his employment by the City, he may request through
his department head special leave of absence. If the employee is unable
to so act, the application may be made in his behalf by a member of his
immediate family or by the department head on his own initiative. If the
department head determines that the disability did in fact occur either
through injury or illness as a result of or arising from employment by
the City, he shall, with the approval of the Mayor, authorize payment of
regular pay for an initial period of special leave of absence not to exceed
three months. If, during such initial period, the employee has applied for
workmen's compensation benefits or has indicated a readiness to so apply
at a future date if the compensation carrier has declined to make voluntary
will be subject to the personnel policies which shall be revised annually
after negotiation with the City employees and the uniformed personnel,
which shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. [Amended
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]
B. Requests for such leave must be filed in advance with the department
head on a form prescribed by the City. All leaves shall be approved by
the department head. No personal leave day with pay shall be granted
immediately before or after any holiday, and the granting of any
personal leave day shall be subject to scheduling requirements of the
department as determined by the department head.
C. Any personal leave day not used by any employee shall not accumulate
from year to year.
§ 60-48 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-51
C:574
payments for temporary disability during the entire period of special leave
of absence, then the department head, with the approval of the Mayor, upon
a renewed application, may authorize additional extensions of the special
leave of absence at a regular pay for one or more periods, such that the
total period of special leave of absence shall not exceed one year. The
department head may require such medical certificates or examination by
a physician designated by the City or workmen's compensation carrier as
may be desired to evaluate any application. Any amount of salary or wages
paid or payable to an employee because of leave granted shall be reduced
by the amount of any workmen's compensation award under Chapter 15 of
Title 34 of the Revised Statues of New Jersey made for temporary disability
because of the same injury or illness requiring such leave, and all checks for
temporary disability benefits received by such employee who has received
full wages under this provision shall be delivered to the Director of Finance.
§ 60-52. Special leave with pay for jury duty.
An employee who is absent from work due to jury duty shall receive his
usual compensation less such amount as he may receive by reason of such
jury duty, provided that the employee reports the summons for jury duty to
his superior within three business days of the receipt of the same.
§ 60-51 CHARTER § 60-52
C:575

ARTICLE IX
Vacation Leave
§ 60-53. Computation of time. [Amended 6-28-1971 by Ord. No.
30-1971; 4-10-1972 by Ord. No. 13-1972; 2-25-1974 by Ord. No.
8-1974; 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 51-2016]
A. Commencing January 1, 1974, every probationary employee after a
minimum period of three consecutive months and every permanent
employee, except department heads, shall be entitled to the following
paid working days of vacation for total time of service:
(1) Initial year of employment: one working day for each month of paid
service for the remainder of the calendar year following the date of
employment (probationary or permanent). A fraction of a month
shall be considered as a full month for this provision.
(2) One year to four years, inclusive: 12 working days of vacation per
year.
(3) Five years to eight years, inclusive: 15 working days of vacation per
year.
(4) Nine years to 12 years, inclusive: 20 working days of vacation per
year.
(5) Thirteen years and over: 25 working days of vacation per year.
B. Vacations shall be taken at such times and for such term as the
respective department head shall determine is in the best interests of
the City, provided that where, during any calendar year following the
initial year of hiring, an employee has not received a vacation time to
which he is entitled because of pressure of City business, then the
vacation time shall accumulate and be granted no later than the end of
the next succeeding calendar year.
C. Department heads shall be entitled to the following paid working days
of vacation for total time of service:
(1) Initial year of employment: 15 working days of vacation.
(2) One year to four years, inclusive: 15 working days of vacation per
year.
(3) Five years to eight years, inclusive: 20 working days of vacation per
year.
(4) Nine years to 12 years, inclusive: 25 working days of vacation per
year.
(5) Thirteen years and over: 30 working days of vacation per year.
D. On January 1 of the calendar year next succeeding the year in which his
or her employment commenced, the employee will be deemed as having
§ 60-53 CHARTER § 60-53
C:577
§ 60-54. Vacation time determined.
Vacations shall be taken at such times and for such terms as the responsible
department head shall determine is in the best interests of the City;
provided that where, during any calendar year following the initial year
of hiring, an employee has not received the vacation time to which he is
entitled because of the pressure of City business, then the vacation time
shall accumulate and be granted no later than by the end of the next
succeeding calendar year.
§ 60-55. Termination of employment. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 1-2011; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 10-2011]
After December 31, 2011, upon termination of employment subsequent
to the calendar year of appointment, the employee shall receive payment
for accumulated vacation time plus vacation pay accrued on a pro rata
basis for each month or part thereof of service during the calendar year
of termination, less any vacation time already received during the calendar
year of termination. Upon an employee's death, compensation equivalent to
any accumulated vacation leave shall be paid to his estate.
§ 60-56. through § 60-57. (Reserved)118
§ 60-58. Determination of periods of service. [Amended 4-10-1972
by Ord. No. 13-1972]
For the purposes of this article, an employee shall be credited with one
month of service for each calendar month in which he shall have been
actually performing duties or on sick leave or vacation with pay or on field
training as provided by the Civil Service Law and Rules. One year's service
shall constitute 12 months of accredited service as aforesaid, whether or
not the period of service shall be continuous or interrupted. On January 1 of
the next calendar year after the year in which the permanent employment
commenced, the employee will be deemed as having one year of service.
one year of service for the purpose of determining his position on the
vacation schedule.
118. Editor's Note: Former §§ 60-56, Vacation time upon retirement, and 60-57, Vacation time
upon resignation, were repealed 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011.
§ 60-53 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-58
C:578
ARTICLE X
Sick Leave
§ 60-59. Basis for allowance.
Sick leave absences shall be allowed to any employee upon submission
of evidence thereto in accordance with N.J.S.A. 11:24A-3, 11:24A-4 and
11:24A-5, and any amendments or supplements thereto.119 By way of
supplement to and clarification of the preceding provisions, the provisions
of this article shall govern sick leave absences.
§ 60-60. Illness of employee or member of immediate family.
§ 60-61. Death of member of immediate family. [Amended
4-10-1972 by Ord. No. 13-1972; 2-25-1974 by Ord. No. 8-1974]
A. Sick leave may be granted for the personal illness of an employee or for
a member of his immediate family where the attendance of the
employee is needed to assure care for the member of the immediate
family.
B. The term "immediate family," as utilized in this article, shall mean
husband, wife, brother, sister, parent, child or other near relative,
which relative resides with the employee as part of a common
household. If it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
department head that an ill person not falling into the foregoing
relationships nevertheless lives with and is part of the household of the
employee and that, by reason of the absence of any other suitable
person, the employee's presence is essential to the care of such person,
then such person may be for the purposes of this article deemed to be a
member of the immediate family.
A. Leave with pay not to exceed five days shall be permitted where such
absence is due to and necessitated by the death of a spouse or parent or
child of the employee, and leave with pay not to exceed three days shall
be permitted where such absence is due to and necessitated by death of
another member of the immediate family of the employee. This leave
must be taken in close proximity to the date of death of the spouse,
parent or child or other member of the immediate family.
B. The term "other member of immediate family" utilized herein shall
mean brother, sister, mother-in-law or father-in-law, wherever residing,
or other near relative residing with the employee as part of a common
household.
C. Leave with pay of one day shall be permitted where such absence is due
to and necessitated by death of a grandparent of the employee,
provided that, in the discretion of the department head, leave with pay
for such purpose may be extended to a total of three days where
119. Editor's Note: These sections are no longer in effect; see now N.J.S.A. 11A:6-5.
§ 60-59 CHARTER § 60-61
C:579
§ 60-62. Quarantine.
An employee, upon certification from the Department of Health, may be
entitled to sick leave when quarantined because of exposure to a contagious
disease.
§ 60-63. Doctor's certificate required under certain conditions.
A doctor's certificate of the treating physician, if there is one, or otherwise
of a physician having personal knowledge of the employee's condition shall
be presented for any absence from work due to illness for a period
embracing more than three successive working days no later than the fifth
day of absence. The certificate shall state the nature of the illness, the
period thereof and whether the same is of sufficient seriousness to render
the employee incapable of working during the period of illness. Where
an employee is absent 10 or more days during a calendar year, whether
in one or more periods, the employee shall present upon request of his
department head proof or certification by his physician that he is capable
of continuing to perform his duties efficiently and well and without personal
risk or danger. Nothing in this section shall preclude a department head in
an appropriate case from requesting an employee to submit to a physical
examination by a medical doctor selected by the City for the purpose of
establishing the degree of incapacity of an employee or his ability to resume
his duties.
§ 60-64. Accumulation of sick leave.
necessitated by distance. This leave must be taken in close proximity
to the date of death of the grandparent and is intended to be for the
purpose of attending the funeral and/or making funeral arrangements
as is the leave provided for in Subsection A above.
A. While sick leave may be accumulated when unused, no absence from
duty shall be excused therefor except for the reasons set forth in this
article. No accumulated sick leave payment shall be made at the time of
termination of service except where, by reason of sickness or disability,
an employee cannot or will not be able to perform his duties
satisfactorily and the City operation will be handicapped thereby and
the employee has accumulated sick leave. The department head may
submit for approval to the Mayor and City Council a proposed lump-sum
sick leave payment conditioned upon termination of employment, such
sum not to exceed the value of the accumulated sick leave time
computed at the last rate of pay of the employee. Such sum shall not
automatically be established at the maximum value, but due
consideration shall be given to the computed value thereof and the
relative likelihood that utilization of sick leave may not be automatically
justified in the future.
B. After an employee has utilized all his earned accumulated sick leave, an
additional special sick leave of absence with pay or part pay, not to
§ 60-61 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-64
C:580
§ 60-65. Conditions where sick leave disallowed.
Sick leave shall be disallowed where:
§ 60-65.1. Additional sick leave provisions. [Added 5-9-1988 by
Ord. No. 5-1988]
exceed one year's duration, may be granted, upon recommendation
by the department head and with the approval of the Mayor and the
City Council by resolution, to any permanent employee disabled either
through injury or illness not as a result of or arising from his respective
employment, where the employee's disability is of such severity and
duration that he will require such extended special sick leave. The
department head shall make such recommendation only after
presentation of satisfactory evidence of the nature of the disability
and of its severity and duration and after considering factors showing
good reasons for such special leave, including, among other things, the
length of service of the employee, the employee's performance on the
job and the absence of any continued prior abuse of sick leave on the
part of the employee. [Added 2-26-1973 by Ord. No. 7-1973]
A. An employee under medical care fails to follow the instructions of his
physician.
B. The illness or disability is due in whole or in part to some willful selfimposed
act of the employee or is occasioned by bad habits.
C. The illness is determined not to be of sufficient severity to warrant
absence.
D. The employee could without danger or discomfort (as determined by a
City-retained physician) be assigned to other tasks for which he is
qualified and refuses to accept such assignments.
E. Upon request of the department head, the employee fails or refuses to
cooperate with or submit to an examination by a City-retained physician
seeking to establish the extent, duration and severity of incapacity of
the employee.
F. The employee has been negligent in advising his superior promptly of
his inability to report for work and thereafter of the prospective
duration of his absence from work.
A. Unclassified City officials shall earn sick days on the basis of 2 1/2 days
per month for each month worked, up to a maximum of 30 days per
calendar year.
B. Sick days may be accumulated; however, if an official is absent due to
illness for more than five consecutive days, a doctor's certificate will be
required. Under extenuating circumstances and where sick time has
been exhausted, a request to apply available vacation time can be
approved for the official by the Mayor.
§ 60-64 CHARTER § 60-65.1
C:581
C. The Mayor may require an official who has been absent because of
personal illness, as a condition of his or her return to duty, to be
examined by a physician. Such examination shall establish whether the
official is capable of performing his or her normal duties and that such
return will not jeopardize the health of other employees. If an official is
absent due to illness for more than 15 days within a calendar year, a
doctor's certificate will be required.
D. Where an official has been absent because of personal illness in excess
of 30 days within a calendar year, as a condition of continued use of
paid leave time the Mayor may require that a medical examination be
performed by a physician designated by the City, and an appropriate
certification must be submitted as evidence thereof. The Mayor may
authorize additional sick leave for officials when this procedure is
implemented.
§ 60-65.1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-65.1
C:582
ARTICLE XI
Military Leave
[Amended 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 16-2002; 8-16-2004 by Ord. No.
21-2004]
§ 60-66. Reserve training.
§ 60-67. Active service.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 38:23-1, any permanent or full-time temporary
officer or employee who is a member of the organized reserve of the
Army of the United States, United States Naval Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve or United States Marine Corps Reserve, or other
organization affiliated therewith, including the National Guard of other
states, upon request of the employee to his/her department head, shall
be entitled to paid leave, in addition to vacation pay, which shall be
granted to any employee as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces of the United States, to take a leave of absence from his or
her respective duty without loss of pay or time on all workdays on which
he or she shall be engaged in any period of federal active duty;
provided, however, that such leaves of absence shall not exceed 30
workdays per year. Any leave of absence for such duty in excess of 30
workdays shall be without pay but without loss of time. The amount of
paid leave shall be the employee's regular pay, without regard to any
compensation received from the state or the United States Government
for field training service.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, a full-time temporary
officer or employee who has served under such temporary appointment
for less than one year shall receive for the service hereinbefore
described leave without pay but without loss of time.
A. Any permanent or full-time temporary officer or employee of the City
called into active military service or volunteering for military service in
time of war or national emergency shall, upon request of the employee
to his/her department head, be placed on an indefinite leave of absence
from his or her respective duties without loss of pay, privileges, status
or time on all days during which he or she shall be engaged in any
period of state or federal active duty; provided, however, that the leaves
of absence for federal active duty or active duty for training shall not
exceed 90 workdays in the aggregate in any calendar year, and 60 days
after discharge therefrom shall be entitled to be reinstated if honorably
discharged. Any leave of absence for such duty in excess of 90
workdays shall be without pay but without loss of time.
B. Global war on terrorism, armed conflict, etc.
(1) Notwithstanding Subsection A, any permanent or full-time
temporary officer or employee of the City called into active military
service in response to the continuing global war on terrorism,
§ 60-66 CHARTER § 60-67
C:583
§ 60-67.1. Reimbursement.
armed conflict with Iraq and heightened tensions with North Korea
shall be entitled, upon termination of such employee's active duty,
to return to City employment with full seniority and benefits
consistent with City, state and federal military reemployment and
seniority rights.
(2) During active duty for the duration of their activation for this crisis,
these City employees, following the exhaustion of statutory
entitlement to full pay as described in Subsection A of this section,
shall be entitled to receive salary equal to the differential between
the employee's City salary and the employee's military base pay.
(3) These City employees shall be entitled to City employee health
benefits, life insurance and pension coverage during active duty
service for which they receive differential salary as described in
Subsection B(2) as if they were on paid leave of absence.
(4) If a City employee's military base pay is greater than his/her City
salary, such that he/she would not receive differential pay under
Subsection B(2) of this section, that City employee shall,
nonetheless, be entitled to City employee health benefits, life
insurance and pension coverage during active duty service, with
the City's contributory portion of those benefits and programs to be
paid by the employee upon his/her return to City employment after
completion of his/her active duty.
(5) This subsection shall take effect immediately and shall apply
retroactively to all City employees who were placed on federal or
state active duty on or after September 11, 2001.
C. Leave of absence for such military duty shall be in addition to the
regular vacation or other accrued leave allowed such officers and
employees.
D. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, a full-time temporary
officer or employee who has served under such temporary appointment
for less than one year shall, as described in that subsection, be entitled
to receive leave without pay but without loss of time.
A. Prior to taking said leave and in order to receive a paid leave, any
employee who is granted military leave under the provisions of this
section must provide the Department of Personnel with the name of
branch of the military which he/she will be engaged in active military
service or active duty for training; rank in the military; the location
where stationed and the date(s) of service (if known); and shall notify
his/her department head as well as the Department of Personnel within
five days of his/her discharge from service.
B. The Department of Personnel shall submit the employee's military
information to the Department of Finance. The Department of Finance
§ 60-67 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-67.1
C:584
shall make application for reimbursement to the State Treasurer and
approval of the application by the Director of the Division of Budget and
Accounting; reimbursement shall be made by the state for any costs
incurred as a result of the provisions of P.L. 2001, c. 351.120
120. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 38A:1-1 et seq.
§ 60-67.1 CHARTER § 60-67.1
C:585

ARTICLE XII
Residency Requirements for Police Officers
§ 60-68. Waiver of state residency requirements.
The Board of Police Commissioners121 may appoint officers of the Police
Department of the City notwithstanding that the same do not, upon the
date of their appointment, meet the residency requirements of the state.
However, no such person shall be appointed unless at the time of such
appointment there shall be a vacancy in the Police Department which
cannot be filled by a qualified resident who has made application for such
vacancy.
§ 60-69. Minimum residency required.
No person shall be appointed pursuant to this article unless he has been a
resident of the state for at least one year and lives within the county.
§ 60-70. Annual review of policies. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord.
No. 15-1980]
The personnel policies shall be revised annually after negotiation with the
City employees and uniformed personnel and shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 14A, Art. X, Police Citizens Advisory Council; Police Director.
§ 60-68 CHARTER § 60-70
C:587

ARTICLE XIII
Residency Requirements for City Officers and Employees
[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 4-1975]
§ 60-71. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONA FIDE RESIDENT — Any person having a permanent domicile within
the City and one which has not been adopted with the intention of again
taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside the City limits.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — Any elected or appointed person who has direct
supervision and responsibility for personnel, records, funds and
maintenance service to be performed by a municipal department.
§ 60-72. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all municipal employees except
policemen and firemen.
§ 60-73. Residency requirement.
All officers and employees hereafter to be employed by the City of East
Orange are hereby required, as a condition of their employment, to have
their place of abode in the City and to be a bona fide resident therein, except
as otherwise provided by law.
§ 60-74. Authorized exemptions. [Amended 12-4-1989 by Ord. No.
41-1989]
The Mayor, upon approval of the City Council, is hereby authorized, for
good cause shown, to permit any official or employee of the City in their
respective departments or offices to remain in the employ or to commence
employment in the City without complying with the provisions hereof,
where:
§ 60-75. Failure to comply.
Failure of any officer or employee to comply with this article shall be cause
for his removal, suspension or discharge from the City's service.
A. The health of any official of employee necessitates residence outside
City limits; or
B. The nature of the employment is such as to require residence outside
City limits.
§ 60-71 CHARTER § 60-75
C:589

ARTICLE XIV
Drug and Alcohol Testing of Employees Required to Maintain a
Commercial Driver's License (CDL)
[Added 12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 20-1996]
§ 60-76. Authority.
§ 60-77. Applicability.
The following policy shall apply to all principal departments in the City of
East Orange:
As a condition of employment, this policy applies to all employees whose
job duties include the performance of safety-sensitive functions related to
the operation of a commercial motor vehicle, as defined below, for which
the employee is required to maintain a commercial driver's license valid in
the State of New Jersey. This applies to employees whose job includes such
functions on a regular or occasional basis where the employee may have
a distinct possibility of performing safety-sensitive functions when on-duty.
It also applies to employees who perform safety-sensitive functions on an
intermittent basis, such as a temporary worker.
§ 60-78. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL — The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol
or other low-molecular-weight alcohols, including methyl and isopropyl
alcohol.
ALCOHOL USE — The use of any beverage, mixture or preparation,
including any medication, containing alcohol.
A. This policy was developed in accordance with the following federal
rules and regulations which apply to the City of East Orange:
(1) Department of Transportation, Office of the Secretary, 49 CFR Part
40, Procedures for Transportation Workplace Drug Testing
Programs: Final Rule.
(2) Department of Transportation, Office of the Secretary, 49 CFR Part
382 et al., Controlled Substance and Alcohol Use and Testing.
B. Moreover, any employment action taken for violation of the provisions
of this policy shall be taken in accordance with Title 11A of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated, Title 4A of the New Jersey Administrative
Code, and/or applicable collective bargaining agreements and/or
applicable local disciplinary procedures as outlined in the City of East
Orange Code.
§ 60-76 CHARTER § 60-78
C:591
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle or combination of
motor vehicles used in commerce to transport passengers or property if the
motor vehicle:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Has the meaning assigned by 21 U.S.C.
§ 812, including substances listed on Schedules I through V, as they may be
revised from time to time (21 CFR Parts 1301-1316), and including those
substances defined by N.J.S.A. Title 24, and companion regulations, as they
may be revised from time to time.
CRIMINAL DRUG STATUTE — Federal or state criminal statute involving
the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, use or possession of any
controlled substance.
DRUG — Interchangeable use with the term "controlled substance"; unless
otherwise provided, refers to marijuana (THC), cocaine, opiates,
phencyclidine (PCP) and amphetamines (including methamphetamine).
MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER — A designated City of East Orange doctor(s)
or contract physician(s) with appropriate medical training and knowledge
of substance abuse conditions, authorized to receive, review and report
laboratory drug test results.
ON DUTY — Any time period (regular work hours, overtime, hourly
services), including breaks, during which an employee is required to comply
with a directive from a supervisor and the employee may be expected to
perform and/or be available to perform a safety-sensitive function.
PERFORMING A SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTION — Any period in which
a driver is actually performing, ready to perform or immediately able to
perform any safety-sensitive function.
POSITIVE ALCOHOL TEST — A breath alcohol level of 0.04 or greater as
measured by a breath analysis machine approved by use by the FHWA and
appearing on the Conforming Products List in the Federal Register.
POSITIVE DRUG TEST — A controlled substance test result reported
positive by the laboratory and subsequently confirmed upon review by the
Medical Review Officer as evidence of prohibited drug use.
SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTION — Any on-duty function as follows:
Has a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds,
inclusive of a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than
10,000 pounds; or
A.
B. Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; or
C. Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or
Is of any size and is used in the transportation of materials found to be
hazardous for the purposes of the Hazardous Materials Transportation
Act, which require the motor vehicle to be placarded under the
Hazardous Materials Regulations (USDOT 49 CFR Part 172, Subpart F).
D.
§ 60-78 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-78
C:592
SUBJECT TO DUTY — Any time period an employee is required to be
available to report for duty to perform a safety-sensitive function.
SUPERVISOR or SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEE — An employee with
responsibility for directing the work of other employees, but not a coworker.
WORKPLACE — Any location, including but not limited to garages, depots,
yards, offices, field or road sites, whether or not owned or operated by the
City of East Orange, where official City business is conducted or where job
duties are performed.
§ 60-79. Policy.
All time at a carrier or shipper plant, terminal, facility or other property
waiting to be dispatched, unless the employee has been relieved from
duty by the supervisor.
A.
All time inspecting equipment as required by the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Regulations or otherwise inspecting, servicing or conditioning
any commercial motor vehicle.
B.
All time, other than driving time, spent on or in a commercial motor
vehicle.
C.
All time loading or unloading a commercial motor vehicle, supervising
or assisting in the loading or unloading, attending a vehicle being
loaded or unloaded, remaining in readiness to operate the vehicle or in
giving or receiving receipts for shipments loaded or unloaded.
D.
All time spent performing the driver requirements associated with an
accident.
E.
All time repairing, obtaining assistance or remaining in attendance
upon a disabled vehicle.
F.
A. Employees in safety-sensitive functions who have drug and/or alcohol
abuse problems are encouraged to voluntarily seek treatment.
Treatment may be sought through the employer or independently by
the employee without employer involvement. Employees may be able to
avoid negative consequences regarding their employment by seeking
help to correct their substance abuse problem.
B. Prohibited conduct. As a condition of employment, all covered
employees are prohibited from:
(1) Reporting for duty or remaining on duty to perform safety-sensitive
functions while having an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or above.
(2) Being on duty or operating a commercial motor vehicle while in the
possession of alcohol, unless the alcohol is manifested and
transported as part of a shipment. This includes the possession of
medicine containing alcohol (prescription or over-the-counter),
unless the packaging seal is unbroken.
§ 60-78 CHARTER § 60-79
C:593
(3) Using alcohol while performing safety-sensitive functions.
(4) Performing safety-sensitive functions within four hours after using
alcohol.
(5) When required to take a post-accident alcohol test, using alcohol
within eight hours following the accident or prior to undergoing a
post-accident alcohol test, whichever comes first.
(6) Reporting for duty or remaining on duty which may require the
performance of safety-sensitive functions when the driver
distributes, possesses or uses any controlled substance, except
when the use is pursuant to the instructions of a physician who has
advised the driver that the substance does not adversely affect the
driver's ability to safely operate a commercial motor vehicle. Note:
Covered employees shall provide notice of such therapeutic use of
controlled substances. Appropriate procedures shall be established
for reporting such information by employees and to protect the
confidentiality of such information, pursuant to the requirements of
the Americans with Disabilities Act, 28 CFR Part 35.
C. Testing required.
(1) Post-offer for final applicants.
(a) All individuals receiving conditional offers of employment for
positions requiring the performance of safety-sensitive
functions will be required to undergo testing for controlled
substances before final employment is confirmed. This
category includes, but is not limited to, new employees, former
employees returning to the City of East Orange service via
reemployment lists, interim appointees and temporary
employees.
(b) Current City of East Orange employees who are initially
assigned or reassigned to a safety-sensitive function in which
service has not been rendered for six months or more are
required to be tested prior to starting work in the new
function. This category includes, but is not limited to,
reassignments, temporary or interim appointments,
demotions, promotions, transfers and appointments resulting
from a reduction-in-force.
(c) All individuals will be notified of the result of any
preemployment test that is positive. An individual who tests
positive for a controlled substance will not be appointed.
(2) Post-accident testing.
(a) Following an accident involving a commercial motor vehicle,
employees shall be tested for alcohol and controlled substance
use when:
§ 60-79 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-79
C:594
[1] The accident involves the loss of human life; or
[2] The employee receives a citation under state or local law
for a moving traffic violation arising from the accident.
(b) Such testing shall be done as soon as practicable following the
accident, provided that:
[1] Under no circumstances shall a post-accident test for
alcohol be administered beyond the eight-hour period
immediately following the accident; and
[2] Under no circumstances shall a post-accident test for
controlled substance be administered beyond the thirtytwo-
hour period immediately following the accident.
(c) Under this type of testing, employees will be removed
immediately from the performance of safety-sensitive functions
pending the outcome of the test(s).
(3) Random testing.
(a) All employees covered by this policy will be subject to random,
unannounced drug and alcohol testing. Selection of employees
will be by a method employing a scientifically valid random
number general method and objective, neutral criteria which
ensure that every such employee has an equal statistical
chance of being selected each time.
(b) All employees will be subject to testing only while on duty, as
defined in § 60-79 herein. The testing frequency level shall be
in conformance with the standards established by the Federal
Highway Administration and published in the Federal Register
on an annual basis.
(c) Drivers who test positive for a controlled substance and/or
0.04 or above for alcohol will be removed from safety-sensitive
functions. They must not return to duty requiring safetysensitive
functions until they have been evaluated by a
substance abuse professional and complied with any treatment
recommendations. Drivers who test at an alcohol
concentration level of 0.02 to 0.039 must be removed from
safety-sensitive functions for 24 hours.
(4) Reasonable suspicion testing.
(a) Alcohol testing. An on-duty employee shall be required to
submit to an alcohol test when the supervisor has reasonable
suspicion to believe the employee has violated § 60-79, Policy,
Subsection B, Prohibited conduct, related to alcohol. The
supervisor's determination that reasonable suspicion exists
must be based upon specific, contemporaneous, articulable
observations concerning the appearance, behavior, speech or
§ 60-79 CHARTER § 60-79
C:595
body odors of the employee. Under no circumstances shall a
test for alcohol under these conditions be administered beyond
the eight-hour period immediately following the supervisor's
determination.
(b) Controlled substance testing.
[1] An on-duty employee shall be required to submit to a test
for controlled substances when the supervisor has
reasonable suspicion to believe the employee has violated
§ 60-79B, Prohibited conduct, related to controlled
substances. The supervisor's determination that
reasonable suspicion exists must be based upon specific,
contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning the
appearance, behavior, speech or body odors of the
employee. The observation may include indications of the
chronic and withdrawal effects of controlled substances.
[2] The required observations for alcohol and/or controlled
substances shall be made by a supervisor who has been
trained in accordance with § 60-79D of this policy.
[3] In all cases of reasonable suspicion testing, supervisors
shall be required to document their observations in a
standard manner as adopted in the Code of the City of East
Orange's Personnel Policies section.
[4] Under this type of testing, employees will be removed
immediately from the performance of safety-sensitive
functions pending the outcome of the test(s).
(5) Return-to-duty testing.
(a) Before a covered employee returns to duty requiring the
performance of safety-sensitive functions after engaging in
conduct prohibited by § 60-79B of this policy concerning
alcohol, the employee must undergo a return-to-duty alcohol
test with a result indicating an alcohol concentration of less
than 0.02.
(b) Individuals who are given an opportunity for a second alcohol
test, as described above, and are still found to have alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater, but less than 0.04, shall be
subject to disciplinary action.
(c) Before a covered employee returns to duty requiring the
performance of safety-sensitive functions after engaging in
conduct prohibited by § 60-79B of this policy concerning
controlled substances, the employee must undergo a return-toduty
controlled substance test with a result indicating a
verified negative result for controlled substance use.
§ 60-79 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-79
C:596
(6) Follow-up testing. When an employee is permitted to return to duty
requiring the performance of safety-sensitive functions, the
employee shall be subject to unannounced follow-up alcohol and/or
controlled substance tests at least six times in the first 12 months
following the return-to-duty. Additional follow-up testing after the
first year shall not exceed 60 months from the date of the
employee's return-to-duty. The number and frequency of such
follow-up testing shall be as directed by a substance abuse
professional.
D. Training. Persons designated to determine whether reasonable
suspicion exists to require an employee to undergo testing must receive
at least 60 minutes of training on alcohol misuse and receive at least an
additional 60 minutes of training on controlled substance use. The
training shall cover the physical, behavioral, speech and performance
indicators of probable alcohol misuse and use of controlled substances.
E. Confidentiality.
(1) Information regarding a medical condition obtained in the course
of drug and alcohol testing must be treated as a confidential
medical record. Such information shall be collected and maintained
on separate forms and in medical files separate from the
employee's personnel file.
(2) The laboratory performing drug testing under this policy shall
report individual test results to the Medical Review Officer (MRO)
only. The results shall not be disclosed by the laboratory to any
other person other than the individual who provided the sample.
(3) Statistical compilations, without individual identifiers, may be
made available to the public.
(4) Any individual who is the subject of a drug test shall, upon written
request, have access to any records relating to his/her drug test.
F. Employee notification.
(1) Each department within the City of East Orange shall establish the
necessary operational procedures to implement this policy in
accordance with the standards established in 49 CFR Parts 383 et
al., and provide notice to all covered employees by copy of the
policy and an explanation of the procedures prior to implementing
any testing procedures.
(2) All employees shall sign acknowledging the receipt of the policy
and an explanation of the procedures, and such receipt shall be
maintained in the employee's personnel file.
§ 60-79 CHARTER § 60-79
C:597

ARTICLE XV
Drug and Alcohol Testing for All Employees
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997]
§ 60-80. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
ALCOHOL — The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol
or other low-molecular-weight alcohols, including methyl and isopropyl
alcohol.
ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION (OR CONTENT) — The alcohol in a volume
of breath expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as
indicated by an evidential breath test.
ALCOHOL USE — The consumption of any beverage, mixture or
preparation, including medication, containing alcohol.
CITY — The City of East Orange.
CITY DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE (CDR) — The primary contact
person designated by the City to receive all information and/or reports from
the Medical Review Officer, the Breath Alcohol Technician, the Substance
Abuse Professional and the laboratories. The CDR is also the designated
contact person for inquiries regarding this article.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any of those substances listed under the
New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act (N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.).
COVERED EMPLOYEE — All City of East Orange employees.
DRUGS —
Any substance recognized as a drug in the official United States
pharmacopoeia and national formulary or official homeopathic
pharmacopoeia of the United States or any supplement to either of
them;
A.
Any substance intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of disease or other conditions in persons or
other animals;
B.
Any substance other than a device or food intended to affect the
structure or any function of the body of persons or other animals; or
C.
Any substance intended for use as a component of any article specified
in Subsection A, B or C, but does not include gases or devices or articles
intended for use or consumption in or for mechanical, industrial,
manufacturing or scientific applications or purposes.
D.
§ 60-80 CHARTER § 60-80
C:599
DRUGS/CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES TEST — A method for determining
the presence of drugs/controlled substances in a urine sample or blood
sampling using a scientifically reliable method.
FOLLOW-UP TEST — An alcohol and/or drugs/controlled substances test
administered to a covered employee who has violated the prohibitions of
this article and who has been permitted to return to duty after passing a
return-to-duty alcohol and/or drugs/controlled substances test.
ILLEGAL DRUGS — Drugs for which the possession, use, sale or
distribution is unlawful pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey or
any federal law or regulation. Illegal drugs, for the purpose of this article,
include drugs which are not legally obtainable and drugs which are legally
obtainable but have been obtained illegally.
INTOXICATING SUBSTANCE — Any substance which produces changes in
one's physical, mental or emotional state or behavior, including but not
limited to glue, paint thinner, etc.
POSSESSION — Having controlled substances which are not obtained
either directly from a doctor or pharmacist using a valid prescription, or
having controlled substances the possession or use of which is unlawful
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey or any federal law or
regulation.
REASONABLE SUSPICION TEST — An alcohol and/or drugs/controlled
substances test administered to a covered employee as a result of a trained
supervisor's or trained City official's reasonable belief that the covered
employee has violated the drug, alcohol or controlled substances
prohibitions of this article. A reasonable suspicion determination must be
based on specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning
the appearance, behavior, speech or body odors of the covered employee.
The observations may include indications of the chronic and/or withdrawal
effects of drugs/controlled substances or alcohol and any of the following:
REFUSAL TO SUBMIT (TO A DRUG, ALCOHOL OR CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES TEST) —
Documentation of unsatisfactory work performance or on-the-job
behavior.
A.
Evidence of the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or
use of drugs/controlled substances, alcohol or other prohibited
substances.
B.
Occurrence of a serious or potentially serious accident that may have
been caused by human error.
C.
Fights (physical contact), assaults and flagrant disregard or violations
of established safety, security or other work rules.
D.
A covered employee fails to provide an adequate amount of breath
during testing without a valid medical explanation after he or she has
received notice of the requirement for breath testing.
A.
§ 60-80 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-80
C:600
REPORTABLE INCIDENT — Any personal injury or property damage
involving a City employee that occurs on or off City-owned property during
assigned work hours or any time an employee is using a City-owned vehicle
or wearing a City uniform.
RETURN-TO-DUTY TEST — An alcohol and/or drugs/controlled substances
test administered prior to a covered employee being permitted to return to
duty, when the covered employee has violated this article.
SCREENING TEST (ALSO KNOWN AS "AN INITIAL TEST") —
SUPERVISOR — A management or supervisory employee of the City of East
Orange.
TRAINED SUPERVISOR or TRAINED CITY OFFICIAL — Any City supervisor
or any City management employee who has received the requisite training
in identifying the signs and symptoms of alcohol abuse and/or drugs/
controlled substances abuse.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL — As a result of the consumption
of alcohol, an employee's (or applicant's) ability to perform his or her job
is impaired to an appreciable degree. For the purposes of this definition,
a blood alcohol level of 0.10% alcohol in the blood by weight shall be
considered to be sufficient to establish said condition. An employee with a
blood alcohol level of less than 0.10% alcohol in the blood by weight may
also be considered to be under the influence of alcohol if job performance is
impaired to any appreciable degree.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS OR OTHER INTOXICATING
SUBSTANCES — As a result of the consumption, inhalation or injection or
any combination of alcohol, drug or any other intoxicating substance or any
combination of substances, an employee's job performance is impaired to
any appreciable degree.
A covered employee fails to provide adequate urine for drugs/controlled
substances testing without a valid medical explanation after he or she
has received notice of the requirement for urine testing.
B.
A covered employee engages in conduct that obstructs or interferes
with the testing process.
C.
A covered employee fails to be readily available for post-accident
testing.
D.
A covered employee fails to report to and undergo alcohol and drugs/
controlled substances testing at a collection site as required.
E.
In alcohol testing, a screening test means an analytical procedure
to determine whether a covered employee may have a prohibited
concentration of alcohol in his or her system.
A.
In drugs/controlled substances testing, a screening test means an
immunoassay screen (or other DHHS-approved test) to eliminate
negative urine specimens from further consideration.
B.
§ 60-80 CHARTER § 60-81
C:601
§ 60-81. Rules and regulations.
To implement this article, the following rules are established as conditions
of employment with the City:
A. The City will not hire any applicant who tests positive on a detection
test for illegal drugs or alcohol. Those individuals will be prohibited
from employment with the City for one year, unless they provide
certified documentation of successful completion of a substance abuse
rehabilitation program. Applicants who have completed a rehabilitation
program will be subject to drug screening prior to being employed.
B. Any City employee who is involved in a reportable incident (see
definitions) that results in injury to persons or property shall be subject
to an investigation. Employees will be directed to undergo a drug or
alcohol detection test to aid in determining fitness for duty if there is
reasonable suspicion that the employee was under the influence of
drugs or alcohol at the time of the incident.
C. An employee who refuses to participate in a required drug or alcohol
detection test will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
D. Based on the results of the investigation and drug or alcohol detection
testing, the employee may be subject to mandatory participation in a
rehabilitation program through the Employee Assistance Program and
disciplinary action in accordance with departmental or City guidelines
and established practices for various infractions.
E. An employee's fitness to continue in his or her current position while
enrolled in any such rehabilitation program will be determined on a
case-by-case basis. Employees who have completed a rehabilitation
program will be subject to random drug screening for the next year and
will sign a waiver consenting to the same.
F. Any City employee at any level who reports for work on City-owned
property or work sites will be directed to undergo a drug or alcohol
detection test to aid in determining fitness for duty if there is
reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the influence of drugs
or alcohol. An employee who refuses to participate in such testing will
be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of
employment.
G. All illegal drugs (see definitions) discovered during an investigation will
be given to the appropriate law enforcement agency and may result in
criminal prosecution. Drug or alcohol test results will be used for
administrative purposes only and will be kept confidential, unless
subpoenaed because of legal action.
H. The use, sale, possession or distribution of a narcotic, an intoxicating
substance or any illegal drug or alcohol while at work will subject an
employee to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
§ 60-81 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-81
C:602
§ 60-82. Exemption for prescribed medical treatment.
The use of a legally controlled substance as part of a prescribed medical
treatment by a licensed physician will not subject an employee to
disciplinary action or denial of employment if that treatment does not
adversely affect job performance. Prescribed use may be substantiated by
a physician's report or statement. If the use of prescribed drugs adversely
affects an employee's job performance or is detrimental to the public trust
or safety of other employees or citizens, it is in the best interest of the
employee and the City for the employee to be placed on a leave of absence
without pay. Leaves of absence will be used in accordance with current
policies.
§ 60-83. Screening process.
In keeping with the City's goal to establish and maintain a work
environment free from the effects of drugs and intoxicating substances and
to ensure the safety of citizens, the workplace and the work force, the
following procedures are established:
I. Supervisors shall take appropriate action to protect City personnel and
City property by removing from the work premises or site any individual
not in condition to perform assigned work in a normal and safe manner.
An employee who appears to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol
shall be taken to an authorized facility for drug and alcohol testing.
Employees shall not be allowed to drive any vehicle, if it appears that
they are under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
J. If any employee has reasonable suspicion that a supervisor is under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, his or her observations shall be reported
to the supervisor's immediate superior. If the employee feels that
reporting these observations in this manner would adversely affect his
or her working conditions, the report may be made to the Personnel
Department.
A. For all positions, applicants who have received an offer of employment
may be required to complete a drug and alcohol detection test in
addition to successful completion of any other physical examination
requirements. A positive finding of alcohol or illegal drugs will result in
denial of employment with the City.
B. Applicants for positions who do not submit to screening at the
appointed time will be denied employment.
C. Department heads, with input from the immediate supervisor, shall
initiate drug or alcohol screening of employees involved in reportable
incidents (see definitions) that result in injury to person or property, if
there is reasonable suspicion of substance abuse.
D. Drug or alcohol testing of employees may be initiated by department
heads, when there is a reasonable suspicion that substance abuse is
§ 60-81 CHARTER § 60-83
C:603
§ 60-84. Prohibitions.
occurring. The City Administrator shall be consulted, if possible, before
ordering a test.
E. Drug or alcohol screening of applicants or employees will include a
urinalysis and may also include a breath analysis and blood sample
testing. The consent form to be used for each such test is attached as
Exhibit B,122 and by this reference made a part hereof. Any positive
readings following urine testing will be confirmed by an alternate
testing method before any management action is taken. All positive
urine or blood samples will be retained by the laboratory for one year or
longer if an appeal or court action is in process.
A. Alcohol.
(1) Covered employees are prohibited from reporting for duty or
remaining on duty when their ability to perform assigned functions
is adversely affected by alcohol or when their blood alcohol
concentration is 0.04 or greater. Covered employees are prohibited
from possessing or using alcohol while on duty. Covered employees
are prohibited from having used alcohol within four hours of
reporting for duty. Employees are cautioned that refraining from
alcohol for four hours before reporting for duty may not result in a
negative test. Alcohol levels are affected by the amount of alcohol
consumed, physical characteristics of the employee and the
employee's rate of metabolizing alcohol which has been consumed.
Covered employees are prohibited from using alcohol during the
hours that they are on call. (Note: Covered employees are
cautioned that prescription drugs and over-the-counter
medications which contain alcohol may result in the employee
having a positive test.)
(2) A covered employee is prohibited from being on duty or operating a
City motor vehicle while the employee possesses alcohol unless the
alcohol is being transported on City business.
(3) A covered employee required to take a post-accident alcohol test is
prohibited from using alcohol for eight hours following the accident
or until he/she undergoes a post-accident test, whichever occurs
first.
(4) A covered employee is prohibited from refusing to submit to a postaccident,
reasonable suspicion, return-to-duty or follow-up alcohol
test. A driver is prohibited from refusing to submit to a
preemployment, post-accident, random, reasonable suspicion,
return-to-duty or follow-up alcohol test.
B. Controlled substance.
122. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 60-83 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-84
C:604
(1) A covered employee is prohibited from reporting for duty or
remaining on duty when the covered employee uses any drugs/
controlled substances, except when the use is pursuant to the
instructions of a physician who has advised the employee that the
substance does not adversely affect his or her ability to safely
perform his or her duties.
C. Other prohibitions and requirements.
(1) A covered employee is prohibited from failing to provide access to
City-owned vehicles, tool boxes, lockers, desks or other Citysupplied
equipment after a determination of reasonable suspicion
that the covered employee is in violation of these provisions.
(2) A covered employee is prohibited from obstructing or interfering
with the administration of any drug or alcohol testing.
(3) A covered employee shall not engage in any other conduct
prohibited by this article.
(4) City work rules not specifically cited in this article remain in full
force and effect.
(5) Before performing work-related duties, covered employees must
notify their supervisor if they are taking any legally prescribed
medication or therapeutic drug or any nonprescription drug which
contains any amount of alcohol or which carries a warning label
that indicates the employee's mental functioning, motor skills or
judgment may be adversely affected by the use of this medication.
A written report of this notification is to be filed by the supervisor
with the Personnel Department. It is the responsibility of the
employee to accurately inform his/her physician in order that the
physician may determine if the prescribed substance could
interfere with the safe and effective performance of the employee's
duties or operation of City equipment. However, any employee who
uses or possesses medication containing alcohol while on duty or
who tests positive for alcohol will be removed from his/her position
and subject to provisions of this policy, even though the reason for
the positive alcohol test is the fact that the employee's prescription
medication contains alcohol. A legally prescribed drug is one where
the employee has a prescription or other written approval from a
physician for the use of the drug in the course of medical
treatment. The prescription or container label must include the
patient's name, the name of the substance and the quantity/amount
to be taken. The misuse or abuse of legal drugs while performing
City business is prohibited by this article. (Note: In many instances
physicians may be able to prescribe nonalcohol alternatives.)
(6) The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or
use of a drug, controlled substance, alcohol or drug paraphernalia
is strictly prohibited for all covered employees in the workplace.
§ 60-84 CHARTER § 60-85
C:605
§ 60-85. Notice.
Before performing any drug, alcohol or controlled substances test under
this article, employees other than drivers being tested shall be notified
that the alcohol and/or drugs/controlled substances test is required by this
article.
§ 60-86. Reasonable suspicion testing.
A. A covered employee shall promptly submit to an alcohol and/or drugs/
controlled substances test whenever a trained supervisor or trained
City official has a reasonable suspicion to believe that the covered
employee has violated the drug, alcohol or controlled substances
prohibitions of this policy.
B. The observations required by the subsection above must be made
during, just preceding or just after the period of the workday that the
covered employee is required to be in compliance with this policy.
C. After determination of reasonable suspicion, the alcohol test shall be
administered within two hours unless the supervisor or City official
prepares and maintains on file a record stating the reasons the test was
not administered within that time. The test may be conducted up to
eight hours after the reasonable suspicion determination is made. If the
test is not administered within eight hours after the determination,
attempts to administer the test shall stop, and the supervisor or City
official shall record and maintain on file the reasons why the test was
not conducted.
D. No covered employee shall be subject to reasonable suspicion drug
testing later than 24 hours following the determination that reasonable
suspicion exists to require the covered employee to undergo such test.
If the test is not administered within 24 hours after the reasonable
suspicion determination, attempts to administer the test shall stop, and
the supervisor or City official shall record and maintain on file the
reasons why the test was not conducted.
E. A trained supervisor or trained City official who makes the
determination that reasonable suspicion exists to conduct an alcohol
test shall not conduct the alcohol test of the covered employee.
F. A written record shall be made of the observations leading to a drugs/
controlled substances reasonable suspicion test and shall be signed by
the trained supervisor or trained City official who made the
observations within 32 hours of the observed behavior or before the
results of the drugs/controlled substances test are released, whichever
is earlier.
G. A written record shall be made of the observations leading to an alcohol
reasonable suspicion test and shall be signed by the trained supervisor
or trained City official who made the observations within 24 hours of
the observed behavior.
§ 60-85 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-86
C:606
§ 60-87. Post-accident testing.
§ 60-88. Return-to-duty testing.
H. Nothing herein shall prohibit a supervisor or a City official from
determining that a covered employee is unfit for duty. Nothing in this
subsection shall be used to circumvent the requirements stated in this
§ 60-86.
A. A surviving covered employee shall be subject to post-accident alcohol
and drugs/controlled substances testing as soon as practicable
following the accident.
B. A covered employee subject to post-accident testing shall be subject to
a breath alcohol test not later than eight hours following the accident
and to a drugs/controlled substances test no later than 32 hours
following the accident.
C. If an alcohol test is not administered within two hours following the
accident, the trained supervisor or trained City official shall prepare
and maintain on file a record stating the reasons the test was not
administered. If an alcohol test is not administered within eight hours
following the accident, the trained supervisor or trained City official
shall cease attempts to administer an alcohol test and shall prepare and
maintain the same record. If a drugs/controlled substances test is not
administered within 32 hours following the accident, the trained
supervisor or City official shall cease attempts to administer a drugs/
controlled substances test and prepare and maintain on file a record
stating the reasons the test was not promptly administered.
D. A covered employee who is subject to post-accident testing shall remain
readily available for such testing or shall be deemed to have refused to
submit to testing. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the
delay of necessary medical attention or to prohibit the covered
employee from leaving the scene of the accident for the period of time
necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident, obtain
necessary medical treatment for injured people or to obtain materials
necessary to secure the accident site.
A. A covered employee who has undergone an alcohol test with a result of
0.04 or greater or who has a confirmed positive test for drugs/
controlled substances shall, at the sole discretion of the City, be
permitted to return to work subject to the following and the follow-up
testing provisions in § 60-89 below.
B. If an employee other than a driver has violated the alcohol prohibitions
above, he or she shall undergo a return-to-duty alcohol test with a
result indicating an alcohol concentration of less than 0.04 before
returning to duty. The covered employee shall first have been evaluated
by a substance abuse professional who shall determine what assistance,
§ 60-86 CHARTER § 60-88
C:607
§ 60-89. Follow-up testing.
A covered employee who has undergone an alcohol test with a result of
0.04 or greater or who has tested confirmed positive for drugs/controlled
substances and who is subject to and has complied with the return-toduty
testing provisions above shall, at the City's discretion, be permitted to
return to work subject to the following:
if any, the covered employee needs in resolving problems associated
with alcohol misuse and drugs/controlled substances use.
C. Following a determination by a substance abuse professional that the
covered employee is in need of assistance in resolving problems
associated with alcohol misuse and/or use of drugs/controlled
substances, the covered employee shall comply with all initial
requirements prescribed by the SAP and shall remain in compliance
with any and all prescribed and recommended rehabilitation and/or
treatment programs.
D. If the covered employee has violated the drugs/controlled substances
prohibitions, he or she shall undergo a return-to-duty drugs/controlled
substances test with a result indicating a verified negative result for
drugs/controlled substances use before returning to duty.
E. The covered employee shall be subject to such return-to-duty testing for
both alcohol misuse and use of drugs/controlled substances if the
substance abuse professional recommends testing for both alcohol and
drugs/controlled substances.
A. The covered employee has been evaluated by a substance abuse
professional who shall determine what assistance, if any, the covered
employee needs in resolving problems associated with alcohol misuse
and/or drugs/controlled substance use; and
B. The covered employee shall be subject to unannounced follow-up
testing.
(1) The covered employee shall be subject to such follow-up testing for
both alcohol misuse of drugs/controlled substances if the substance
abuse professional recommends testing for both alcohol and drugs/
controlled substances.
(2) The number and frequency of such tests shall be determined by the
substance abuse professional and shall consist of at least six tests
in the first 12 months following the covered employee's return to
duty. Follow-up testing shall not exceed 60 months after the
covered employee's return to duty.
(3) The substance abuse professional may terminate such tests at any
time after the first six tests have been administered if he or she
determines the tests are no longer necessary.
§ 60-88 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-90
C:608
§ 60-90. Discipline.
§ 60-91. Confidentiality.
§ 60-92. Drug-free workplace.
A. Just cause for discipline up to and including discharge shall be
established when a covered employee engages in any conduct in
violation of the provisions of this article or City work rules.
B. Failure to comply with any required evaluation by a substance abuse
professional or failure to comply and remain in compliance with any and
all prescribed or recommended rehabilitation and/or treatment
programs shall establish just cause for discipline up to and including
discharge.
A. All records shall be maintained in a secure location with controlled
access.
B. Except as required or permitted by law or expressly authorized or
required by Title 49, CFR Subtitle B, Chapter III, Section 382.405, the
City shall not release information that is contained in records.
C. Records shall be made available to a subsequent employer upon receipt
of a written request from a covered employee. Disclosure by the
subsequent employer is permitted only as expressly authorized by the
terms of the covered employee's request.
D. Upon written request, a covered employee is entitled to copies of any
records pertaining to the covered employee's use of drugs/controlled
substances or alcohol, including any records pertaining to his or her
drug, alcohol or drugs/controlled substances tests.
E. All results of alcohol and/or drugs/controlled substances testing
conducted pursuant to this policy shall be made available, upon
request, to the Secretary of Transportation, any DOT agency or any
state or local officials with regulatory authority over the City or any of
its drivers.
A. Reporting a drug conviction. The Drug-Free Workplace Act, Public Law
100-690, Title V, Subtitle D, makes it a condition of employment that all
City employees notify the City (your immediate supervisor or the
Personnel Director) of any criminal statute conviction for a violation
occurring in the workplace no later than five days after such conviction.
Within 10 days of receiving such notice of conviction, the City will notify
the appropriate federal contracting or granting agency, if any, as
required. This is required by the federal law. Within 30 days of notice of
the workplace drug conviction, the City will:
(1) Require the employee to satisfactorily participate in a drug or
alcohol assistance or rehabilitation program that is approved by the
City; or
§ 60-90 CHARTER § 60-92
C:609
§ 60-93. Review and appeal.
§ 60-94. Implementation.
(2) Take appropriate disciplinary action up to and including discharge.
A. Upon report of a positive test, the employee or applicant will be notified
of the test results. As part of that notification, he or she will be provided
an opportunity to explain any positive results. An employee or applicant
whose test results were positive may, at the employee's or applicant's
own expense, have a retest conducted of the original sample at a
laboratory of the employee's choice that has been pre-approved by the
City. An employee or applicant shall request such retest within 30 days
of being notified of the original test results.
B. The laboratory used for the retest shall have chain of custody
procedures to ensure proper identification, labeling and handling of
test samples and proper exchange with and return of the samples to the
original medical group or laboratory. Following review of the appeal
process, a final determination will be made by the appropriate
authority. Employees who have disciplinary action taken against them
as a result of a positive drug test may file a grievance or appeal under
the applicable grievance or appeal procedure.
A. Substance abuse screening will be conducted by certified operators of
breath alcohol testing devices or by the medical group or groups
responsible for administering preemployment physical examinations.
The integrity of the urine or blood sample being tested or the breath
test record card will be ensured by an explicit chain-of-custody
procedure developed by the medical group or laboratory. Any testing,
testing-related documents and test results will be kept confidential and
will only be released to the employee or applicant, the Personnel
Department Head, a department administrator or a counselor of the
Employee Assistant Program. Further disclosure of such information is
prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee
or applicant. Any breach of confidentiality will subject the employee
responsible to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
B. The Personnel Department will assist supervisors in policy
implementation, day-to-day administration and with disciplinary action
arising from implementation of the article.
C. A training program will be provided to assist supervisory personnel in
identifying drug and alcohol use among employees. The training will be
directed towards helping supervisors recognize the conduct and
behavior that give rise to a reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use.
D. The Personnel Manager will be responsible for scheduling the
screening of applicants and employees during normal working hours.
Department directors will assume responsibility for scheduling
employees for testing when the Personnel Manager is not available.
§ 60-92 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-94
C:610
E. This article is intended to be a unilateral expression of the general
policies, procedures and guidelines concerning substance abuse and
the City's contractual rights of employment, whether express or
implied, between the City and its employees. The City reserves the right
to change these provisions.
§ 60-94 CHARTER § 60-94
C:611

ARTICLE XVI
Employment of Police Officers by Private Parties
[Added 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003; amended 11-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 30-2011; 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 15-2016]
§ 60-95. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure providing for the
acquisition of and compensation to members of the police force during offduty
hours by private parties requiring special police services.
§ 60-96. Assignments of off-duty police officers.
Eligibility and limitations. Sworn members of the East Orange Police
Department who are authorized to engage in off-duty employment shall be
permitted to accept police-related employment, in accordance with the East
Orange Police Department Rules and Regulations, for private employers
who are separate and independent from the City of East Orange, only
during off-duty hours, to perform public safety functions on behalf of and
as assigned by the Public Safety Director or the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer of the Police Department, while receiving compensation from the
Police Department at the rates established by the governing body of the City
of East Orange, at such times as will not interfere with the efficient actual
performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the City.
§ 60-97. Request for services.
A. Approval of Public Safety Director. Any person or entity wishing to
employ off-duty East Orange police officers as security officers (as an
employee, agent or subcontractor of a private security company or
private employer) shall first obtain the approval of the Public Safety
Director or his or her designee, which approval shall be granted if, in
the opinion of the Public Safety Director or his or her designee, such
employment is necessary and would not be inconsistent with the
efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police Department and
would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the officer
or officers who are to perform the work.
B. All road construction, traffic control or public safety functions required
which interfere with motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic on City streets
(curb to curb) shall require the use of a uniformed police officer. In
order to maximize safety, it is encouraged that all vendors utilize East
Orange police officers. These vendors are required to schedule
employment of East Orange police officers through the Police
Department's Outside Employment Unit.
C. The Public Safety Director or his or her designee is hereby authorized
to execute an agreement with the applicant for services required, which
agreement shall set forth the specific nature of the services to be
performed, the location, dates and hours of service, payment
§ 60-95 CHARTER § 60-97
C:613
§ 60-98. Police uniforms.
East Orange police officers performing off-duty police-related services for
applicants shall be in full police uniform while said services are being
provided.
§ 60-99. Off-duty employment escrow account.
arrangements mandated by this article, insurance coverage or any
other provisions required by law or regulation of the State of New
Jersey. The applicant must first file a request for services with the Police
Department's Outside Employment Unit.
D. All requests to the City for the services of off-duty law enforcement
officers in the City of East Orange Police Department shall be
forwarded to the Public Safety Director for posting within the time
frame established by the Police Department. The Public Safety Director
in his or her discretion may approve emergency requests for services.
E. All requests to the East Orange Police Department for the services of
off-duty law enforcement officers for a period of one week or longer
shall be forwarded to the Public Safety Director or his or her designee
for posting at least 10 business days before such services are required.
Any law enforcement officers, when so employed by private employers,
shall be compensated at the rate set forth in § 60-99.1.
F. All requests to the East Orange Police Department for service of offduty
law enforcement officers for a period of less than one week shall
be forwarded to the Public Safety Director or his or her designee for
posting within seven business days prior to the desired start work date.
Any law enforcement officers, when so employed by private employers,
shall be compensated at the rates set forth in § 60-99.1.
G. In emergency situations, requests to the East Orange Police
Department for the services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall
be made as necessary to the Public Safety Director or his or her
designee, who shall use his or her discretion in approving or denying
that request, considering the interests of the Police Department.
H. Any law enforcement officers, when so employed, shall not be
considered an employee of the City, except for discipline purposes. Any
and all wages earned for outside employment shall not be applied
toward the pension benefits of law enforcement officers so employed,
nor shall hours worked for outside employment be considered in any
way compensable as overtime under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29
U.S.C. § 201 et seq., or compensable in any other manner that requires
the City to pay the officers by City funds through its payroll system.
I. The Police Department Policy and Procedures shall be revised to be in
compliance with this section and N.J.S.A. 45:19A-9 et seq.
§ 60-97 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-99
C:614
A. Establishment. To assure the timely payment of wages to police officers
who perform off-duty services, and to meet the requirements of the Fair
Labor Standards Act, the Chief Financial Officer of the City of East
Orange shall establish an escrow account known as the "off-duty
employment trust account," or such other name as assigned by the
Chief Financial Officer in accordance with appropriate rules and
statutes, which trust fund is dedicated for the receipt of fees collected
from private persons or entities for the payment to police officers for
off-duty or outside employment services. The off-duty employment
escrow account shall be administered by the City's Finance Division.
B. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in East Orange shall estimate the number of hours
such law enforcement services are required, which estimate shall be
approved in writing by the Public Safety Director, or his or her
designee, and upon Public Safety Director's approval, a copy of said
approval shall be forwarded to the City's Finance Division. The person
or entity requesting the services shall then forward payment for
services for the total estimated hours of service, the rates of
compensation and administrative fees as set forth in § 60-99.1 to the
Finance Division for deposit in the off-duty employment escrow account
prior to the commencement of said services.
C. In any instance where the number of hours required is unknown and
cannot be reasonably estimated, or is anticipated to be in excess of 10
days, the person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer shall deposit an amount sufficient to cover the rate
of compensation and administrative fees as set forth in § 60-99.1 for the
equivalent of 10 days prior to the commencement of any work. Any
unused portion of the deposit shall be returned or credited against the
final amount owed.
D. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law enforcement
officers, the Public Safety Director or his or her designee shall verify
that the balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for
the number of hours specified in the request for services. The Public
Safety Director or his or her designee shall not post a request for
services from any person or entity unless all fees and compensation
required in the manner described above have been deposited in the offduty
employment escrow account. All payments must be remitted
directly to the City of East Orange Finance Division for deposit in said
account. No officer shall be paid directly by any employer for requested
services nor provide any such services for more hours than are
specified in the request for services.
E. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
§ 60-99 CHARTER § 60-99
C:615
§ 60-99.1. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for
services; equipment costs.
F. In the event the funds in the escrow account should become depleted or
that the escrow account falls below the designated level, services of offduty
law enforcement officers shall cease, and further requests for
additional or future services shall not be honored or posted until
additional funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed above.
G. The Chief of the East Orange Police Department, or his designee, shall
make a written report to the Public Safety Director every 90 days
regarding the status of each account and highlight each deficient
account holder. Payments to police officers shall be on a biweekly basis
with all appropriate deductions.
A. Absent any contractual agreements with a vendor or contractor to the
contrary, the following rates of compensation apply:
(1) Traffic control, parades and events, movie/TV sets: $75 per hour.
(2) Store or building security: $25 per hour.
(3) Supervisory fee: $5 per hour added to the applicable fee.
B. All off-duty employment law enforcement officers shall be guaranteed a
minimum of four hours and be compensated for any fraction thereof, or
whole hour, in addition thereto.
C. A supervisor will be required for every six police personnel assigned to
a security officer company. The supervisory fee will be paid to the
highest-ranking member of the Department assigned to the vendor
(referring to private security company or private employer).
D. An additional fee of $5 per officer per hour is hereby established to
cover administrative costs, overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses of the
City.
E. Any commercial single store detail, and details for or on behalf of taxexempt
organizations, nonprofit [501(c)(3)] organizations, civic
organizations, and individuals in noncommercial situations shall be at
the hourly rate of $25. However, any such details deemed by the Public
Safety Director or his/her designee, based upon prior history, to involve
major or unusual crowd control issues, including, but not limited to,
parades and festivals, then in that event the hourly rate shall be $57 per
hour.
F. Exemption. All public utility companies are exempt from the provisions
set forth in this section requiring advance payment to the trust account,
providing, however, that there are no amounts previously due that are
outstanding for a period in excess of 15 days. Any such delinquent
§ 60-99 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-99.1
C:616
§ 60-99.2. Public emergency.
The Public Safety Director or his or her designee shall have the authority
to order any police officer engaged in off-duty assignments within the City
of East Orange to respond to an emergency situation within East Orange.
The Public Safety Director or his or her designee shall also have the right to
order any off-duty assignment to be terminated whenever said assignment
creates an unacceptable risk to the health, safety and welfare of the off-duty
officer and/or the citizens of East Orange.
§ 60-99.3. Insurance requirements.
balances shall require advance payment of the amount outstanding
prior to any officer engaging in any further off-duty assignments.
G. Cancellation. In the event that the person or entity requesting the offduty
law enforcement officers fails to contact the City of East Orange at
least four hours prior to the scheduled start time to cancel the job, or
the officer works less than four hours and the job is completed, the
officer is entitled to be paid for the minimum of four hours.
H. Request for City-owned vehicles. All requests for City-owned vehicles
for use exclusively by an officer while performing public safety
functions on behalf of and as assigned by the Police Department must
be reviewed by the Public Safety Director.
(1) Marked police vehicle: $10 per hour.
I. The request shall be approved in writing by the Public Safety Director
if, in the opinion of the Public Safety Director, the intended use of the
vehicle by the off-duty officer would not be inconsistent with the rules
and regulations of the East Orange Police Department, the laws of this
state and/or the efficient functioning and good reputation of the East
Orange Police Department.
J. The aforesaid rates may be reviewed from time to time as may be
appropriate; however, they shall remain in full force and effect until
appropriately amended.
K. The Police Department Policy and Procedures shall be revised to be in
compliance with this article and N.J.S.A. 45:19A-9 et seq.
A. The applicant (private security company or private employer) shall be
responsible for providing all insurance coverage as required by law. The
applicant shall provide East Orange with appropriate certificates of
insurance naming East Orange and the police officers as additional
insureds and evidencing that the police officer and the City are covered
by general liability coverage on an occurrence basis of at least
$1,000,000 each occurrence and workers' compensation insurance with
respect to the services to be provided. The certificate of insurance or
the policy shall contain the following language: "The City of East
Orange, its agents, servants and administrators are included as
§ 60-99.1 CHARTER § 60-99.3
C:617
§ 60-99.4. Indemnification and duty to defend.
additional insureds with respect to general liability coverage as
required by written contract."
B. As an alternative, the Public Safety Director, after consultation with the
City's Risk Manager, may accept a broad form policy endorsement in
addition to a certificate of insurance (with language satisfactory to the
City's Risk Manager, in accordance with City policies and procedures)
naming the City of East Orange and the police officer as additional
insureds under the policies.
A. The person or entity requesting the services of the off-duty police shall
execute an appropriate hold harmless and indemnity agreement, which
shall provide that such person or entity shall indemnify, defend, and
hold harmless the City of East Orange, its agents, servants and
administrators from and against any and all claims, or actions at law,
whether for personal injury, property damage or liability, including any
cost of defense incurred by the City of East Orange which arises from
any acts or omissions of the insured, its agents, or employees arising
out of or related to the use of off-duty East Orange police officers.
B. This indemnification and hold-harmless agreement and the duty to
defend shall apply in all instances, whether the City of East Orange is a
plaintiff or is made a direct party to the initial action or claim or is
subsequently made a party to the action by third-party in-pleading or is
made a party to a collateral action arising, in whole or in part, from any
of the issues from the original cause of action or claim.
§ 60-99.3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-99.4
C:618
ARTICLE XVII
Supplemental Benefits and Compensation Upon Retirement for City
Officers and Employees Not Covered by Bargaining Unit
[Added 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 31-2004]
§ 60-100. Insurance premiums; earned and unused sick leave.
[Amended 9-12-2005 by Ord. No. 21-2005]
A. Each City officer or full-time employee who is not entitled to become a
part of a bargaining unit shall be entitled, upon retirement from
employment with the City of East Orange, to the benefits and
compensation enumerated under this article. For the purposes of this
article, the effective date of retirement from a state-administered
pension system shall be defined as the member's separation date from
employment with the City of East Orange after having filed an
application for retirement with a state-administered pension system.
[Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 5-2007]
(1) Payment of insurance premiums after retirement.
(a) The City shall assume upon request by the retiree the entire
cost of the premiums for health insurance selected by the City,
which shall include administrative fees and eligible
dependents for retirees who have retired from a stateadministered
retirement system after 25 years or more of
service credit in a state-administered retirement system and a
period of service of 25 years with the City at the time of
retirement; or who have retired from a state-administered
retirement system and reached the age of 65 years or older
after 25 years or more of service credit in a state-administered
retirement system and a period of service of 15 years with the
City at the time of retirement; or who have retired from a stateadministered
retirement system and reached the age of 65
years or older with at least 20 years of service to the City, 15
years of which must have been continuous and uninterrupted
at the time of retirement.
(b) The City shall assume, upon request by the retiree, 50% of the
costs for health insurance premiums selected by the City,
which shall include administrative fees and eligible
dependents for retirees from a state-administered retirement
system who have retired and reached the age of 62 years or
older with at least 15 years of service with the City or who have
retired on a disability pension with at least 10 years of service
with the City.
(2) Restrictions on payment of premiums after retirement. The City's
health insurance coverage shall become secondary for retirees who
are eligible for medicare. The City shall not pay the insurance
premiums for retirees who are eligible for a state health benefits
§ 60-100 CHARTER § 60-100
C:619
plan. Retirees who are not eligible for payment of insurance
premiums pursuant to Subsection A(1) may opt to pay the entire
cost of coverage for themselves and their eligible dependents
through coverage maintained by the City. A retiree's health
insurance and benefits shall terminate upon the death of any
retiree who has received health insurance pursuant to Subsection
A(1) of this section.
(3) Effective date. Subsections A(1) and (2) of this section shall apply
to retirees who retire on or after January 1, 2005. Retirees eligible
for health benefits pursuant to Subsections A(1) and (2) who retired
prior to the amendment of this section shall not be eligible for
reimbursement from the City of premiums already paid.
B. Compensation for earned and unused sick leave. Upon request of the
retiree, the City shall make a lump-sum payment for earned and unused
accumulated sick leave which is credited to the retiree on the effective
date of retirement, as defined herein, from a state-administered
retirement system in the manner and to the extent provided for herein.
Only City officers and full-time employees who have accumulated sick
leave days of 100 or more and completed 10 years or more of service
shall be entitled as a right to receive the lump-sum payment provided
for in this section. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011;
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 10-2011]
(1) Such supplemental compensation payment shall be computed at
the rate of 1/2 of the eligible City officer's or employee's daily base
rate of pay excluding longevity for each day of earned and unused
accumulated sick leave based upon the City officer or employee's
average annual compensation received during the last year of his
or her employment prior to the effective date of his or her
retirement; provided, however, that no such lump-sum
supplemental compensation payment shall exceed $15,000.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection B(1) above, up to and through
December 31, 2011, each City officer or employee who has
accumulated sick leave days of 100 or more and has completed 10
years or more of service with the City of East Orange shall be
entitled to receive full lump-sum payment of accumulated sick
leave, not to exceed 1/2 of the City officer or employee's annual
base salary, excluding longevity.
(3) The lump-sum supplemental compensation provided for
accumulated sick days shall not be treated as part of the base
salary and is not intended to in any way affect, increase or decrease
any pension or retirement benefits to such retired City officer or
employee.
(4) A City officer or employee who incurs a separation in service for
any reason except that due to temporary layoff shall have his or her
§ 60-100 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-100
C:620
accumulated sick leave computed only from the date of return to
employment.
(5) Notice of intention to claim the benefit provided for herein must be
made in writing to the City Administrator no later than 30 days
after the filing of an application for a type of retirement with the
State Division of Pensions and Benefits for which the retiree may
qualify. Eligible retirement types shall be defined as including
service, early, veteran, deferred, ordinary disability, accidental
disability retirement or such other type of retirement as the retiree
may qualify for through a state-administered retirement system.
The City, in its sole discretion, may defer payment of all or part of
the benefit to the fiscal year following the retirement.
§ 60-100 CHARTER § 60-100
C:621

ARTICLE XVIII
Sexual Harassment Policy
[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 17-2009]
§ 60-101. Purpose; responsibility of department heads.
§ 60-102. Scope; when effective.
A. Recognition of the dignity and worth of each person in municipal
employment is vital to the public sector workplace. All employees,
regardless of sex or sexual orientation, shall be permitted to work in an
environment free from all forms of unlawful discrimination and conduct
which are sexually harassing.
B. Sexual harassment is a form of unlawful sex discrimination which
undermines the integrity of the employment relationship. Sexual
harassment is a violation of the City's personnel policies and state and
federal laws. It debilitates morale, is offensive, interferes with work
productivity and creates a hostile and intimidating work environment.
C. The purpose of this policy is not to regulate personal morality or to
encroach upon one's personal life, but to demonstrate a strong
commitment to maintaining a workplace free of sexual harassment. The
goals of this policy are to: inform City employees as to what conduct
constitutes sexual harassment; ensure that all employees understand
that sexual harassment will neither be condoned nor tolerated; create a
procedure to promptly, thoroughly, confidentially and respectfully
handle complaints, and ensure that retaliation against complainants or
participants in any investigation does not occur. In keeping with these
goals, sexual harassment in the workplace is strictly prohibited by the
City. All employees have the right to work in an environment which is
free from discrimination of any kind.
D. It is the primary responsibility of department heads, division heads and
supervisory personnel to ensure that a working environment free from
sexual harassment is provided to all employees. This responsibility
pertains not only to conduct which may be undertaken by supervisory
and nonsupervisory City employees, but also to actions taken by
nonemployees conducting business with the City. To ensure all City
employees are aware of their rights and responsibilities, this policy is to
be distributed to all City employees.
A. It is the City's policy to prohibit sexual harassment of an employee by
another employee, management representative, supplier, volunteer or
business invitee. This sexual harassment policy applies to conduct that
occurs in any location that is operated by the City or considered a
workplace of any City employee or volunteer, as well as any location
that can reasonably be regarded as an extension of the workplace, such
as at any off-site social or business function or any other non-City
facility where City business is being conducted. Further, this policy
§ 60-101 CHARTER § 60-102
C:623
§ 60-103. Sexual and other harassment defined.
applies to all work-related conduct, including conduct that occurs offduty,
if such conduct may negatively affect the work environment.
B. Consensual, romantic and/or sexual relationships between a supervisor
and any subordinate, including one not directly under the supervisor,
will compromise the City's ability to enforce its policy against
harassment. Consequently, if such relationships arise, they will be
considered carefully by the City and appropriate action will be taken.
Such action may include, but is not limited to, a change in the
responsibilities of the individuals involved in such a relationship or the
transfer of location within the City to diminish or eliminate the
supervisory relationship and workplace contact that may exist. To the
extent that such remedial actions are impracticable, one of the
employees involved in the relationship may be asked to leave his or her
employment with the City. Any employee involved in such a relationship
is required to report the relationship to the City Administrator and/or
his or her department head.
C. This policy shall take effect on the date of adoption and apply to all
complaints made on or after that date. This policy shall continue in
force until changed and approved by the Mayor and City Council.
A. "Sexual harassment" is defined as unwelcomed sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct based
on gender when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
(2) Submission to rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment, including, but not limited
to:
(a) Gender harassment: generalized gender-based remarks and
behavior, i.e., use of stereotypes, offensive, insulting,
derogatory or degrading remarks based on gender or sexual
orientation, using sexually explicit language, gender- or sexbased
pranks or jokes, and the display of sexually suggestive
objects or pictures in the workplace.
(b) Seductive behavior: inappropriate, unwanted or offensive
physical or verbal sexual advances, i.e., unwelcomed or
repeated flirtations, propositions or advances, unwelcomed
physical contact, whistling, leering, improper gestures, tricks
or horseplay.
§ 60-102 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-103
C:624
(c) Sexual bribery: solicitation of sexual activity or other sexlinked
behavior by promise or reward, i.e., demands for sexual
favors in exchange for favorable or preferential treatment,
such as a raise or a good performance evaluation.
(d) Sexual coercion: coercion of sexual activity by threat of
punishment, i.e., threatening to take or taking adverse
employment actions, such as a discharge, demotion or
reassignment, if sexual favors are not granted.
(e) Sexual assault: gross sexual imposition like touching, fondling,
grabbing or assault.
B. While not exhaustive, the following types of conduct may rise to the
level of sexual harassment:
(1) Wolf whistles.
(2) Discussion of one's partner's sexual inadequacies.
(3) Sexual innuendo.
(4) Comments about a man's or a woman's body.
(5) Brushing or rubbing the sexual parts of another person's body.
(6) Tales of sexual exploitation.
(7) Graphic descriptions of pornography.
(8) Pressure for dates.
(9) Sexually explicit gestures.
(10) Unwelcome touching or hugging.
(11) Sexual sneak attacks (e.g., grabbing breasts, buttocks or genitals).
(12) Sexist jokes, cartoons or graffiti.
(13) Obscene phone calls.
(14) Displaying pornographic material in the workplace.
(15) Insisting that workers wear revealing clothes.
(16) Stalking.
(17) Indecent exposure.
(18) Sexual assault.
(19) Pressing or rubbing up against the victim.
(20) Inappropriate gifts (e.g., lingerie).
(21) Soliciting sexual services.
§ 60-103 CHARTER § 60-103
C:625
§ 60-104. Types of sexual harassment claims.
(22) Deliberate humiliation or intimidation based on one's gender.
(23) Speculation about sexual experiences.
(24) Deliberate physical interference with or restriction of another's
movements.
C. Other harassment defined. For the purposes of this policy, "other
harassment" is defined as verbal or physical conduct that denigrates or
shows hostility or aversion toward an individual because of his or her
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, religion, gender,
disability, marital status, affectional or sexual orientation, veteran
status, domestic partner status, genetic information, atypical
hereditary cellular or blood trait or any other legally protected
classification, and that:
(1) Creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment; or
(2) Unreasonably interferes with an individual's work performance.
D. Examples of other harassment include using epithets or slurs; mocking;
ridiculing or mimicking another's culture, accent, appearance or
customs; threatening, intimidating or engaging in hostile or offensive
acts that focus on an individual's race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, age, religion, gender, including gender identity or expression,
disability, marital status, affectional or sexual orientation, veteran
status, domestic partner status, genetic information, atypical
hereditary cellular or blood trait or any other legally protected
classification, including jokes and pranks; the displaying on walls,
bulletin boards or elsewhere on City premises, or circulating in the
workplace, written or graphic material that denigrates or shows
hostility or aversion towards a person or group because of race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, age, religion, gender, disability, marital
status, affectional or sexual orientation, veteran status, domestic
partner status, genetic information, atypical hereditary cellular or
blood trait or any other legally protected classification.
A. Quid pro quo sexual harassment ("this for that"). This type of sexual
harassment occurs when a supervisor or someone else with authority
over the subordinate employee makes a "put out or get out" demand
(i.e., "Submit to my sexual request or you will be fired, demoted,
intimidated, passed over for promotion or in some other way made
miserable on the job.").
B. Hostile environment sexual harassment. This type of harassment, while
not necessarily sexual in nature, occurs when the sexually- or genderbased
conduct (words or deeds) of a supervisor, coworker or someone
else with whom the employee comes in contact on the job unreasonably
interferes with an employee's work performance or creates an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. This conduct
§ 60-103 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-104
C:626
§ 60-105. Right to report; time limit to file complaint.
All employees are encouraged to report discrimination and/or harassment
if they believe they are being harassed or if they observe the harassment
of another. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a third
party, to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question is
offensive and unwelcome. However, failure to do so does not preclude filing
a complaint. All employees have the right, and supervisors have a duty, to
formally or informally report any and all statements, acts or behavior by a
co-employee or supervisory personnel which are deemed or perceived by
the affected employee to be an improper employment practice or to be a
violation of this policy. At the latest, complaints of sexual harassment must
be filed no later than 30 days after the triggering event.
§ 60-106. Procedures for addressing acts of sexual harassment.
Employees may address acts of sexual harassment as follows:
does not need to be directed to a particular person or to any person at
all.
C. Third-party sexual harassment.
(1) A third-party sexual harassment claim may occur when either:
(a) Conduct directed at one employee is sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and thus
create a hostile working environment for another employee; or
(b) An employee is able to claim that he or she was denied job
benefits as an implicit quid pro quo that had become a general
condition of employment.
(2) An employee may be able to claim that he or she was denied job
benefits based on the unlawful sex-based coercion of the favored
employee.
A. An employee should clearly inform the person engaging in the
harassment that his or her behavior is offensive and unwelcome and tell
him or her to immediately refrain from such conduct. As soon as
possible, an employee should then report the incident(s) to his or her
immediate supervisor. However, if an employee is uncomfortable with
reporting this matter to his or her immediate supervisor, for whatever
reason, or if the complaint stems from behavior engaged in by the
employee's immediate supervisor, the employee may report the
behavior to the head of his or her department. If an employee is
uncomfortable with reporting this matter to the head of his or her
department, for whatever reason, or if the complaint stems from
behavior engaged in by the head of the employee's department, the
employee should report the behavior to the City Administrator, Director
of Human Resource Services or the Office of the Corporation Counsel.
§ 60-104 CHARTER § 60-106
C:627
§ 60-107. Procedures for addressing filed complaints;
Antiharassment Officer designated.
All complaints of sexual harassment will be taken seriously and investigated
discreetly, impartially, thoroughly and promptly. While a procedure is set
forth for conducting investigations, this policy is not rigid. It may vary from
case to case depending on a variety of circumstances. But in all instances,
internal investigations of sexual harassment complaints will be thoroughly
and promptly conducted.
B. If a complaint is directed against the City Administrator or the Director
of Human Resource Services, the functions assigned to those persons
by this policy will be transferred to a person or entity selected by the
Office of the Corporation Counsel.
C. While a complaint may be filed verbally, employees are urged to put
their complaints in writing. If the complaint is made orally, the
department head, division head, City Administrator, Director of Human
Resource Services or the Office of the Corporation Counsel shall reduce
the complaint to a written document which shall, if it is deemed
accurate, be signed by the complainant. When filing a complaint, an
employee is required to provide a specific and detailed account of any
and all acts that the employee believed constituted sexual harassment.
The complaint should address:
(1) The name and department of the complainant.
(2) The name and department of the alleged harasser.
(3) The nature and circumstances, in detail, of the alleged sexual
harassment, including but not limited to the injuries or
consequences suffered by the complainant, the names of any
witnesses to such actions and the duration of the actions in
question.
(4) Whether such harassment has been previously reported to a
supervisor or other person and, if so, when and to whom.
(5) Assessing the presence or absence of corroborative evidence for
either party.
D. Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from providing
other information or documents he or she believes are essential to the
fair disposition of his or her complaint.
E. Once filed, complaints alleging sexual harassment may not be
withdrawn, and the complaining person is required to cooperate fully in
the investigation of his or her claim(s). The failure or refusal to
cooperate fully in an investigation may result in the dismissal of the
claim.
§ 60-106 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-107
C:628
A. The City will employ the following procedures when a supervisor or
department head is presented with a complaint of sexual harassment or
otherwise becomes aware of conduct that may rise to the level of sexual
harassment:
(1) In the event a supervisor or department head witnesses an act that
could be construed as constituting sexual harassment, he or she is
to immediately direct the person who is engaging in the conduct to
cease the conduct. As soon as practical, the supervisor or
department head is to report the matter to the Director of Human
Resource Services, the City Administrator and the Office of the
Corporation Counsel for further action. When reporting the matter,
the supervisor or department head must do so in a writing that
addresses the factors set forth in § 60-106C of this article. Failure
to report or adequately address such harassment is violative of this
policy and will result in disciplinary action.
(2) If a supervisor or department head is provided with a verbal
complaint of sexual harassment by an employee, the supervisor or
department head will conduct an initial interview of the
complaining party. The interview should elicit the information that
is set forth in § 60-106C of this article. At the conclusion of the
interview, the supervisor or department head shall reduce this
information to writing, have the complaining party sign the
document memorializing the verbal complaint and then, as soon as
practical, submit the report to the Director of Human Resource
Services, the City Administrator and the Office of the Corporation
Counsel.
B. If the Director of Human Resource Services, City Administrator or the
Office of the Corporation Counsel receives a complaint of sexual
harassment from either a supervisor, a department head or an
employee, he will be guided by the following procedures:
(1) The City Administrator, the Director of Human Resource Services
and the Corporation Counsel, or their designees, shall conduct one
or more interviews with the complainant. Said interview(s) shall be
conducted and completed within 30 days. From the outset of the
initial interview, the employee shall be advised that all information
contained in the complaint shall be treated confidentially but will
be used for investigation purposes and will result in an interview of
the alleged harasser, which may cause him or her to become aware
of the matter.
(2) Once the investigation is completed, a summary report shall be
completed.
C. Antiharassment Officer. The City Administrator, or his designee, is
hereby designated as the Antiharassment Officer. Persons who, by
reason of circumstances, are uncomfortable directing a complaint to
the City Administrator may report a complaint to the Director of Human
§ 60-107 CHARTER § 60-107
C:629
§ 60-108. Disciplinary action for violation of policy.
§ 60-109. Remedial action for violation of policy; record of
proceedings.
Resource Services, his or her department head and/or any supervisor
with whom the employee feels comfortable making the complaint, who
will then bring the complaint to the appropriate authorities.
A. Upon a preliminary finding that the sexual harassment policy has been
violated, a disciplinary action shall be recommended that is
commensurate with the degree of misconduct.
B. Any and all discipline meted out shall be in accordance with any
collective bargaining agreement(s) and/or rules and regulations of the
New Jersey Department of Personnel.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent a supervisor and/or department head who
has specific and credible knowledge that an event of sexual harassment
did in fact take place from taking immediate and appropriate remedial
action. If the alleged harassment involves any types of physical threats
or takes the form of a sexual assault, the alleged harasser shall be
immediately suspended, without pay, pending the outcome of the
administrative hearing. Any discipline meted out under this provision
shall be in accordance with the applicable civil service rules and/or all
other applicable court rules.
A. Unclassified employees. Remedial action for employees/volunteers
found in violation of the policy may include the following:
(1) Oral or written reprimand;
(2) Reassignment or change of work schedule to minimize contact
between parties;
(3) Demotion;
(4) Suspension (without pay);
(5) Termination;
(6) Referral to criminal justice system.
B. Classified employees. The above section is applicable along with any
other disciplinary action in accordance with New Jersey civil service
rules and regulations, including existing collective bargaining unit
agreements.
C. All remedies shall be implemented in a timely manner, and a summary
of the complaint and the action taken shall be furnished to the parties
by the City Administrator or his/her designee. Where harassment has
been found to have occurred, a summary will be placed in the
§ 60-107 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-109
C:630
§ 60-110. Penalties for false accusations.
§ 60-111. Responsibilities of supervisory personnel; notification and
reporting by employees.
§ 60-112. Confidentiality.
To the extent possible, all harassment complaints and investigations will be
conducted in a manner to protect the confidentiality of the complainant, the
alleged harasser and all witnesses. All parties involved in the proceedings
will be advised to maintain strict confidentiality, from the initial meeting to
the final decision, to safeguard the privacy and reputation of all involved.
However, anonymity and confidentiality cannot always be guaranteed if a
proper investigation is to be carried out and, where appropriate, action is
to be taken against the alleged harasser.
harasser's personnel file. The City shall keep a record of all proceedings
in a separate, confidential file.
A. A charge of sexual harassment is a grave and serious one. False
accusations of sexual harassment are, and will be treated as, a
disciplinary offense and shall result in a level of punishment
appropriate for a person actually engaging in such behavior.
B. A person who knowingly and/or recklessly and/or maliciously fails to
give a truthful statement or complaint, obstructs an investigation or
withholds disclosing relevant information, or encourages others to do
so, may be deemed to have made a false accusation or statement and
may be subject to discipline up to and including termination.
A. In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment, supervisory
personnel are required to ensure adherence to and compliance with
this policy and, upon being informed of possible sexual harassment, are
required to take appropriate, immediate action in response, including,
but not limited to, informing employees of their right to file a complaint
with the City Administrator, or his designee, and taking any possible
preliminary action designed to protect the interest of the complainant,
the alleged harasser and the City, without same being any admission of
wrongdoing or liability of any party.
B. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a third party,
to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question is offensive
and unwelcome. At the very least, employees should refuse to
participate in such behavior.
C. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all alleged incidents of
sexual harassment.
§ 60-109 CHARTER § 60-113
C:631
§ 60-113. Retaliation prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to take reprisals against
any person because he or she has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in
any proceedings in this policy. Threats, other forms of intimidation and/or
retaliation against the complainant or any other party based on involvement
in the complaint process may be cause for disciplinary action. There will
be no discrimination or retaliation against any individual who files a goodfaith
harassment complaint pursuant to this policy, even if the investigation
ultimately produces insufficient evidence to support the complaint. A
complaint of retaliation shall be reported to the City Administrator and/or
his designee, who shall investigate the complaint in the same manner as a
sexual harassment complaint.
§ 60-114. Collection and maintenance of data.
It will be the responsibility of the City Administrator and/or his designee
to receive and collect data regarding complaints filed under this policy. It
shall be maintained under lock and key, separate from all other employee
personnel files.
§ 60-115. Applicability to nonemployees.
Harassment of any employee in connection with his/her work by a
nonemployee, i.e., volunteer, vendor, supplier or business invitee, may also
violate this policy. Any employee who experiences harassment by a
nonemployee, or who observes harassment of an employee by a
nonemployee, should report such harassment in accordance with this policy.
Appropriate action will be taken against the nonemployee if the complaint
is substantiated following an investigation.
§ 60-116. Mandatory training.
§ 60-117. Distribution of policy.
A. All management and supervisory employees of the City, as well as all
elected officials of the City, shall undergo training in one or more
sessions on sexual harassment in the workplace with a person trained
to lead or implement such training. They also shall receive training or
updated materials on an ongoing basis, at least once every year, in
order to provide or discuss any significant changes or developments in
the law and/or to operate as a refresher on the subject.
B. All other employees of the City shall also undergo similar training, led
by a person trained to lead such sessions, to raise their awareness and
understanding of impermissible behavior, the consequences of such
behavior and to reduce confusion about which actions or conduct are
acceptable and which are not. These employees shall also be required
to undergo this training once a year, with regular updates thereafter.
A. The distribution of the policy shall consist of:
§ 60-113 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-117
C:632
§ 60-118. Abrogation.
The City of East Orange is committed to maintaining a heightened
awareness of the personal dignity of others by fostering a work environment
free of sexual harassment. This policy shall not be construed as abrogating
any rights or remedies established under the laws, rules or regulations of
New Jersey or the United States.
§ 60-119. Record retention.
Upon completion of an investigation, the entire file regarding the sexual
harassment investigation shall be kept confidential by the Department of
Human Resource Services in a location separate from all other personnel
records and/or files; although, in the event an allegation of sexual
harassment is substantiated, the incident will be documented in the
offender's personnel file. If an allegation is not substantiated, no formal
record will be kept in the alleged harasser's personnel file. If a person
is found to have filed a willfully false sexual harassment allegation, the
incident will be documented in the complainant's personnel file.
§ 60-120. External agencies for further action.
Following the decision of the Sexual Harassment Review Committee, a
complainant may then continue with further action at his/her own expense if
he/she wishes to do so. While one seeking such relief is encouraged to retain
an attorney, should he/she wish to pursue this matter on his/her own, he/she
should contact one of the following agencies to seek further guidance:
(1) Posting this policy, together with any necessary signage, in a
prominent location within all of the City's buildings and in each
department, division or agency located outside a City-owned
building;
(2) Distribution to all current City employees and volunteers;
(3) Distribution to all persons hired as City employees or volunteers
subsequent to the effective date of this policy;
(4) Issuing an annual memorandum to update all municipal employees
concerning the policy of the City of East Orange against sexual
harassment; and
(5) Discussing the policy against sexual harassment during any new
employee orientation meetings, seminars or training sessions held
subsequent to the effective date of this policy.
B. The Director of Human Resource Services shall ensure compliance with
this section and that all employees/volunteers are aware of the sexual
harassment reporting procedures.
§ 60-117 CHARTER § 60-120
C:633
New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety
Division on Civil Rights
140 E. Front Street, 6th Floor
P.O. Box 089
Trenton, New Jersey 08625
Phone: (609) 292-4605
Division of EEO/AA
New Jersey Department of Personnel
Three Station Plaza, CN 315
Trenton, New Jersey 08625
Phone: (609) 520-0299
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
1801 L Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20507
Phone: (202) 663-4900
§ 60-121. Failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
If an employee fails to follow the City's internal policies and procedures
for the filing and handling of sexual harassment claims as set forth herein,
and the employee, or his or her representative, heir or spouse thereafter
institutes an administrative or legal action against the City or any officer,
agent or employee thereof, the City or any officer, agent or employee
thereof shall have the right to assert, as the law permits, the employee's
failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies as a defense to the
action.
§ 60-122. Questions regarding policy.
Any questions about this policy may be directed to the Director of Human
Resource Services. Any and all questions must be put in writing.
§ 60-120 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-122
C:634
ARTICLE XIX
Antidiscrimination Policy
[Added 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 19-2009]
§ 60-123. Purpose; construal of provisions; responsibility of
department heads.
A. It is the intent of the City of East Orange that no person be denied the
equal protection of the laws, nor shall any person be denied the
enjoyment of his or her civil rights or be discriminated against because
of his or her actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin,
sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental disability,
family status, sexual orientation or gender identity.
B. The prohibitions against discrimination as provided for in this article
shall not be deemed preempted by federal or state law but are intended
to supplement state and federal civil rights laws prohibiting
discrimination in the areas of employment, public accommodations and
housing; provided, however, that this article shall be construed and
applied in a manner consistent with First Amendment jurisprudence
regarding the freedom of speech and exercise of religion.
C. Discrimination is a form of unlawful harassment which undermines the
integrity of the employment relationship. Discrimination is a violation of
the City's personnel policies and state and federal laws. It debilitates
morale, is offensive, interferes with work productivity and creates a
hostile and intimidating work environment.
D. Nothing in this article shall require preferential treatment of any
person or group on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.
E. The purpose of this policy is not to regulate personal morality or to
encroach upon one's personal life, but to demonstrate a strong
commitment to maintaining a workplace free of discrimination. The
goals of this policy are to: inform City employees as to what conduct
constitutes discrimination; ensure that all employees understand that
discrimination will neither be condoned nor tolerated; create a
procedure to promptly, thoroughly, confidentially and respectfully
handle complaints; and ensure that retaliation against complainants or
participants in any investigation does not occur. In keeping with these
goals, discrimination in the workplace is strictly prohibited by the City.
All employees have the right to work in an environment which is free
from discrimination of any kind.
F. It is the primary responsibility of department heads, division heads and
supervisory personnel to ensure that a working environment free from
discrimination is provided to all employees. This responsibility pertains
not only to conduct which may be undertaken by supervisory and
nonsupervisory City employees, but also to actions taken by
nonemployees conducting business with the City. To ensure all City
§ 60-123 CHARTER § 60-123
C:635
§ 60-124. Scope; when effective.
§ 60-125. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this article, the following practices
shall not be violations of this article:
employees are aware of their rights and responsibilities, this policy is
to be distributed to all City employees.
A. It is the City's policy to prohibit discrimination of an employee by
another employee, management representative, supplier, volunteer or
business invitee. This discrimination policy applies to conduct that
occurs in any location that is operated by the City or considered a
workplace of any City employee or volunteer, as well as any location
that can reasonably be regarded as an extension of the workplace, such
as at any off-site social or business function or any other non-City
facility where City business is being conducted. Further, this policy
applies to all work-related conduct, including conduct that occurs offduty,
if such conduct may negatively affect the work environment.
(1) The City will prohibit discrimination against any person in
recruitment, examination, appointment, training, promotion,
retention, discipline or any other aspect of personnel
administration for reasons of political or religious opinions or
affiliations, because of race, color, national origin, physical
disability, age (except where a specific age, sex or physical
requirement constitutes a bona fide occupational qualification
necessary to properly and efficiently function on the job) or any
other nonmerit factor.
(2) It is the responsibility of the City to ensure the opportunity for
equal employment and to maintain a nondiscriminatory work
environment.
B. This policy shall take effect on the date of adoption and apply to all
complaints made on or after that date. This policy shall continue in
force until changed and approved by the Mayor and City Council.
A. To engage in a bona fide effort to establish an affirmative action
program to improve opportunities in employment for minorities and
women consistent with applicable state and federal law.
B. To discriminate based on a person's age when such discrimination is
required by state, federal or local law.
C. To refuse to enter a contract with an unemancipated minor.
D. To restrict any of its facilities or to restrict employment opportunities
based on duly adopted institutional policies that conform to federal and
state laws and regulations.
§ 60-123 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-125
C:636
§ 60-126. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
AGE — Chronological age.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR — The City Administrator of the City of East Orange
or his or her designee.
DISCRIMINATE — To make a decision, offer to make a decision or refrain
from making a decision based in whole or in part on the actual or perceived
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status,
physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation or gender
identity of another person.
FAMILY — Includes either of the following:
FAMILY STATUS — The state of being in a family.
GENDER IDENTITY — A person's actual or perceived gender, including a
person's self-image, appearance, expressions or behavior, whether or not
that self-image, appearance, expression or behavior is different from that
traditionally associated with the person's biological sex as assigned at birth
as being either female or male.
HARASSMENT — For the purposes of this policy, "harassment" is defined
as verbal or physical conduct that denigrates or shows hostility or aversion
toward an individual because of his/her race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, age, religion, gender, disability, marital status, affectional or
sexual orientation, veteran status, domestic partner status, genetic
information, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait or any other legally
protected classification (i.e., using epithets or slurs; mocking; ridiculing or
mimicking another's culture, accent, appearance or customs; threatening,
E. To restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or
on an athletic team on the basis of age, sex, height or weight.
F. To the employment of an individual by one's family.
G. To the use of marital status or family status limitations in a health or
pension plan if such limitations conform to federal and state laws and
regulations.
A. An individual who is pregnant; or
Husband, wife, brother, sister, parent, child or other near relative,
which relative resides with the employee as part of a common
household. If it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
department head that an ill person not falling into the foregoing
relationships nevertheless lives with and is part of the household of
the employee and that, by reason of the absence of any other suitable
person, the employee's presence is essential to the care of such person,
then such person may be, for the purposes of this article, deemed to be
a member of the family.
B.
§ 60-125 CHARTER § 60-126
C:637
intimidating or engaging in hostile or offensive acts that focus on an
individual's race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, religion,
gender, including gender identity or expression, disability, marital status,
affectional or sexual orientation, veteran status, domestic partner status,
genetic information, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait or any other
legally protected classification, including jokes and pranks; the displaying
on walls, bulletin boards or elsewhere on City premises, or circulating
in the workplace, written or graphic material that denigrates or shows
hostility or aversion toward a person or group because of race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, age, religion, gender, disability, marital status,
affectional or sexual orientation, veteran status, domestic partner status,
genetic information, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait or any other
legally protected classification) and that:
PERCEIVED — Refers to the perception of the person who acts and not to
the perception of the person for or against whom the action is taken.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality
or bisexuality, whether by orientation or practice. Sexual orientation does
not include the physical or sexual attraction to a minor by an adult.
§ 60-127. Right to report; time limit to file complaint.
All employees are encouraged to report discrimination and/or harassment
if they believe they are being harassed or if they observe the harassment
of another. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a third
party, to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question is
offensive and unwelcome. However, failure to do so does not preclude filing
a complaint. All employees have the right, and supervisors have a duty, to
formally or informally report any and all statements, acts or behavior by a
co-employee or supervisory personnel which are deemed or perceived by
the affected employee to be an improper employment practice or to be a
violation of this policy. At the latest, complaints of discrimination must be
filed no later than 30 days after the triggering event.
§ 60-128. Procedures for addressing acts of discrimination.
Employees may address acts of discrimination as follows:
A. Creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment; or
B. Unreasonably interferes with an individual's work performance.
A. An employee should clearly inform the person engaging in the
harassment that his or her behavior is offensive and unwelcome and tell
him or her to immediately refrain from such conduct. As soon as
possible, an employee should then report the incident(s) to his or her
immediate supervisor. However, if an employee is uncomfortable with
reporting this matter to his or her immediate supervisor, for whatever
reason, or if the complaint stems from behavior engaged in by the
employee's immediate supervisor, the employee may report the
behavior to the head of his or her department. If an employee is
§ 60-126 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-128
C:638
§ 60-129. Procedures for addressing filed complaints;
Antiharassment Officer designated.
All complaints of discrimination will be taken seriously and investigated
discreetly, impartially, thoroughly and promptly. While a procedure is set
forth for conducting investigations, this policy is not rigid; it may vary from
uncomfortable with reporting this matter to the head of his or her
department, for whatever reason, or if the complaint stems from
behavior engaged in by the head of the employee's department, the
employee should report the behavior to the City Administrator, Director
of Human Resource Services or the Office of the Corporation Counsel.
B. If a complaint is directed against the City Administrator or the Director
of Human Resource Services, the functions assigned to those persons
by this policy will be transferred to a person or entity selected by the
Office of the Corporation Counsel.
C. While a complaint may be filed verbally, employees are urged to put
their complaints in writing. If the complaint is made orally, the
department head, division head, City Administrator, Director of Human
Resource Services or the Office of the Corporation Counsel shall reduce
the complaint to a written document, which shall, if it is deemed
accurate, be signed by the complainant. When filing a complaint, an
employee is required to provide a specific and detailed account of any
and all acts that the employee believed constituted discrimination. The
complaint should address:
(1) The name and department of the complainant.
(2) The name and department of the alleged harasser.
(3) The nature and circumstances, in detail, of the alleged
discrimination, including but not limited to the injuries or
consequences suffered by the complainant, the names of any
witnesses to such actions and the duration of the actions in
question.
(4) Whether such harassment has been previously reported to a
supervisor or other person and, if so, when and to whom.
(5) Assessing the presence or absence of corroborative evidence for
either party.
D. Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from providing
other information or documents he or she believes are essential to the
fair disposition of his or her complaint.
E. Once filed, complaints alleging discrimination may not be withdrawn,
and the complaining person is required to cooperate fully in the
investigation of his or her claim(s). The failure or refusal to cooperate
fully in an investigation may result in the dismissal of the claim.
§ 60-128 CHARTER § 60-129
C:639
case to case depending on a variety of circumstances, but in all instances
internal investigations of discrimination complaints will be thoroughly and
promptly conducted.
A. The City will employ the following procedures when a supervisor or
department head is presented with a complaint of discrimination or
otherwise becomes aware of conduct that may rise to the level of
discrimination:
(1) In the event a supervisor or department head witnesses an act that
could be construed as constituting discrimination, he or she is to
immediately direct the person who is engaging in the conduct to
cease the conduct. As soon as practical, the supervisor or
department head is to report the matter to the Director of Human
Resource Services, the City Administrator and the Office of the
Corporation Counsel for further action. When reporting the matter,
the supervisor or department head must do so in a writing that
addresses the factors set forth in § 60-128C of this article. Failure
to report or adequately address such harassment is violative of this
policy and will result in disciplinary action.
(2) If a supervisor or department head is provided with a verbal
complaint of discrimination by an employee, the supervisor or
department head will conduct an initial interview of the
complaining party. The interview should elicit the information that
is set forth in § 60-128C of this article. At the conclusion of the
interview, the supervisor or department head shall reduce this
information to writing, have the complaining party sign the
document memorializing the verbal complaint, and then, as soon a
practical, submit the report to the Director of Human Resource
Services, the City Administrator and the Office of the Corporation
Counsel.
B. If the Director of Human Resource Services, City Administrator or the
Office of the Corporation Counsel receives a complaint of
discrimination from either a supervisor, a department head or an
employee, he will be guided by the following procedures:
(1) The City Administrator, the Director of Human Resource Services
and the Corporation Counsel, or their designees, shall conduct one
or more interviews with the complainant. Said interview(s) shall be
conducted and completed within 30 days. From the outset of the
initial interview, the employee shall be advised that all information
contained in the complaint shall be treated confidentially but will
be used for investigation purposes and will result in an interview of
the alleged harasser, which may cause him or her to become aware
of the matter.
(2) Once the investigation is completed, a summary report shall be
completed.
§ 60-129 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-129
C:640
§ 60-130. Disciplinary actions for violation of policy.
§ 60-131. Remedial action for violation of policy; record of
proceedings.
C. Antiharassment Officer. The City Administrator, or his designee, is
hereby designated as the Antiharassment Officer. Persons who, by
reason of circumstances, are uncomfortable directing a complaint to
the City Administrator may report a complaint to the Director of Human
Resource Services, his or her department head and/or any supervisor
with whom the employee feels comfortable making the complaint, who
will then bring the complaint to the appropriate authorities.
A. Upon a preliminary finding that the discrimination policy has been
violated, a disciplinary action shall be recommended that is
commensurate with the degree of misconduct.
B. Any and all discipline meted out shall be in accordance with any
collective bargaining agreement(s) and/or rules and regulations of the
New Jersey Department of Personnel.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent a supervisor and/or department head who
has specific and credible knowledge that an event of discrimination did
in fact take place from taking immediate and appropriate remedial
action. If the alleged harassment involves any types of physical threats
or takes the form of a sexual assault, the alleged harasser shall be
immediately suspended, without pay, pending the outcome of the
administrative hearing. Any discipline meted out under this provision
shall be in accordance with the applicable civil service rules and/or all
other applicable court rules.
A. Unclassified employees. Remedial action for employees/volunteers
found in violation of the policy may include the following:
(1) Oral or written reprimand;
(2) Reassignment or change of work schedule to minimize contact
between parties;
(3) Demotion;
(4) Suspension without pay;
(5) Termination;
(6) Referral to criminal justice system.
B. Classified employees. The above section is applicable along with any
other disciplinary action in accordance with New Jersey civil service
rules and regulations, including existing collective bargaining unit
agreements.
§ 60-129 CHARTER § 60-131
C:641
§ 60-132. Penalties for false accusations.
§ 60-133. Responsibilities of supervisory personnel; notification and
reporting by employees.
§ 60-134. Confidentiality.
To the extent possible, all harassment complaints and investigations will be
conducted in a manner to protect the confidentiality of the complainant, the
alleged harasser and all witnesses. All parties involved in the proceedings
will be advised to maintain strict confidentiality, from the initial meeting to
the final decision, to safeguard the privacy and reputation of all involved.
However, anonymity and confidentiality cannot always be guaranteed if a
proper investigation is to be carried out and, where appropriate, action is
to be taken against the alleged harasser.
C. All remedies shall be implemented in a timely manner, and a summary
of the complaint and the action taken shall be furnished to the parties
by the City Administrator or his/her designee. Where harassment has
been found to have occurred, a summary will be placed in the
harasser's personnel file. The City shall keep a record of all proceedings
in a separate, confidential file.
A. A charge of discrimination is a grave and serious one. False accusations
of discrimination are, and will be treated as, a disciplinary offense and
shall result in a level of punishment appropriate for a person actually
engaging in such behavior.
B. A person who knowingly and/or recklessly and/or maliciously fails to
give a truthful statement or complaint, obstructs an investigation or
withholds disclosing relevant information, or encourages others to do
so, may be deemed to have made a false accusation or statement and
may be subject to discipline up to and including termination.
A. In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment, supervisory
personnel are required to ensure adherence to and compliance with
this policy and, upon being informed of possible discrimination, are
required to take appropriate, immediate action in response, including,
but not limited to, informing employees of their right to file a complaint
with the City Administrator, or his designee, and taking any possible
preliminary action designed to protect the interest of the complainant,
the alleged harasser and the City, without same being any admission of
wrongdoing or liability of any party.
B. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a third party,
to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question is offensive
and unwelcome. At the very least, employees should refuse to
participate in such behavior.
C. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all alleged incidents of
discrimination.
§ 60-131 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-135
C:642
§ 60-135. Retaliation prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to take reprisals against
any person because he or she has filed a complaint, testified or assisted
in any proceedings under this policy. Threats, other forms of intimidation
and/or retaliation against the complainant or any other party based on
involvement in the complaint process may be cause for disciplinary action.
There will be no discrimination or retaliation against any individual who
files a good-faith harassment complaint pursuant to this policy, even if
the investigation ultimately produces insufficient evidence to support the
complaint. A complaint of retaliation shall be reported to the City
Administrator and/or his designee, who shall investigate the complaint in
the same manner as a discrimination complaint.
§ 60-136. Collection and maintenance of data.
It will be the responsibility of the City Administrator and/or his designee
to receive and collect data regarding complaints filed under this policy. It
shall be maintained under lock and key, separate from all other employee
personnel files.
§ 60-137. Applicability to nonemployees.
Harassment of any employee in connection with his/her work by a
nonemployee, i.e., volunteer, vendor, supplier or business invitee, may also
violate this policy. Any employee who experiences harassment by a
nonemployee, or who observes harassment of an employee by a
nonemployee, should report such harassment in accordance with this policy.
Appropriate action will be taken against the nonemployee if the complaint
is substantiated following an investigation.
§ 60-138. Mandatory training.
§ 60-139. Distribution of policy.
A. All management and supervisory employees of the City, as well as all
elected officials of the City, shall undergo training in one or more
sessions on discrimination in the workplace with a person trained to
lead or implement such training. They also shall receive training or
updated materials on an ongoing basis, at least once every year, in
order to provide or discuss any significant changes or developments in
the law and/or to operate as a refresher on the subject.
B. All other employees of the City shall also undergo similar training, led
by a person trained to lead such sessions, to raise their awareness and
understanding of impermissible behavior, the consequences of such
behavior and to reduce confusion about which actions or conduct are
acceptable and which are not. These employees shall also be required
to undergo this training once a year, with regular updates thereafter.
A. The distribution of the policy shall consist of:
§ 60-135 CHARTER § 60-139
C:643
§ 60-140. Abrogation.
The City of East Orange is committed to maintaining a heightened
awareness of the personal dignity of others by fostering a work environment
free of discrimination. This policy shall not be construed as abrogating any
rights or remedies established under the laws, rules or regulations of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 60-141. Record retention.
Upon completion of an investigation, the entire file regarding the
discrimination investigation shall be kept confidential by the Department of
Human Resource Services in a location separate from all other personnel
records and/or files; although, in the event an allegation of discrimination is
substantiated, the incident will be documented in the offender's personnel
file. If an allegation is not substantiated, no formal record will be kept in
the alleged harasser's personnel file. If a person is found to have filed a
willfully false discrimination allegation, the incident will be documented in
the complainant's personnel file.
§ 60-142. External agencies for further action.
Following the decision of the Discrimination Review Committee, a
complainant may then continue with further action at his/her own expense if
he/she wishes to do so. While one seeking such relief is encouraged to retain
an attorney, should he/she wish to pursue this matter on his/her own, he/she
should contact one of the following agencies to seek further guidance:
(1) Posting this policy, together with any necessary signage, in a
prominent location within all of the City's buildings and in each
department, division or agency located outside a City-owned
building;
(2) Distribution to all current City employees and volunteers;
(3) Distribution to all persons hired as City employees or volunteers
subsequent to the effective date of this policy;
(4) Issuing an annual memorandum to update all municipal employees
concerning the policy of the City of East Orange against
discrimination; and
(5) Discussing the policy against discrimination during any new
employee orientation meetings, seminars or training sessions held
subsequent to the effective date of this policy.
B. The Director of Human Resource Services shall ensure compliance with
this section and that all employees/volunteers are aware of the
discrimination reporting procedures.
§ 60-139 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-142
C:644
New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety
Division on Civil Rights
140 E. Front Street, 6th Floor
P.O. Box 089
Trenton, New Jersey 08625
Phone: (609) 292-4605
Division of EEO/AA
New Jersey Department of Personnel
Three Station Plaza, CN 315
Trenton, New Jersey 08625
Phone: (609) 520-0299
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
1801 L Street, N. W.
Washington, D.C. 20507
Phone: (202) 663-4900
§ 60-143. Failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
If an employee fails to follow the City's internal policies and procedures for
the filing and handling of discrimination claims as set forth herein, and the
employee, or his or her representative, heir or spouse thereafter institutes
an administrative or legal action against the City or any officer, agent or
employee thereof, the City or any officer, agent or employee thereof shall
have the right to assert, as the law permits, the employee's failure to
exhaust his or her administrative remedies as a defense to the action.
§ 60-144. Questions regarding policy.
Any questions about this policy may be directed to the Director of Human
Resource Services. Any and all questions must be put in writing.
§ 60-142 CHARTER § 60-144
C:645

ARTICLE XX
Direct Deposit
[Added 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 15-2015]
§ 60-145. Direct deposit required.
All full-time employees, seasonal employees, temporary employees and
elected public officials who receive compensation from the City of East
Orange are mandated to have direct deposit of their compensation no later
than June 1, 2015.
§ 60-145 CHARTER § 60-145
C:647
Chapter 68
PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Claims: approval and payment — See Ch. 18.
Interlocal services — See Ch. 44.
§ 60-145 EAST ORANGE CODE § 60-145
C:648
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 68-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY PURCHASING AGENT — The Purchasing Agent of the City or the
authorized designee of the City who has the authority, responsibility and
accountability for the purchasing activity of the municipality and may
conduct any activities as may be necessary or appropriate to the purchasing
function of the contracting unit.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES — All utility services; window cleaning service;
leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other space required by the using
agencies; and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery
and other City-owned real and personal property. The term shall not include
professional and other contractual services which are in their nature unique
and not subject to competition.
EMERGENCY — A pressing need for public expenditure affecting the public
health, safety or welfare that requires the immediate delivery of goods or
the performance of services.
GOODS AND SERVICES — Any work, labor, commodities, equipment,
materials or supplies of any tangible or intangible nature, except real
property or any interest therein, provided or performed through a contract
awarded by the purchasing agent, including goods and property subject to
N.J.S.A. 12A:2-101 et seq.
LOCAL PUBLIC CONTRACTS LAW — All references refer to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.
LOWEST PRICE — The least possible amount that meets all requirements
of the request of the City.
LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR VENDOR — The bidder or vendor:
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR VENDOR — Able to complete the contract in
accordance with its requirements, including but not limited to requirements
pertaining to experience, moral integrity, operating capacity, financial
capacity, credit, and workforce, equipment and facilities availability.
RESPONSIVE — Conforming in all material respects to the terms and
conditions, specifications, legal requirements and other provisions of the
request as determined by the City.
STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION — The provisions of this chapter shall be
liberally construed to grant the municipality the greatest latitude
authorized pursuant to the Local Public Contracts Law. Conflicts between
Whose response to a request for bids offers the lowest price and is
responsive; and
A.
B. Who is responsible.
§ 68-1 CHARTER § 68-1
C:649
this chapter and the Local Public Contracts Law shall be construed in favor
of the Local Public Contracts Law.123
USING AGENCY — Any department, agency, commission, board or other
unit in the City government including the Boards of Police, Fire and Water.
VOLUNTARY USING AGENCY — Any autonomous unit in the City
government which controls expenditures of funds appropriated to it by the
City or other governmental unit.
123. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 68-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 68-1
C:650
ARTICLE II
City Purchasing Agent
§ 68-2. Supervision of Procurement Division of Office of City
Administrator; duties generally. [Amended 7-16-2007 by Ord. No.
18-2007; 1-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
The City Purchasing Agent shall be the head and have general supervision
of the Procurement Division of the Office of the City Administrator. He shall
perform all duties required by law and shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by this chapter. As a part thereof, he shall coordinate the central
purchasing of municipal goods and services.
§ 68-3. Appointment; civil service status.
The City Purchasing Agent shall have civil service status and shall be
appointed in the manner that all municipal employees are appointed.
§ 68-4. Bond.
The City Purchasing Agent shall give an official bond, approved as to form
by the City Council, not less than $50,000.
§ 68-5. Scope of purchasing authority.
A. Purchase or contract.
(1) The City Purchasing Agent shall have the power and it shall be his
duty to purchase or contract for all goods and services needed by
any using agency for the internal management and operation of the
Procurement Division of the Office of the City Administrator. The
Purchasing Agent is authorized to join with voluntary using
agencies in cooperative purchasing plans and to delegate his rights
to purchase to a voluntary using agency when the best interests of
the City would be served thereby, provided that nothing herein
shall prevent the Purchasing Agent from entering into cooperative
purchasing plans and from delegating his rights to purchase to
another governmental unit or independent governmental agency in
accordance with state statutes when such an undertaking would be
in the best interest of the City. [Amended 7-16-2007 by Ord. No.
18-2007; 1-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
(2) The Purchasing Agent is also authorized to enter into joint
agreements with other federal, state or local governmental
contracting units for the provision and performance of goods and
services, if such an undertaking is determined to be in the best
interest of the City by the Committee on Standardization and
Specification.
§ 68-2 CHARTER § 68-5
C:651
§ 68-6. Additional powers and duties.
In addition to the purchasing authority conferred by this chapter, the City
Purchasing Agent shall:
(3) The Purchasing Agent may present to the Committee on
Standardization and Specification for recommendation as to
resolution of issues concerning the purchase of goods and services.
B. Purchases by other officials. All purchases for all using agencies shall
be made by the City Purchasing Agent, except that:
(1) Using agencies are authorized to make emergency purchases of
goods and services in accordance with the provisions of Local
Public Contracts Law and § 68-28 without regard to any restriction
set forth in this chapter.
C. Unauthorized purchases. Except as provided in this chapter, no City
officer or employee shall order the purchase of any goods and services
or make any contract within the purview of this chapter other than
through the Procurement Division of the Office of the City
Administrator. Unauthorized purchases of tangible goods shall be the
responsibility of the employee who procured said goods and shall not
bind the City. [Amended 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 18-2007;
1-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
A. Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the City the highest quality in
goods and services at least expense to the City.
B. Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to
obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases of
goods and services.
C. Rules and regulations. Subject to the approval of the Mayor and City
Council or the Committee on Standardization and Specification, where
applicable, establish and amend all rules and regulations authorized by
this chapter and all others necessary to its operation.
D. Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the field
of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure
for the City the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by
other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade
associations having national recognition and by private businesses and
organizations.
E. Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably
necessary to the operation of this chapter.
F. Standard nomenclature. Prepare and adopt a standard purchasing
nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers.
§ 68-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 68-6
C:652
G. Vendors' catalog file. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors' catalog
file. Such catalog shall be filed according to materials and shall contain
descriptions of vendors, commodities, prices and discounts.
H. Bulk purchases. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take
full advantage of discounts.
I. Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the City all federal tax
exemptions to which it is entitled.
J. Cooperation with Chief Financial Officer. Cooperate with the Chief
Financial Officer so as to secure for the City the maximum efficiency in
budgeting and accounting.
§ 68-6 CHARTER § 68-6
C:653

ARTICLE III
Committee on Standardization and Specification
§ 68-7. Committee established.
There is hereby established in the City the Committee on Standardization
and Specification.
§ 68-8. Membership; Chairman.124
The Committee on Standardization and Specification shall consist of the
following seven officials or their duly designated representatives, who shall
serve without additional compensation: the City Administrator, the Chief
Financial Officer, Director of Public Works, Corporation Counsel, President
of the Board of Water Commissioners and one other City official, to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of the Committee shall elect a
Chairman from among their own number, who shall serve for one year. The
Chairman of City Council or his designee shall be an ex officio member.
§ 68-9. Duties of Purchasing Agent relative to Committee.
The City Purchasing Agent shall enforce the written specifications adopted
by the Committee on Standardization and Specification. He shall attend
all meetings of the Committee in an advisory capacity and shall have the
authority to present his recommendations on any proposed standardization
or specification.
§ 68-10. Duties of Committee.
It shall be the duty of the Committee on Standardization and Specification:
A. Classification. To classify all the goods and services used by the various
branches of the City government.
B. Standardization. To adopt as standards the minimum number of
qualities, sizes and varieties of goods and services consistent with the
successful operation of the City government.
C. Specifications. To prepare and adopt written specifications of all such
standard goods and services.
D. Meetings. To hold official meetings at least once every two months.
E. To formulate policy standards and purchasing strategies consistent
with the Local Public Contracts Law to promote the efficient and
effective delivery of goods and services.
F. To provide guidance to the Purchasing Agent, Mayor and City Council.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-7 CHARTER § 68-11
C:655
§ 68-11. Nature of specifications.
All specifications adopted by the Committee on Standardization and
Specification shall be definite and certain and shall permit competition,
provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to noncompetitive
types and kinds of goods and services.
§ 68-12. Effect of adoption of specifications.
§ 68-13. Use of City laboratory and engineering facilities.
The Committee on Standardization and Specification shall have the
authority to make use of the laboratory and engineering facilities of the City
and the technical staffs thereof in connection with its work of preparing and
adopting standards and written specifications.
§ 68-14. Consultation with using agencies.
The Committee on Standardization and Specification shall consult with the
department heads and other officials of the using agencies to determine
their precise requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe those standards
which meet the needs of the majority of such agencies.
A. After its adoption, each standard specification shall, until revised or
rescinded, apply alike in terms and effect to every future purchase and
contract for the supply described in such specifications.
B. The City Purchasing Agent, with the approval of the Committee on
Standardization and Specification, shall have the authority to exempt
any using agency of the City from use of the supply described in such
standard specification and/or the requirement to purchase specified
goods or services through the Procurement Division.
§ 68-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 68-14
C:656
ARTICLE IV
Requisitions, Estimates, Contracts and Purchases
§ 68-15. Requisitions and estimates.
All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the
department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the City
Purchasing Agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in
goods and services in such manner, at such time and for such future periods
as the Purchasing Agent shall prescribe.
§ 68-16. Encumbrance of funds.
Except in cases of emergency, the City Purchasing Agent shall not issue
any order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the
Chief Financial Officer shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is
to the credit of the using agencies concerned a sufficient unencumbered
appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the
amount of such order.
§ 68-17. Conflicts of interest.
Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this chapter in which
the City Purchasing Agent or any officer or employee of the City is
financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void.
§ 68-18. Gifts and rebates to City officers and employees.
The City Purchasing Agent and every officer and employee of the City are
expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person,
company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is or
might be awarded any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever,
except where given for the use and benefit of the City, and no City officer
or employee shall accept employment with any person, company, firm or
corporation for the performance of work under any agreement with the City.
§ 68-19. Competitive contracting.
The Purchasing Agent is authorized to initiate competitive contracting for
goods or services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9.
A. Unforeseen requirements. A using agency shall not be prevented from
filing in the same manner with the Purchasing Agent, at any time, a
requisition or estimate for any goods and services the need for which
was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed.
B. Revisory power of Purchasing Agent. The City Purchasing Agent shall
examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to
revise it as to quantity, quality or estimated cost, but revision as to
quality shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications
established pursuant to this chapter.
§ 68-15 CHARTER § 68-20
C:657
§ 68-20. Advertisements for bids.
§ 68-21. Contents of advertisements for bids; publication.
All advertisements for bids shall be completed in accordance with the Local
Public Contracts Law.125
§ 68-22. Formal contract procedure.
All goods and services for which public bidding is required or undertaken
pursuant to this chapter shall be completed in accordance with the Local
Public Contracts Law. Any formal contract as required under this section or
the Local Public Contracts Law shall be executed by the Mayor and the City
Clerk on behalf of the City, with the corporate seal affixed thereto.
A. Except as otherwise provided by the provisions of the Local Public
Contracts Law, no contract shall be entered into by the City for the
doing of any work or for the furnishing of any materials, goods and
services or labor or the hiring of teams or vehicles unless the City shall
first publicly advertise for bids thereunder and the contract shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder who has submitted a
responsive bid.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall be accorded authority to implement this
section and negotiate and award contracts pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3 in accordance with the bidding threshold set by the
Governor of the State of New Jersey.
A. Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall be in accord with the
requirements of § 68-20 and shall include a general description of the
articles to be sold.
B. Bidders' list. The City Purchasing Agent shall also solicit sealed bids
from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their
names to be added to a bidders' list, which the Purchasing Agent shall
maintain, by sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or such
other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale.
C. Bulletin board. The Purchasing Agent shall also advertise for bids by a
notice posted on the public bulletin board in the City Hall.
D. Bid deposits. In accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of deposit where the
Agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any deposit
required by the City Purchasing Agent upon failure on his part to enter
a contract.
E. Bid opening procedure.
125. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 68-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 68-22
C:658
(1) Presentation of sealed bids. Sealed bids shall be presented to and
received by either the Purchasing Agent or the City Clerk, as
designated in the bid specification, and at least one other City
official or their authorized representatives. The time and place for
receipt of sealed bids shall be specified in the advertisement for
bids as approved by resolution of the City Council.
(2) Opening. Bids shall be received and opened in public at the time
and place stated in the public notice and advertisement for bids.
(3) Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for
public inspection.
F. Rejection of bids.
(1) The City Council shall have authority to reject any or all bids.
(2) The City Council may, by resolution approved by the majority of the
governing body, disqualify a bidder who would otherwise be
determined to be the lowest responsible bidder, if the governing
body finds that it has had prior negative experience with the bidder
as defined by the Local Public Contracts Law.126 The decision to
disqualify shall be made within the discretion of City Council in the
best interests of the City.
(3) This section shall be construed to grant City Council any and all
authority it may have to reject bids under the Local Public
Contracts Law or other applicable statute.
G. Award of contract.
(1) Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded by the City
Council to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the
Local Public Contracts Law.127 "Lowest responsible bidder," in
addition to price, shall be determined by the following criteria:
(a) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the services required.
(b) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly or within the time specified without delay or
interference.
(c) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
(d) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
(e) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service.
126. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
127. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 68-22 CHARTER § 68-22
C:659
§ 68-23. Open market procedure.
All purchases of goods and services which do not exceed the bid threshold
set forth in the Local Public Contracts Law may be made in the open market
without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed by § 68-22; except that the Chief Financial Officer's approval
shall be affixed thereto and in the event the estimated value is $1,000 or
more, approval of the Mayor or his designee shall be affixed to the purchase
order or formal written contract, as the case may be.
§ 68-24. Consulting and professional contracts.
Consulting and professional contracts are subject to the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law129 and shall be conducted in a manner
appropriate to contracts of this chapter. Where budget provisions are made
for hiring consultants and professional persons to perform services for the
City, but are not otherwise subject to approval by a board, commission or
(f) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service.
(g) The quality, availability and adaptability of the goods and
services to the particular use required.
(h) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract.
(i) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
(j) The bid is responsive.
(2) Performance bonds. The City Purchasing Agent shall have the
authority to require a performance bond pursuant to the provisions
of the Local Public Contracts Law.128
H. Subdivision prohibited. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to
avoid the requirements of this chapter.
A. Minimum number of quotations. All open market purchases shall,
wherever possible, be based on at least three competitive quotations
and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 68-22G(1).
B. Notice inviting quotations. The City Purchasing Agent shall solicit
quotations by direct mail request to prospective vendors, by telephone
and by public notice posted on the bulletin board of the City Hall.
C. Recording. The City Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of all open
market orders and the quotations submitted in competition thereon,
and such records shall also be open to public inspection.
128. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 68-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 68-24
C:660
agency of the City, the contract shall be subject to approval and execution
by the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk, including those contracts.
§ 68-25. Petty cash fund.
§ 68-26. Central warehousing.
The City Purchasing Agent shall control and supervise storerooms and
warehouses and shall administer the inventory revolving fund.
A. Established. There is hereby established a petty cash fund of $300,
which shall be known as the "Purchasing Agent's petty cash fund."
From this fund shall be paid all purchases not in excess of $25 each
made by the heads of using agencies for incidentals, with the approval
of the City Purchasing Agent.
B. Monthly statement. At the end of each month the City Purchasing Agent
shall render to the Chief Financial Officer a statement showing the
actual expenditures for each using agency so made out of the
Purchasing Agent's petty cash fund, and the City Treasurer shall
reimburse the Purchasing Agent's petty cash fund for such
expenditures in the same manner as other expenditures of such using
agencies are paid.
C. Rules and regulations. The City Purchasing Agent shall promulgate
rules and regulations for use of the Purchasing Agent's petty cash fund,
subject to the approval of the Mayor, City Council and the Chief
Financial Officer.
D. Accounting and expenditure practices. All accounting and expenditure
practices and rules and regulations of the City Purchasing Agent in
regard thereto shall be in accord with the requirements of the Local
Public Contracts Law and the regulations of the Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government.
A. Inventory revolving fund. There shall be provided in each annual
budget an amount required to provide the necessary funds to establish
an inventory revolving fund.
B. Accounting procedure. Requisitions from goods and services in a
storeroom or warehouse shall be credited by the City Purchasing Agent
to the inventory revolving fund by a charge against the appropriation of
the using agency.
C. Inventory. The City Purchasing Agent shall maintain a perpetual
inventory record of all materials, goods and services or equipment
stored in storerooms and warehouses of the City.
§ 68-24 CHARTER § 68-27
C:661
§ 68-27. Available supplies.
The head of the using agency shall have the authority to submit requisitions
to the City Purchasing Agent for goods and services made available to the
using agencies by the City Purchasing Agent.
§ 68-28. Emergency purchases.
§ 68-29. Inspection and testing of items purchased.
The City Purchasing Agent shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all
deliveries of goods and services to determine their conformance with the
specifications set forth in the order or contract.
A. Any contract may be negotiated or awarded without public advertising
for bids and bidding therefor, notwithstanding that the contract price
will exceed the bid threshold, when an emergency affecting the public
health, safety or welfare requires the immediate delivery of goods or
the performance of services, provided that the awarding of such
contracts is made in the following manner:
(1) The Purchasing Agent shall be notified of such an emergency and
the need for invoking this section. If an emergency exists, then the
Purchasing Agent shall be authorized to award a contract or
contracts for such purposes as may be necessary to respond to the
emergent needs. Such notification shall be reduced to writing and
filed with the Purchasing Agent.
(2) Implementation of emergency purchases shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6 and N.J.A.C. 5:34-6.1.
B. Agent's responsibility. The City Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of
all emergency purchases and shall make an analysis of such purchases
and report to the Mayor and the City Council whenever his analysis
shall indicate that the emergency provision procedure is being used to
circumvent the requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law130 or of
this chapter otherwise applicable.
A. Inspection by using agency. The City Purchasing Agent shall have the
authority to authorize using agencies having the staff and facilities for
adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using
agencies under rules and regulations which the Agent shall prescribe.
B. Tests. The City Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to require
chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples
of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and
conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests,
the City Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to make use of
laboratory facilities of any agency of the City government or of any
outside laboratory.
130. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 68-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 68-30
C:662
§ 68-30. Disposition of surplus stock.
§ 68-31. Contracts subject to fair and open process. [Added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 34-2005]
A. All using agencies shall submit to the City Purchasing Agent, at times
and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all
goods and services which are still being used, no longer used or which
have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped.
B. The City Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus
stock to other using agencies.
C. The City Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to sell all goods and
services which have become unsuitable for public use or to exchange
the same for or trade in the same on new goods and services.
D. Sales under this section shall be made by sealed bid or public auction to
the highest responsible bidder pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-36 and in
conformance with § 68-22 or 68-23, whichever is applicable.
A. Contracts awarded having an anticipated value in excess of $17,500, or
such other dollar amount as shall be established in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.5,
may be awarded pursuant to the fair and open process established in
this chapter.
B. All contracts awarded pursuant to the provisions of the Local Public
Contract Law131 through public bidding, the competitive contracting
process or N.J.S.A. 40A:11-12 shall be deemed to have satisfied the
municipal standards for the fair and open process.
C. The City of East Orange, its boards and commissions shall not enter into
a contract having an anticipated value which shall exceed $17,500, or
such other dollar amount as established by N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.5, with a
business entity, except a contract awarded in a fair and open process as
defined by this chapter, if, beginning January 1, 2006, one year prior to
the award of the contract (excluding year 2005 or earlier) that business
entity has made a contribution that is reportable by the recipient under
N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. to any municipal committee of a political party
in East Orange if a member of that political party is serving in an
elective public office of East Orange when the contract is awarded or to
any candidate committee of any person serving in an elective public
office of East Orange when the contract is awarded.
D. Prior to awarding any contract having an anticipated value exceeding
$17,500, or such other dollar amount as determined by N.J.S.A.
19:44A-20.5, except a contract awarded pursuant to the fair and open
process as defined by this chapter or contracts defined in Subsection B
of this section, the business entity shall be required to submit a written
131. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 68-30 CHARTER § 68-31
C:663
§ 68-32. Standards for fair and open process. [Added 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. 34-2005]
certification that it has not made a contribution that would bar the
award of a contract pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.
A. Notice.
(1) Notice shall be given in either an official newspaper of the City of
East Orange or on the City's official website.
(2) Sufficient time of notice shall be publication of either a request for
proposals or request for qualifications 10 calendar days prior to the
designated date for receipt of proposals or qualifications in either
the official newspaper or website.
(3) Receipt of proposals or qualifications shall be by the City's
Purchasing Agent or his designee, and the date, time, place and
manner of receipt shall be included in the notice.
(4) Sufficient contents of notice shall include the following:
(a) Description of the goods or services;
(b) Contact information for obtaining the proposal or qualification
document;
(c) Name of department requesting the proposal or qualifications;
(d) A statement that the proposal or qualifications are being
solicited in a fair and open process in accordance with N.J.S.A.
19:44A-1 et seq.; and
(e) Date, time, place and manner for receipt of proposals or
qualifications.
B. Opening of requests for proposals or qualifications. All proposals or
qualifications received shall be publicly opened and announced at the
date, time and place set forth in the notice soliciting the proposals or
qualifications.
C. Awarding of contract. The awarding of contracts or selection of
business entities pursuant to this section shall be by resolution, which
shall include a statement that the contract was awarded or business
entities selected pursuant to the fair and open process.
D. Advertisement. The Purchasing Agent or his designee is authorized to
advertise for requests for qualifications in the City's official newspaper
or website. The Purchasing Agent shall determine, in conjunction with
the user agency, department, board or commission, the criteria that will
be used for the basis of the contract award, and this criteria shall not be
required to be included in the public notice. The criteria established as
§ 68-31 EAST ORANGE CODE § 68-32
C:664
§ 68-33. Public exigency. [Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 34-2005]
the basis of the award shall be included in the document requesting
proposals or qualifications.
E. Satisfaction of fair and open process. Any contract awarded satisfying
the applicable standards of § 68-32 shall be deemed to have met the
City's requirement for fair and open process as authorized pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq., which shall include N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.5 and
19:44A-20.7.
A. Nothing contained in §§ 68-31 through 68-32 shall be construed as
prohibiting the awarding of a contract when the public exigency
requires immediate delivery of goods or performance of emergency
services as determined by the State Treasurer or as determined in the
applicable New Jersey statute, administrative code, rule or
regulation.132
132. Editor’s Note: Former Art. V, Political Contributions, added 6-20-2011 by Ord. No.
19-2011, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-14-2011 by Ord. No.
29-2011.
§ 68-32 CHARTER § 68-33
C:665
Chapter 74
RECORDS AND INFORMATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5. Licenses and fees generally — See Ch. 170.
§ 74-1. (Reserved)133
§ 74-2. Charges for copies of records in custody of City Clerk.
[Amended 7-19-1976 by Ord. No. 27-1976; 11-28-1988 by Ord. No.
36-1988; 4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 9-1996; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999134]
§ 74-2.1. Passport application and fees. [Added 9-27-2004 by Ord.
No. 29-2004; amended 3-24-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]
A. Public records. Copies of all public records in custody of the City Clerk
shall be available during normal business hours to any member of the
public requesting the same upon payment in advance of the established
fees, including the following fees:
(1) Notarial services.
(a) Notary services, per signature: $2.50.
(b) Acknowledgment of deed, mortgage or other instrument
requiring the same, per copy: $4.
B. Statutory provisions governing certain charges. Copies of any other
records within the office of the City Clerk, where no fee has been set by
this chapter, shall be charged for in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq., its amendments and supplements.
A. Proposed applicants who desire to obtain a United States passport may
apply for a passport at the office of the City Clerk for the following fees:
(1) Two two-by-two-inch pictures (to be attached to the passport
application): $10.
(2) DS-11 form (new passport applications), age 16 and over: United
States Department of State fee.
(3) Execution fee: set by United States Department of State.
133. Editor's Note: Former § 74-1, Use and custody of city records, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-33 EAST ORANGE CODE § 74-2.1
C:666
§ 74-3. Fees for search of tax liens or taxes owing on property.
[Amended 3-24-1975 by Ord. No. 24-1975135]
§ 74-4. Police Department services. [Amended 8-17-1970 by Ord.
No. 36-1970; 4-11-1977 by Ord. No. 18-1977; 10-25-1982 by Ord.
No. 45-1982136]
(4) DS-11 (for children under 16 years of age): United States
Department of State fee.
(5) Expedited services: United States Department of State fee.
(6) File search fee: United States Department of State fee.
(7) Passport card (age 16 and over): United States Department of State
fee.
(8) Passport card (age 15 and under): United States Department of
State fee.
B. All of the above fees, with the exception of Subsection A(1) and (3), are
payable directly to the United States Department of State. The
execution fee and picture fee are made payable to the City of East
Orange and will be accepted in the form of cash or a money order only.
All other applicable fees will be accepted in the form of a check or
money order made payable to the United States Department of State.
A. Tax liens. The Tax Collector or the Assistant Tax Collector shall provide,
upon payment of a fee in accordance with the following schedule, an
official search of tax liens or taxes owing on any property to any person
so applying and, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-14, receive, for each
certificate issued by him, a fee of $10.
B. Duplicate records. The Tax Collector shall provide duplicate records
upon the payment of a fee, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64d, of a maximum
of $5 for the first duplicate copy and a maximum of $25 for each
subsequent duplicate copy of the same tax bill in the same fiscal year.
A. Chief to promulgate regulations authorizing release of information. The
Chief of the Police Department shall prescribe, in writing, regulations
governing the release of noncriminal information from the files of the
Police Department. Such regulations shall specifically set forth that
noncriminal information which may be released by the Police
Department, and all other information shall be treated as confidential
and shall not be released unless by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction or by authority of the Chief of the Police Department.
B. Fees to be charged for Department services.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-2.1 CHARTER § 74-4
C:667
(1) Any person desiring noncriminal information from the files of the
Police Department shall make such request in accordance with and
in the manner prescribed by regulations to be promulgated by the
Chief of the Police Department. Checks and money orders shall be
made payable to the City of East Orange, and all fees shall be
remitted to the Police Department.
(2) Fees to be charged shall be as follows:
(a) Copy of any noncriminal report, per page: $0.50.
(b) Copy of any noncriminal report requested other than in person:
an additional fee of $5 for the first three pages and $1 per page
thereafter.
(c) Copy of noncriminal photograph, per photo: $7.
(d) Permit to purchase pistol or revolver: $2.
(e) Firearms identification card: $5.
(f) Fingerprints registered where required for issuance of permit
or license or for civilian purpose: $3, in addition to such other
fees as may be required by other law enforcement agencies
imposing a processing user fee.
(g) Clearance visa or letter of good conduct: $3.
(h) Report of record of individual when requested by prospective
employer engaged in government contract of a national
security nature: $4.
(i) Notarization of signature, each: $2.
(j) Moving permit: $2.
(k) A search fee for any of the foregoing enumerated services
when a report, record or photograph is not on file: $3.
(l) The charge for the first hour, or part thereof, to include setting
up playback dictaphone machine or record search: $25. For
each succeeding hour or part thereof: $15.
(3) No fee shall be charged for any of the enumerated services when
requested by any municipality, county, state or federal agency or
subdivision thereof. The fee for notarization of signature shall not
apply to signatures required on application forms for commitment
to mental health hospitals.
§ 74-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 74-4
C:668
Chapter 76
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
Real Estate Commission — See Ch. 14A, Art.
VII.
Business Development Authority — See Ch.
15.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 40.
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 76-1. Designation of agency.137
The City Council of the City of East Orange is hereby designated as the
redevelopment agency for the City of East Orange pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., as amended
and supplemented.138
§ 76-2. Powers of City Council.
The powers of the City Council to perform its legislative functions relating
to the redevelopment of the City of East Orange shall include but not be
limited to the following:
A. To dispose of land acquired in a redevelopment area to any person at its
fair value, as determined by the City Council, for the uses specified in
the redevelopment plan and pursuant to law.
B. To review, modify and approve contracts with and/or the plans of
registered architects, licensed professional engineers or planners for
the carrying out of any redevelopment project.
C. To review, modify and approve contracts with public agencies or
redevelopers to provide, as part of any such contract, for extension of
credit or making of loans to redevelopers to finance any redevelopment
work.
D. To review, modify and approve contracts with private parties or public
agencies for the opening, grading, improvement or closing of streets,
roads, roadways, sidewalks, alleys or other places or the acquisition by
the City or other public agencies of property rights or options, including
contracts for the furnishing of property or services in connection with
the redevelopment plan.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
138. Editor's Note: Formerly, the Redevelopment Agencies Law, P.L. 1949, c. 306 (N.J.S.A.
40:55C-1 et seq.)
§ 74-4 CHARTER § 76-2
C:669
§ 76-3. Powers of Mayor.
The powers of the Mayor to perform his executive functions relating to the
redevelopment of the City of East Orange shall include but not be limited to
the following:
E. To review, modify and approve contracts with public agencies, to the
extent and within the scope of the agencies' functions, to cause the
services customarily provided by said agencies to be rendered for the
benefit of occupants of the redevelopment area and to have such
agencies provide and maintain related municipal facilities adjacent to
or in connection with the redevelopment area.
F. To conduct examinations and investigations, including the powers to
hear testimony and take proof under oath at public or private hearing of
any material matter, require attendance of witnesses and the
production of books and papers, take affidavits and issue commissions
for the examination of witnesses who are out of state, unable to attend
or excused from attendance.
G. To formulate policy decisions and undertake necessary or proper action
as to the settlement, compromise or other disposition of litigation
arising from the redevelopment area and project, including the
payment of claims and related activities.
H. To review, modify and approve the selection of the redevelopers to
perform redevelopment activities upon any project and all plans for the
redevelopment projects.
I. To formulate policy decisions relating to the design, modification or
construction of public roadways which are a part of or affected by any
project, retaining walls included in any project area and off-site parking
facilities.
J. To require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
statements regarding said officer's official duties and the performance
thereof and otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, office
or agency of the municipal government as said conduct relates to any
redevelopment project.
K. To undertake any and all additional activities necessary or proper to
carry out its powers and functions.
A. To enforce the laws and ordinances applicable in the municipality as
they affect the redevelopment project.
B. To report to the City Council and public on the status and progress of
the redevelopment project and on such applicable conditions and
requirements of any nature as may bear upon the continuing
redevelopment activities of the project.
§ 76-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 76-3
C:670
§ 76-4. Redevelopment Officer.
The office of Redevelopment Officer is hereby established. The
Redevelopment Officer shall be a City officer appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council. The Redevelopment Officer shall be a person
who, by experience, education and training, is qualified to carry out the
duties assigned to the Redevelopment Officer.
§ 76-5. Duties of Redevelopment Officer.
Subject to applicable laws and ordinances, the Redevelopment Officer shall
exercise the following powers and duties under the supervision of the
Mayor:
C. To make such recommendations for action by the City Council as may
be deemed to be in the public interest.
D. To supervise all activities of the departments of the municipal
government as said activities bear upon the functions and activities of
the redevelopment project.
E. To require each department of the municipal government to prepare
and submit reports with regard to those activities of any redevelopment
project.
F. To exercise those powers afforded by law to attend meetings of the City
Council and take part in City Council conferences as such meetings and
conferences relate to the redevelopment project.
G. To supervise the Redevelopment Officer in accordance with the
Administrative Code.139
H. To undertake any and all additional activities necessary or proper to
carry out his powers and functions.
A. To be the executive officer in charge of redevelopment activities,
including the preparation and modification of the redevelopment plan
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.140
B. To have full charge and management of the redevelopment office and of
the employees in said office.
C. To keep accurate records of books of account of all redevelopment
transactions.
D. To prepare budget recommendations for the redevelopment office.
E. To have full charge and management of the redevelopment properties
and equipment.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Art. XX, Mayor's Office of Planning and Development.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 76-3 CHARTER § 76-5
C:671
Chapter 79
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 5.
F. To prepare and present to the Mayor short- and long-range planning
recommendations for the improvement of redevelopment activities.
G. To coordinate redevelopment activities with the work of other
departments and officers of the City of East Orange.
H. To keep the Mayor and City Council apprised of the respective
obligations to the United States government; to coordinate the
redevelopment activities of the municipality with those of the United
States government; to coordinate the activities of redevelopment
planners and consultants; and to establish progress schedules of
redevelopment activity.
I. To prepare written reports of all redevelopment activities of the City of
East Orange undertaken with regard to any redevelopment project
during the relevant period. Said reports shall be reviewed by the Mayor
and shall be provided to the City Council on or before the 15th and the
final day of each month. Said reports shall adequately summarize and
describe the redevelopment activities undertaken and shall include a
discussion of recommended future actions under consideration. The
reports shall also describe activities relating to present or future
tenants of the redevelopment area and activities undertaken with the
Parking Authority, Housing Authority or other authority, board or
agency relating to the redevelopment project.
J. To undertake any additional activities necessary or proper to carry out
his powers and duties.
§ 76-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 76-5
C:672
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 22-2008 (Ch. 5, Art. L, of the 1980
City Code)]
§ 79-1. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 79-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. City Administrator;
B. Corporation Counsel, First Assistant Corporation Counsel and Assistant
Corporation Counsel;
C. Chief Municipal Prosecutor and Municipal Prosecutor;
D. Chief Municipal Court Judge, Municipal Court Judge and Temporary
Municipal Court Judge;
E. Municipal Court Director;
F. City Treasurer;
G. Municipal Engineer;
H. Director, Data Processing;
I. Director, Human Resource Services;
J. Director of Health and Human Services;
K. Director of Planning;
L. Director of Property Maintenance;
M. Director of Public Works;
N. Director, Recreation and Cultural Affairs;
O. Secretary to the Mayor;
P. Police Director.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
§ 79-1 CHARTER § 79-2
C:673
§ 79-3. Pension Certifying Officer determinations.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 79-1 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 79-2 above,
the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may determine that the
individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program, if that individual:
§ 79-4. Statutory construction and interpretation.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Municipal Planner;
H. Registered Municipal Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and served continuously since that time; or
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim or acting basis to a position
requiring state certification, as set forth in § 79-2 herein, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 79-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 79-4
C:674
Chapter 83
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business Development Authority — See Ch.
15.
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Redevelopment Agency — See Ch. 76.
§ 79-4 CHARTER § 79-4
C:675

ARTICLE I
Zone Development Corporation
[Adopted 10-21-1994 by Ord. No. 15-1994]
§ 83-1. Development Corporation designated.
The City Council of the City of East Orange hereby designates the East
Orange Economic Development Corporation, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 52:27H-67, to act as the Zone Development Corporation for the City
of East Orange.
§ 83-2. Board of Directors.
The Zone Development Corporation shall include on its Board of Directors
representatives of the East Orange government, members of the East
Orange business community and representatives of community
organizations in the municipality, and the total membership of the Board
of Directors shall be broadly representative of businesses and communities
within the municipality.
§ 83-3. Administration and implementation of Zone Development
Plan.
The Zone Development Corporation shall monitor, administer and
implement the Zone Development Plan of the City of East Orange subject to
the approval of the City Council of the City of East Orange.
§ 83-4. Compliance with statutory provisions.
It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Directors of the Zone
Development Corporation designated herein to ensure that all provisions
of the Enterprise Zones Act (P.L. 1983, c. 303), as may be amended,141 are
adhered to as long as it is designated as the Zone Development Corporation.
141. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
§ 83-1 CHARTER § 83-4
C:677

ARTICLE II
Acceptance of Zone Designation and Zone Development Plan
[Adopted 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 11-1996]
§ 83-5. Acceptance of designation and plan.
The governing body of the City of East Orange does hereby accept the
designation of certain areas contained in its application. The City Council
accepts this designation from the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority and
accepts the designation of the Zone Development Plan as formulated and
approved in the aforesaid application.
§ 83-5 CHARTER § 83-5
C:679
Chapter 84
VEHICLES, CITY-OWNED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug and alcohol testing of employees
required to maintain a commercial driver's
license — See Ch. 60, Art. XIV.
§ 83-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 83-5
C:680
ARTICLE I
Use
[Adopted 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 18-1998; amended 8-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 15-2000]
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL — City employees assigned or permitted by
a department head to operate a vehicle; City officials and department
heads authorized by the Mayor or the Boards of Police, Fire or Water
Commissioners to operate a vehicle; the Mayor.
MUNICIPAL VEHICLES — All sedans, station wagons, sports utility
vehicles, vans, trucks and equipment owned or leased by the City of East
Orange or the Boards of Police, Fire or Water Commissioners for use by
authorized City employees to conduct the business of the City.
OFFICIAL VEHICLES — Municipal vehicles used by City officials,
department heads or employees to conduct City business.
POOL VEHICLES — Municipal vehicles obtained from a centralized group
of vehicles used by authorized City employees to conduct City business.
§ 84-2. Lease of motor vehicles.
§ 84-3. Mayor's vehicle.
A vehicle shall be provided for the use of the Mayor, equipped with the
appropriate communications equipment.
§ 84-4. Labeling of municipal vehicles.
All new and existing municipal vehicles shall be plainly marked or lettered
"City of East Orange, For Official Use," with the department or division
also identified, which marking or lettering shall be in letters at least one
inch in height conspicuously placed in a contrasting color on the vehicle.
Labeling shall not apply to the vehicle used or operated by the Mayor. The
City Council shall establish a budgetary line item to purchase the necessary
decals for labeling. All municipal vehicles shall be licensed as a municipal
A. The municipality may lease municipal vehicles pursuant to this section,
subject to the availability and appropriation annually of sufficient funds
as may be required to meet the extended obligation.
B. Leasing municipal vehicles shall be as permitted by the Local Public
Contracts Law;142 provided, however, that such contracts shall be
entered into only subject to and in accordance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services of the Department of Community Affairs.
142. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 84-1 CHARTER § 84-4
C:681
government vehicle and shall display municipal government license plates.
Vehicles used by the Police and Fire Departments for undercover
investigative purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this
section.
§ 84-5. Motor vehicle use.
All official vehicles which are assigned to City officials, department heads or
employees (with the exception of the Mayor, City Administrator and Chief
of Staff) are to be made available for use on City business by all other
members of their department. City officials and department heads assigned
vehicles are allowed to drive their assigned vehicles to and from their home
only if they reside in East Orange, unless granted an exemption by the
Mayor.
§ 84-6. Use of City vehicles.
§ 84-7. Motor vehicle operator license requirements.
A. Persons assigned a vehicle shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred
regarding maintenance and safekeeping following the submission of a
voucher that details the expenses and dates incurred. Municipal
vehicles are to be used for official work-related activities only. Only
authorized persons may be transported in a municipal vehicle.
B. Unauthorized use or removal of a municipal vehicle may be cause for
disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment.
C. An employee may be held liable for a loss or damages to a municipal
vehicle if the loss or damage is the result of gross negligence or
reckless conduct on the part of the employee.
D. All occupants of municipal vehicles must wear their seat belts in
compliance with laws of the State of New Jersey.
E. It shall be the employee's responsibility to possess the current vehicle
registration and insurance card and make sure that the vehicle has a
current inspection sticker.
F. Payment of traffic/parking tickets are the responsibility of the operator
of the vehicle. Failure to attend to the summons and pay any fine
required may result in disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
A. If the possession of a valid motor vehicle operator license is a condition
of employment and that license is suspended or revoked for any reason,
the employee may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
removal from their position.
B. The employee shall inform his or her division head, within 24 hours of
the event, if his or her motor vehicle license or commercial driver's
§ 84-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 84-7
C:682
§ 84-8. Vehicle operation.
§ 84-9. Motor vehicle accidents.
§ 84-10. Vehicle use and mileage reimbursement.
license endorsement(s) is suspended or revoked for any reason. Failure
to inform the City is sufficient cause for disciplinary action.
C. To use a municipal vehicle, an employee must possess a current, valid
driver's license, which is valid for the class of vehicle to be driven. The
operation of a municipal vehicle with a suspended or revoked license
may be cause for disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
A. All employees operating municipal vehicles must comply with all motor
vehicle and traffic laws. Failure to comply with all motor vehicle and
traffic laws may result in disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
B. A municipal vehicle should be inspected prior to operation. Any defects
found with the municipal vehicle before, during and after operation
must be reported to the immediate supervisor.
A. All motor vehicle accidents involving a municipal vehicle must be
reported to the Police Department in the location where the accident
occurs.
B. A vehicular accident report must be prepared by the driver and his
immediate supervisor. Also, a vehicular loss notice must be prepared
inclusive of all sketches and details. The completed reports are to be
submitted to the appointee and/or department head responsible for
vehicular accident records within 24 hours of the accident.
C. Vehicular accident report. The following procedures must be adhered to
when an accident occurs:
(1) Stop and investigate immediately;
(2) Attend to injured first;
(3) Obtain names and addresses of owners, drivers and occupants of
the other vehicle(s) involved;
(4) Obtain the other parties' insurance company names, addresses and
policy numbers; and
(5) Do not discuss the accident nor sign any statements unless
authorized to do so by an authorized City official, other than the
police officer filing the report.
A. A municipal vehicle should be used for official business. An employee
may only use a private vehicle to conduct City business with permission
from the employee's supervisor when there is no municipal vehicle
§ 84-7 CHARTER § 84-10
C:683
§ 84-11. Vehicle maintenance.
§ 84-12. Insurance.
§ 84-13. Scope.
This article shall apply to all municipal departments, including the Fire
Department, Police Department and Board of Water Commissioners.
available. Employees who, through necessity, must use their private
automobile for City business are eligible for reimbursement of mileage
at a rate stated by City Council resolution. Employees shall be
reimbursed for mileage following the submission of a voucher that
details the actual number of miles traveled, the purpose of the trip
and the specific dates of travel. Any toll and parking receipts are to be
attached to the voucher.
B. Mileage may be charged under the following circumstances:
(1) To conduct City business when a municipal vehicle is not available;
(2) To attend a meeting pertaining to City business after normal
business hours, in the evenings, holidays or weekends; and
(3) To attend a job-required training program or school sessions
associated with employment with the City.
A. Assigned drivers are responsible for ensuring that the vehicles are kept
clean, in good operating condition and are serviced in accordance with
a representative maintenance schedule.
B. A log must be maintained for all maintenance performed on municipal
vehicles. This log sheet must be submitted on a monthly basis to the
central City garage for filing.
A. The City of East Orange shall provide insurance coverage for the
following purposes:
(1) To insure against any loss or damage however caused to any motor
vehicle owned or leased by it or owned or leased by or under the
control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions.
(2) To insure against liability for its negligence and that of its officers,
employees and servants, whether or not compensated or part-time,
who are authorized to perform any act or services.
B. The City of East Orange shall provide uninsured motorist coverage for
any one accident in the minimum amount required by the insurance
laws of the State of New Jersey.
C. The City of East Orange shall provide insurance coverage for the
authorized operators of all municipal vehicles against liability for
damages to property.
§ 84-10 EAST ORANGE CODE § 84-13
C:684
ARTICLE II
Insurance
[Adopted 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998]
§ 84-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INSURED —
UNINSURED MOTOR VEHICLE —
An employee or City official with authorization to operate a City of East
Orange vehicle;
A.
B. Any other authorized occupant of a City of East Orange vehicle; and
Any person that is entitled to recover damages because of bodily injury
sustained by a person described in Subsection A or B above to which
this coverage applies.
C.
Includes a land motor vehicle or trailer of any type:
To which no bodily injury liability bond or policy applies at the time
of the accident;
(1)
To which a bodily injury liability bond or policy applies at the time
of the accident in which the limits for bodily injury liability must be
less than the minimum limit for bodily injury liability specified by
the Financial Responsibility Law of the State of New Jersey;
(2)
Which is a hit-and-run vehicle whose operator or owner cannot be
identified and which hits a City-owned vehicle, which an insured
person is occupying; and
(3)
To which a bodily injury liability bond or policy applies at the time
of the accident but the bonding or insuring company:
(a) Denies coverage; or
(b) Is or becomes insolvent.
(4)
A.
"Uninsured motor vehicle" does not include any vehicle or equipment:
Owned by or furnished or available for the regular use of the
insured;
(1)
Owned or operated by a self-insurer under any applicable motor
vehicle law;
(2)
(3) Owned by any governmental unit or agency;
(4) Operated on rails or crawler treads;
B.
§ 84-14 CHARTER § 84-14
C:685
§ 84-15. Insuring agreement.
§ 84-16. Exclusions.
§ 84-17. Limit of liability.
Designed mainly for use off public roads while not on public roads;
and
(5)
(6) While located for use as a residence or premises.
A. The City of East Orange Self-Insured Fund will pay damages which an
insured is legally entitled to recover from the owner or operator of an
uninsured motor vehicle because of bodily injury:
(1) Sustained by an insured; and
(2) Caused by an accident.
B. The owner's or operator's liability for these damages must arise out of
the ownership, maintenance or use of the uninsured motor vehicle.
C. Any adjustment for damages arising out of a suit instituted without
authorization of the City of East Orange and notice to the City is not
binding on the City of East Orange.
A. The City does not provide uninsured motorist's coverage for bodily
injury sustained by any person:
(1) While occupying or when struck by any motor vehicle owned by the
insured which is not covered by bodily injury liability insurance.
This includes a trailer of any type used with that vehicle.
(2) If that person or the legal representative settles the bodily injury
claim without the authorization of the City of East Orange.
(3) Using a City-owned vehicle without a reasonable belief that the
person is entitled to use the vehicle.
B. This coverage shall not apply directly or indirectly to benefit any
insurer or self-insurer under any of the following or similar law:
(1) Worker's compensation law; or
(2) Disability benefits law.
A. The limit of liability is $15,000 per individual and $30,000 per
occurrence for this coverage. This is the maximum limit of liability for
all damages resulting from any one accident. This is the most the City of
East Orange will pay, regardless of the number of:
(1) Insureds.
(2) Claims made.
§ 84-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 84-17
C:686
§ 84-18. Other insurance.
If there is other applicable similar insurance, the City of East Orange will
pay only the City's share of the loss. The City's share is the proportion that
the City's limit of liability bears to the total of all applicable limits.
§ 84-19. Arbitration.
(3) Vehicles involved in the accident.
B. Any amounts otherwise payable for damages under this coverage shall
be reduced by all sums:
(1) Paid because of the bodily injury by or on behalf of persons or
organizations who may be legally responsible; and
(2) Paid or payable because of the bodily injury under any of the
following or similar laws:
(a) Worker's compensation law; or
(b) Disability benefits law.
A. If the City of East Orange and an insured do not agree whether that
person is legally entitled to recover damages under this article or as to
the amount of damages, either party may make a written demand for
arbitration. In this event, each party will select an arbitrator. The two
arbitrators will select a third. If they cannot agree within 30 days,
either may request that selection be made by a judge of a court having
jurisdiction.
B. Each party will:
(1) Pay the expenses it incurs; and
(2) Bear the expenses of the third arbitrator equally.
C. Unless both parties agree otherwise, arbitration will take place in Essex
County. Local rules of law as to procedure and evidence will apply. A
decision agreed to by two of the arbitrators will be binding as to:
(1) Whether the insured is legally entitled to recover damages; and
(2) The amount of damages.
§ 84-17 CHARTER § 84-19
C:687
Part III: General Legislation
Chapter 94
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 28.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 84-19 EAST ORANGE CODE § 84-19
C:688
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 94-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AIR CONTAMINANT — Solid particles, liquid particles, vapors or gases
which are discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.[Added 9-11-1972 by
Ord. No. 33-1972]
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property,
or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property as
shall be affected thereby, and excludes all aspects of employer-employee
relationship as to health and safety hazards.
COMMON INCINERATOR — An incinerator designed and used to burn
waste materials of Types 0, 1, 2 and 3 only, in all capacities not exceeding
2,000 pounds per hour of waste material input.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
DIRECTOR — The person holding the position of Director of Air Pollution
Control created and established by this chapter and authorized to exercise
the powers, duties and functions prescribed herein.
DUST — Airborne solid particles, including but not limited to fly ash, cinders
and soot.
FLY ASH — Particles of gasborne solid matter arising from the combustion
of solid fuel, not including process materials.
FUEL — Solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce useful heat by
burning.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
FUEL OIL — Oil commonly used as a fuel. The grades are commonly
numbered 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 and have the requirements as shown in Table I of
Commercial Standard CS 12-48 published by the United States Department
of Commerce or any equivalent succeeding table or reference published
hereafter by such Department.
FUMES — Solid particles generated by condensation from the vapor state,
generally after volatilization from molten metals, etc.
GARBAGE — Waste animal or vegetable matter from houses, kitchens,
restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any other source or food of any kind
to be thrown away.[Amended 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
GAS — A formless fluid which occupies space and which can be changed to
a liquid or solid state by increased pressure with decreased or controlled
§ 94-1 CHARTER § 94-1
C:689
temperature or by decreased temperature with increased or controlled
pressure.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, trade waste, debris
or scrap, or a facility for cremating human or animal remains.[Amended
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat-conducting
material to a substance being heated so that the latter is not contacted
by and adds nothing to the products of combustion.[Added 9-11-1972 by
Ord. No. 33-1972]
INTERNAL CROSS-SECTIONAL DIMENSION — Any maximum linear
perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to the
inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular cross section
or the length or width of a rectangular cross section.[Added 9-11-1972 by
Ord. No. 33-1972]
LIQUID PARTICLES — Particles which have volume but are not of rigid
shape and which, upon collection, tend to coalesce and create uniform
homogeneous films upon the surface of the collecting media.[Added
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Any action, operation or treatment
embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing factors,
methods or forms, including but not limited to furnaces, kettles, ovens,
converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roasters, crushers,
grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters, reboilers,
columns, classifiers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters, towers,
washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers and absorbers.[Added 9-11-1972
by Ord. No. 33-1972]
ODOR — A property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPACITY — The property of a substance which renders it partially or wholly
obstructive to the transmission of visible light, expressed as the percentage
to which the light is obstructed.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
OPEN AIR — Air space outside of buildings, stacks or exterior ducts.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire whose products of combustion are emitted
directly into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney of an incinerator.[Amended 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of a building
or premises or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or shall have charge, care or control of any
dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as fiduciary,
§ 94-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 94-1
C:690
including but not limited to executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate, or as a
mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained.
Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any
dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor
and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or
assigned by such lessee.
PARTICLES — Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in
finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard
conditions.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
PLANT LIFE — Vegetation, including but not limited to trees, tree branches,
leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.[Added
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
REFUSE — Rubbish, garbage, trade waste and plant life.[Amended
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's Scale for grading the
density of smoke, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or
any chart, recorder, indicator or device which is approved by the State
Department of Environmental Protection as the equivalent of such
Ringelmann's Scale for the measurement of smoke density.[Amended
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
RUBBISH — Waste solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber,
carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No.
33-1972]
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any operation or activity from which is salvaged
or reclaimed any product or material, including but not limited to metals,
chemicals or shipping containers.[Amended 9-11-1972 by Ord. No.
33-1972]
SMOKE — Small gasborne and airborne particles, exclusive of water vapor,
arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to be
observable.[Amended 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
SOLID FUEL — Any fuel that is not liquid or gaseous.
SOLID PARTICLES — Particles of rigid shape and definite volume.[Added
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
SOOT — A dark substance, essentially carbon, resulting from the burning
or heating of coal, wood, oil or other fuels or burnable material.
SOURCE OPERATION — Any manufacturing process or any identifiable part
thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere through
one or more stacks or chimneys.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
SPECIAL INCINERATOR — Municipal, pathological waste or trade waste
incinerator of any burning capacity, or any incinerator with a burning
capacity in excess of 2,000 pounds per hour.
§ 94-1 CHARTER § 94-1
C:691
STACK or CHIMNEY — A fuel, conduit or opening designed and constructed
for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor air.[Added
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
STANDARD CONDITIONS — Seventy degrees Fahrenheit and one
atmospheric pressure (14.7 pounds per square inch absolute or 760 mm
Hg).[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
SUBSTANCE — Includes smoke, cinders, soot, fly ash, dust, gases, fumes,
mists, vapors or odors, or combination thereof.
TRADE WASTE — All waste solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste material.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord.
No. 33-1972]
VAPORS — The gaseous form of substances which, under standard
conditions (14.7 pounds per square inch absolute and 70º F.), are in the
solid or liquid state and which can be changed to these states by either
increasing the pressure or decreasing the temperature.[Amended
6-9-1969 by Ord. No. 20-1969]
VISIBLE SMOKE — Smoke which obscures light to a degree readily
discernible by visual observation.[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No.
33-1972]
§ 94-2. Findings and declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders,
soot, fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors and odors is a menace to the health,
welfare and comfort of the residents of this City and a cause of substantial
damage to property. For the purpose of controlling and reducing
atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of this City to
minimize air pollution as herein defined and prohibit excessive emission of
the same by establishing standards governing the installation, maintenance
and operation of equipment and appurtenances relating to combustion,
which is a source or potential source of air pollution.
§ 94-3. Director of Air Pollution Control; enforcement personnel.
A. There is hereby established the position of Director of Air Pollution
Control, who is hereby vested with the duty of enforcing and
administering this chapter and with all other duties and powers
provided herein. The Director may appoint or designate other
employees or officers of the City to perform duties necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter.
B. The Board of Health, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-90, may appoint any
person employed by the Suburban Air Pollution Commission, or its
successor, to administer and enforce this chapter in addition to the
powers and appointments provided by Subsection A above.
§ 94-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 94-4
C:692
§ 94-4. Promulgation of rules and regulations; filing.
The Director of Air Pollution Control, with the approval of the Board of
Health, may promulgate such rules and regulations consistent with this
chapter governing installation, maintenance and use of fuel-burning
equipment, incinerators, the burning of various types of fuel and fuel oil,
and the types of matter subject to incineration, as may be necessary to
minimize or eliminate air pollution. The Director of Air Pollution Control
may conduct such investigations, hold such hearings and make such tests as
may be necessary to establish specifications to be incorporated in such rules
and regulations. All regulations shall be filed 15 days prior to the effective
date thereof with the City Clerk, the Mayor and the City Council.
§ 94-5. Availability of regulations to owners and operators;
conspicuous posting.
All owners or operators of property on which there exists fuel-burning
equipment or incinerators, or both, shall secure from the Director of Air
Pollution Control such regulations as shall be reproduced and made
available as to the maintenance and operation of such equipment and
incinerators, and copies of the regulations shall be kept posted at all times
by such owner or operator at a conspicuous location at or near such
equipment or incinerator affected thereby. Copies of such regulations shall
be distributed personally to each person who has responsibility for the
maintenance or operation of such equipment or incinerator in behalf of
the owner or operator. The Director of Air Pollution Control may require
the posting by the owner or operator at specified locations of such other
permanent-type signs as may be necessary and desirable to instruct
personnel or occupants of the premises as to the proper maintenance and
operation of the equipment or incinerator.
§ 94-6. Construction of provisions.
This chapter is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
§ 94-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980]
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $2,500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both, for each violation committed hereunder.143
B. Each violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
and distinct violation independent of any other section or subsection or
any order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day's failure to comply
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 94-4 CHARTER § 94-7
C:693
with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 94-7 EAST ORANGE CODE § 94-7
C:694
ARTICLE II
Air Pollution Regulations
§ 94-8. Pollution prohibited.
No person nor owner of property or person having possession or control
thereof shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the open air
substances in such quantities as shall result in pollution.
§ 94-8 CHARTER § 94-8
C:695

ARTICLE III
Open Burning
[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
§ 94-9. Salvage operations.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit a salvage operation by open
burning.
§ 94-10. Burning of rubbish or garbage.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of rubbish,
garbage or trade waste, buildings or structures by open burning.
§ 94-11. Disposal of plant life.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of any type of
plant life by open burning.
§ 94-12. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
A. Variances approved and issued by the State Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with Chapter II, Section 5, of
the State Air Pollution Control Code.
B. Open burning of refuse for training or research exercises when
conducted at a permanent facility or training center designed to be
used solely for such purposes on a continuing basis.
§ 94-9 CHARTER § 94-12
C:697

ARTICLE IV
Smoke from Combustion of Fuel
[Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 33-1972]
§ 94-13. Emission through indirect heat exchangers of small
capacity.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be emitted
into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any stationary indirect
heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of less than 200,000,000
British thermal units (BTUs) gross heat input or discharging through a stack
or chimney having an internal cross-sectional dimension of less than 60
inches.
§ 94-14. Emission through indirect heat exchangers of large
capacity.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart,
or greater than twenty-percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be
emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of 200,000,000 BTUs
or greater gross heat input or discharging through a stack or chimney
having an internal cross-sectional dimension of 60 inches or greater.
§ 94-15. Allowable emission of visible smoke.
The provisions of §§ 94-13 and 94-14 shall not apply to smoke which is
visible for a period of not longer than three minutes in any consecutive
thirty-minute period.
§ 94-16. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to direct heat exchangers or
manufacturing processes or any motor vehicle while operating on the public
highways.
§ 94-17. Furnishing of facilities for measuring smoke.
Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration or use
of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the Director, provide
the facilities and necessary equipment for determining the density or
opacity of smoke being discharged into the open air and shall conduct such
smoke tests using methods approved by the Director.
§ 94-13 CHARTER § 94-17
C:699

ARTICLE V
Standards for the Emission of Solid Particles
§ 94-18. Emission from stack or chimney restricted.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit particles to be emitted from
any stack or chimney into the outdoor air, the shade or appearance of which
is greater than twenty-percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor.
§ 94-19. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply:
A. To the emission of particles the shade or appearance of which is greater
than twenty-percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a period of
not longer than three minutes in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
B. To source operations issued a variance in accordance with Chapter 7,
Section 5, of the State Air Pollution Control Code.
C. To indirect heat exchangers.
D. To incinerators.
E. For a period of five years from the date of issuance of a valid permanent
certificate to operate to a source operation equipped with control
apparatus for which a valid permit to construct or the permanent
certificate to operate was issued by the State Department of
Environmental Protection during the period from June 15, 1967 to the
effective date of this article.
§ 94-18 CHARTER § 94-19
C:701

ARTICLE VI
Stacks and Chimneys
§ 94-20. Information required as to certain operations.
Except as hereinafter provided, persons burning solid or liquid fuel whose
products of combustion are discharged into the open air from a stack or
chimney shall submit to the Director of Air Pollution Control information
for each such stack or chimney relating to place, type of fuel burned, heat
of fuel burned, quantity of fuel burned per hour, description of combustion
equipment, usual period of operation, height and size of outlet, description
of dust-removal equipment and such other and pertinent information as may
be requested, on forms provided for that purpose by the Director of Air
Pollution Control. The application forms shall also require submission of
name, address and telephone number of the persons responsible for day-today
operation and also of the persons responsible for maintenance of any
such equipment. Any change in the name, address or telephone number of
such person or persons shall be reported within 10 days of the occurrence
of such change to the Director of Air Pollution Control.
§ 94-21. Time of submission of information; compliance with
building regulations.
The information required by § 94-20 shall be submitted to the Director of Air
Pollution Control within 90 days after either new installations a144re placed
into service or existing installations are altered. Nothing herein shall be
construed as relieving any person from the requirements of the Building
Code of the City. From time to time, additional reports concerning these
items may be requested by the Director of Air Pollution Control.
§ 94-22. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to equipment designed for use
in which the heat content of the fuel burned is not more than 1,000,000
British thermal units per hour, except that equipment designed for use of or
actually using No. 5 or 6 fuel oil or coal shall comply with the provisions of
this article.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 94-20 CHARTER § 94-22
C:703

ARTICLE VII
Incinerators
§ 94-23. Compliance with provisions.
No person shall operate and no owner or operator of any building in the City
shall permit the operation of an incinerator in violation of any provision of
this chapter.
§ 94-24. Permit required.
No person shall operate and no owner or operator of any building in the
City shall permit the operation of an incinerator without a duly issued
permit issued by the Director of Air Pollution Control in accordance with
this article.
§ 94-25. Application for permits.
Applications for permits to operate incinerators shall be made on forms
provided by the Director of Air Pollution Control and shall provide such
information as may be necessary to determine the nature of the installation,
safety and fire protection devices, design and devices sufficient to ensure
against air pollution, necessary information as to person or persons
responsible for operation and for maintenance, and qualifications therefor,
and such other pertinent information as may be necessary for protection of
the public welfare, safety, health and interest.
§ 94-26. Issuance of permits; conditions; fees; duration of permit.
[Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]
The Director of Air Pollution Control shall recommend issuance of a permit
for the operation of an incinerator after examining the application and
inspecting the facility and being satisfied that it may be operated in
accordance with this chapter. Such permit may be conditioned on
improvements being made within a prescribed time or on certain operating
restrictions if necessary to comply with this chapter. All permits shall be
issued by the City Clerk and shall expire on July 31 following their issuance
or at such time prior thereto as any conditions or restrictions shall not be
complied with. The annual fee for each incinerator shall be as provided
for in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, payable to the City Clerk, and the
procedures governing such permit shall be in accordance with Chapter 170,
Licenses and Fees.
§ 94-27. Sealing of incinerators operated without permit.
The Director of Air Pollution Control may take all necessary steps to seal
any incinerator which has been operated without a duly authorized permit
issued pursuant to this article.
§ 94-23 CHARTER § 94-28
C:705
§ 94-28. Hours of operation.
No person shall operate and no owner or operator of any building in the
City shall permit the operation of an incinerator prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
5:00 p.m., and all operation shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m.,
including complete extinction of the fire and removal of materials from
the firebox to a noncombustible container in a safe manner, provided that,
by special permit, the Director of Air Pollution Control may, because of
exceptional circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of
the public or of persons in the vicinity.
§ 94-29. Abatement of nuisances.
Where the operation of an incinerator constitutes an immediate and
substantial menace to public health and safety or is a substantial source of
air pollution causing irritation and discomfort to persons in the vicinity, and
the owner or operator fails, upon written or oral notice, to take immediate
corrective measures, the Director of Air Pollution Control may take all
necessary measures to abate the condition, including but not limited to
ordering the cessation of use of the equipment and sealing the same
pending a hearing in the Municipal Court.
§ 94-30. Construction and installation standards.
All incinerators hereafter installed shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with the current specifications of the IIA Incinerator Standards,
as published by the Incinerator Institute of America, and any subsequent
amendments thereto, except as such standards may be modified by
regulations promulgated and filed by the Director of Air Pollution Control in
accordance with this chapter or by the Building Code of the City.
§ 94-31. Applicability of standards to existing installations;
alteration permits.
To the extent feasible, existing installations shall be maintained in
accordance with and, if altered, repaired, renovated or converted, shall
be made to conform with, the IIA Incinerator Standards specifications
adopted by § 94-30. Prior to altering, renovating or converting any existing
incinerator, the owner or person in charge thereof shall apply for an
alteration permit therefor from the Director of Air Pollution Control,
specifying the type and nature of any such change in the installation. The
Director of Air Pollution Control may condition such permit on compliance
with the aforesaid standards, to the extent compliance is feasible. Upon
request of the owner, the Director of Air Pollution Control shall hold a
hearing upon written notice and within 15 days of the aforesaid request
on any proposed condition or order of the Director of Air Pollution Control
requiring compliance with such standards, at which time the applicant can
present such proofs, information or data as may relate to the issuance of the
alteration permit, the conditions attached thereto and the applicability and
§ 94-28 EAST ORANGE CODE § 94-31
C:706
feasibility of the aforesaid standards. In determining feasibility as applied
to proposed changes in existing incinerators, the Director of Air Pollution
Control shall weigh the physical and financial difficulties of making such
change as against the effect of such change in eliminating or curtailing
the likelihood of air pollution. The Director of Air Pollution Control, within
10 days after the hearing, shall make a determination of such application
or order, and the issuance of the permit by the City Clerk shall be in
accordance therewith.
§ 94-32. Prohibited emissions. [Amended 6-9-1969 by Ord. No.
20-1969]
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any incinerator
the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart to be emitted into the open air or emissions of such opacity
within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity
leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated
as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
§ 94-33. Exceptions. [Amended 6-9-1969 by Ord. No. 20-1969]
The provisions of § 94-32 shall not apply to smoke emitted during the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not greater than
No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of three consecutive
minutes, or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney or, exclusive
of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney, to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, for a period greater than three consecutive minutes.
§ 94-34. Visible emissions from certain incinerators prohibited.
[Amended 6-9-1969 by Ord. No. 20-1969]
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles of
unburned waste or ash from any common incinerator or from any special
incinerator which are individually large enough to be visible while
suspended in the atmosphere.
§ 94-35. Incinerators causing odors. [Amended 6-9-1969 by Ord.
No. 20-1969]
No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any common
incinerator or any special incinerator which will result in odors being
detectable by sense of smell in any area of human use or occupancy.
§ 94-31 CHARTER § 94-35
C:707

ARTICLE VIII
Inspections and Right of Entry
§ 94-36. Buildings and premises subject to inspections; hours.
All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to inspection
from time to time by the Director of Air Pollution Control or his duly
authorized representatives. All rooms and areas in the building shall be
available and accessible for such inspection, which shall be made during
usual business hours if the premises are used for nonresidential purposes;
provided, however, that inspections may be made at other times if:
§ 94-37. Refusal to permit inspection.
Where the Director of Air Pollution Control or his duly authorized
representative is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or
prevented by the owner or operator from conducting an inspection of the
premises, such person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 94-38. Search warrants.
A. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection; or
B. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection during other
than the prescribed hours; or
C. There is reason to believe that a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
A. The Director of Air Pollution Control may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the City for a search warrant, setting
forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
chapter may exist on the premises, including one or more of the
following:
(1) That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the City for periodic inspections of premises of the
type involved.
(2) That observation of external conditions (smoke, ash, soot, odors) of
the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief that
violations of this chapter exist.
(3) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
or system, types of incinerator, particular use of premises or other
factor which renders systematic inspections of such building
necessary in the interest of public health or safety.
§ 94-36 CHARTER § 94-38
C:709
§ 94-39. Emergency inspections.
Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the Director
of Air Pollution Control has reason to believe that a condition exists which
poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall
only take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance
of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the
Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:2C-32. Where the Director or his agent is refused entry or access or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from
conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation
of this chapter and subject to the penalties hereunder.
B. If the Judge of the Municipal Court is satisfied as to the matter set forth
in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant
permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on
which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ 94-38 EAST ORANGE CODE § 94-39
C:710
Chapter 97
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146. Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 97-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon
the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal agencies to
any location in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this
chapter in no way prohibit alarm companies from providing service by
private source to other offices within or without the City of East Orange so
long as such activity is not connected to the alarm console; except, however,
that any person having premises protected by an alarm device shall still be
responsible for the registration thereof in accordance with § 97-5A without
fee.
§ 97-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices giving a visual
or audio response, or both, and located within the confines of the Police
Department and Fire Department headquarters of the City of East Orange.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the
alarm console, providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other
peril.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one or more buildings at a location other than the alarm
consoles.
CLASS A RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Such property whose permitted use
is defined under Chapter 51, §§ 51-92 and 51-93, of the Code of the City
of East Orange (single- to three-family residences), including single units
within high-rise structures that have occupant-owned alarm systems solely
protecting the single unit.[Added 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010145]
CLASS B RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Such property whose permitted use
is defined under Chapter 51, §§ 51-94, 51-95 and 51-96, of the Code of
the City of East Orange (multifamily greater than three units and high-rise
structures).[Added 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010146]
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 94-39 CHARTER § 97-2
C:711
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Such property whose permitted use is defined
under Chapter 51, §§ 51-98 through 51-103, of the Code of the City of East
Orange, including industrial uses (business and industrial uses).[Added
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010147]
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Limited to a member of the Police
Department and Fire Department, City of East Orange.
DIAL ALARM — That type of device using telephone lines transmitting an
alarm directly through the police or fire switchboard.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or
unintentional act of someone other than an intruder and shall include, as
well, alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant
equipment. Excluded are alarm signals caused by violent conditions of
nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to
control by the alarm business operator or alarm user or owner that are
not related to alarm maintenance.[Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
20-2010]
LICENSEE — The person obtaining the license to maintain the alarm
consoles hereinafter set forth.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when actuated, produces a
signal not connected to the alarm consoles, such as store burglar alarms
actuating bell devices, plus heat, fire or smoke alarms actuating an audible
device.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device or a local alarm within
the scope of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation,
association or City agency.
§ 97-3. Alarm console license.
A. There is hereby established a police and fire alarm console license,
which shall be granted by the Police Director/Chief of Police and Fire
Chief as set forth in § 97-4 of this chapter. [Amended 10-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 20-2010]
B. Any connection to the police and fire alarm consoles shall be of a type
inspected and approved by the Chiefs of Police and Fire of the City of
East Orange or their designated representatives, and any person
aggrieved by said decision may appeal said decision, in writing, within
10 days to the Bureau of Licensing. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 20-2010]
C. All alarms existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter shall be
connected hereunder to the alarm console by the licensee, and no
connection cost for such transfer shall be permitted, provided that said
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 97-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 97-3
C:712
§ 97-4. Registration; permits.
§ 97-5. Limitations of City's obligations. [Amended 10-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 20-2010]
The City of East Orange shall be under no duty or obligation or be
responsible for damage to any permittee hereunder or to any alarm console
licensee hereunder. The alarm consoles and allied equipment are
maintained at will and are subject to termination at any time or cancellation
of the contract by resolution duly adopted by the City Council of the City of
East Orange, and any individual permit issued hereunder may be revoked
at any time by the Police Director/Chief of Police and Fire Chief, provided
that 30 days' notice is given, in writing, to said permittee. The permittee
shall have a right to a hearing within 10 days of the service of said notice.
alarms qualify as the type of alarm or equipment under the other
provisions or requirements of this chapter.
D. Except as provided in § 97-5 of this chapter, any license issued
hereunder shall be for a term of five years from the date of approval by
the Mayor and Council of the City of East Orange. Such licensee shall
post with the City Clerk a performance bond in the amount of $5,000,
noncancelable without notification to the City Clerk of the City of East
Orange, guaranteeing performance for five years of the obligation of
the licensee and insuring maintenance of said consoles and alarm
systems during said period when such license is in force.
A. Any person, firm or corporation which owns or operates a police or fire
alarm device or a local alarm shall make application for the continuance
thereof, in writing, to the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, which
application shall contain at least the location of the device, the name of
the installer of said device, the type of device, provisions relating to
false alarms and testing procedures, a list of persons to be contacted in
the event of an alarm and other information as may be required by the
Police Director/Chief of Police and Fire Chief. [Amended 10-12-2010
by Ord. No. 20-2010]
B. Local alarms shall be registered, but no fee shall be charged therefor.
[Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
C. For alarm devices, the permittee shall pay whatever charges are
required by any alarm company making such installations and, in
addition, a fee for connection to the console control panel of $50 or less
and such monthly maintenance charge as the licensee specified in his
bid. Should the permittee fail to make payment of said fees to the
licensee when due, the licensee may disconnect such system from the
alarm consoles after giving 30 days' notice, in writing, of such intent to
disconnect. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the Chief of Police and
the Fire Chief. The licensee shall also notify the Chief of Police and the
Fire Chief when the actual disconnection takes place and when the
permittee is reconnected to the system.
§ 97-3 CHARTER § 97-5
C:713
Neither the City of East Orange nor its agents or employees assume any
obligation whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance
of any private alarm system. Neither the City nor its agents or employees
assume any liability whatsoever for any failure of any private alarm system,
failure to respond to any such alarm system or for any act of omission or
commission relating to any such alarm system.
A. Dial alarm devices using prerecorded messages.
(1) Effective 90 days after final adoption of this chapter or the
awarding of the bid contract to provide fire and police alarm
service, whichever is greater, no person shall use, or cause or
permit to be used, any alarm device that automatically selects an
emergency trunk line of the Fire or Police Department of the City of
East Orange and then reproduces any prerecorded voice messages
to report any robbery, burglary, holdup, fire or other emergency.
Such devices are permissible, provided that they are designed to
select a private line so designated by the Fire or Police Department
for that purpose exclusively and such equipment is designed and
installed so that the equipment shall be disconnected automatically
from the telephone line after the signal has been received by the
Fire or Police Department.
(2) The use of any alarm device which relays a digital coded signal to
the alarm-monitoring facility at police and fire headquarters is
permitted under this section.
(3) The Police Department will accept up to three digital coded
channels, e.g.:
(a) Holdup alarm.
(b) Panic alarm.
(c) Burglar alarm.
(4) The Fire Department will accept up to four coded channels, e.g.:
(a) Fire/smoke alarm.
(b) Sprinkler alarm.
(c) Manual.
(d) Medical alert.
(5) Private police or fire alarm equipment arranged to automatically
transmit a digital coded signal over commercial telephone facilities
shall be so designed and installed that the equipment shall be
disconnected automatically from the telephone line after the signal
has been received by the Police or Fire Department.
(6) Any person, firm or corporation seeking to install the
aforementioned devices within the City of East Orange shall pay an
§ 97-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 97-5
C:714
annual license fee in accordance with the following schedule:
[Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
Property Type Registration Fee
Commercial $150
Class A Residential $50
Class B Residential $150
B. All fire alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the City of East Orange, the laws of the
State of New Jersey and the United States and with the approval of the
Fire Chief.
C. Any license from the alarm console company and any permittee utilizing
the services of any other alarm company connected to said consoles
shall provide for a representative to be on call at all times, and such
service shall be provided within eight hours of notification by the Police
or Fire Department of any malfunctions of any equipment.
D. False alarms.
(1) In case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police or Fire Department in a manner to be
prescribed by rules and regulations in accordance with § 97-6 of
this chapter. In addition, in case of false alarms, the Chiefs of Police
and Fire shall cause an investigation to be made and keep a record
of said alarm on file.
(2) In the event within one year of a second burglar alarm or robbery
alarm emitting a sound or message resulting in a response by a
designated representative when a situation requiring a response by
a designated representative does not in fact exist, the alarm user
shall be notified by the designated representative to complete a
written report to the designated representative setting forth the
cause of the false alarm, if known; the corrective action taken;
whether the alarm system has been inspected by an alarm service
company; and such other information as the designated
representative may reasonably require. The alarm user's failure to
return this report shall be a violation of this section. It shall be a
violation of this section for the alarm user to allow three false
alarms within 12 months.
(3) For such false alarms, the City Council prescribes the following
penalties after formal complaint, notice and hearing:
Property Type
First and
Second
Offense
Third
through
Fifth Offense
Sixth Offense
or Greater*
Commercial Warning $300 $750
Class A Residential Warning $100 $300
§ 97-5 CHARTER § 97-5
C:715
§ 97-5.1. Duration of alarm. [Added 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
20-2010]
Property Type
First and
Second
Offense
Third
through
Fifth Offense
Sixth Offense
or Greater*
Class B Residential Warning $300 $750
NOTE:
*Penalties may also include, but are not limited to, revocation of
all alarm registrations, licenses and permits, subject to a hearing
by the Police Director/Chief of Police and Fire Chief in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Where the investigation of the Police or Fire Department discloses
continued abuse of the privilege of connection to the alarm
consoles and a disregard by the permittee for taking remedial steps
to avoid false alarms, the right is reserved by the Chiefs of Police
and Fire to require disconnection from the alarm console for a
limited period or permanently, provided that no such permit shall
be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee an
opportunity to show cause before the Police Director/Chief of Police
and Fire Chief why such action should not be taken.
E. Any authorized equipment may be disconnected at the console by the
Chiefs of Police and Fire or their designated representatives for
noncompliance with this chapter, and any person installing or
maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be prosecuted for violation
of this chapter, and each and every day said equipment is in operation
shall be considered a separate violation. Any permittee shall, by
acceptance of the permit, be deemed as having consented to inspection
of the premises on which said alarm devices are installed at reasonable
hours by the Chiefs of Police and Fire or their designated
representatives.
A. No burglar alarm or robbery alarm system or device shall be
maintained and allowed to emit a sound from any building which does
not deactivate within 20 minutes after being activated, nor shall it be
allowed to emit sound intermittently for any period in excess of a total
of 20 minutes after being activated.
B. For the first occurrence, the designated representative shall notify the
alarm user, in writing, that his/her alarm did not deactivate after 20
minutes. For the second occurrence, the designated representative
shall notify the alarm user, in writing, that he/she is in violation of this
section. Upon a third occurrence of a burglar alarm or robbery alarm
emitting sound for over 20 minutes, the owner or alarm user shall
receive a summons and complaint for a violation of this section.
§ 97-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 97-5.1
C:716
§ 97-6. Authority to promulgate rules and regulations. [Amended
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
The Police Director/Chief of Police and Fire Chief may from time to time
promulgate, by resolution, rules and regulations supplementing this chapter
in order to provide recordkeeping and efficient management of said system.
§ 97-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
20-2010]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of
the City of East Orange for violation of the terms of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 100
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control — See
Ch. 14A, Art. III.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 103.
Entertainment hours of operation — See Ch.
138.
Licenses and fees generally — See Ch. 170.
Peace and good order generally — See Ch.
198.
C. In addition, upon a second violation of this section, the alarm user shall
be required to submit to the designated representative, within 72
hours, evidence that he/she has taken the necessary steps to correct the
system and comply with this section.
§ 97-5.1 CHARTER § 97-7
C:717

ARTICLE I
Licensing; Rules and Regulations
§ 100-1. Purpose.
This chapter is for the purpose of fixing license fees and regulating the
sale of alcoholic beverages in the City in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96, and supplements and amendments thereto,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated or to be
promulgated by the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control
applicable hereto, and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
City not inconsistent with the Act or rules and regulations of the State
Commissioner.
§ 100-2. Hours of sale and consumption.
§ 100-3. Sale to certain persons prohibited.
No licensee under this chapter shall sell, serve or deliver, or allow, permit or
suffer the sale, service or delivery of, any alcoholic beverage to any mental
defective, habitual drunkard or intoxicated person, nor shall a licensee
permit consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises by
any such person or permit any such persons to congregate in or about the
licensed premises.
A. No licensee under this chapter shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit
or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, or
permit consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises on
a Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. nor on
Christmas and New Year's Day between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. nor on any other Thursday, Friday or Saturday between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. nor on any other Monday, Tuesday or
Wednesday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Amended
12-28-1977 by Ord. No. 74-1977; 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980; 11-23-1981 by Ord. No. 29-1981]
B. During hours when sales are prohibited by this section, the entire
licensed premises shall also be closed, but this closing of premises
requirement shall not apply to bona fide hotels, to restaurants or to
clubs qualified for club licenses under N.J.S.A. 33:1-12, Subdivision 5,
provided that where a licensee operates a restaurant in conjunction
with his alcoholic beverage licensed business, such restaurant shall be
closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a Sunday and
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday other than
Christmas and New Year's Day, on which two days such restaurant shall
be closed between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
C. The term "restaurant," as used in this section, means an establishment
regularly and principally used for the purpose of providing meals to the
public, having an adequate dining room and kitchen equipped for the
preparing, cooking and serving of food.
§ 100-1 CHARTER § 100-4
C:719
§ 100-4. Solicitation prohibited.
No licensee under this chapter shall, directly or indirectly, solicit from house
to house, personally or by telephone, the purchase of alcoholic beverages,
nor allow, permit or suffer such solicitation.
§ 100-5. Licensing authority.
The Municipal Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the City, having
been duly constituted by the City Council, shall be the authority for the
administration of the issuance of all licenses under this chapter.
§ 100-6. Applications for licenses.
No license shall be issued except after written application has been
presented by the proposed licensee upon forms furnished by the Municipal
Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the City, and after publication of
notice, and as otherwise required by state law and this chapter.
§ 100-7. Annual license fees, license transfer fees and special
permit fees. [Amended 3-28-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988; 4-26-2004
by Ord. No. 13-2004; 7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 21-2011]
The fees for liquor licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter and
state law shall be as follows:
A. For a plenary retail consumption license: $2,500 per annum.
B. For a plenary retail distribution license: $1,728 per annum.
C. For a club license: $188 per annum.
D. Fees for a person-to-person or place-to-place transfer of a plenary retail
consumption license: $250; fees for a person-to-person and place-toplace
transfer of a plenary retail consumption license: $500.
E. Fees for a person-to-person or place-to-place transfer of a plenary retail
distribution license: $172.80; fees for a person-to-person and place-toplace
transfer of a plenary retail distribution license: $345.60.
F. For each special permit for social affairs: an application fee of $25.
G. For a plenary retail consumption license with broad package privilege:
$2,500 per annum.
H. For a seasonal plenary retail consumption license: $1,875 per annum.
I. For a hotel/motel plenary retail consumption license: $2,500 per
annum.
J. For a theater plenary retail consumption license: $2,500 per annum.
K. For a limited plenary retail distribution license: $63 per annum.
§ 100-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 100-8
C:720
§ 100-8. Number of licenses limited. [Amended 12-28-1977 by Ord.
No. 73-1977]
Except as otherwise provided in this section, not more than 22 plenary
retail consumption licenses, 15 plenary retail distribution licenses and six
club licenses shall be in effect in this City at any one time, provided that
the foregoing limitation shall not apply where an application for a license
is made for premises operated as a bona fide hotel having 100 or more
sleeping rooms equipped for the accommodation of guests. Where any such
plenary retail consumption license is issued for premises operating as such
hotel, the sales of alcoholic beverages shall be limited for consumption
within the hotel establishment.
§ 100-9. Restrictions and prohibitions against issuance.
No limited retail distribution or seasonal retail consumption licenses shall
be issued. No plenary retail distribution license shall be issued to permit
the sale of alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in which any
other mercantile business is carried on, provided that the holder of any
such license shall be permitted to sell nonalcoholic beverages in original
containers for consumption off the licensed premises; provided, further, that
nothing herein shall prohibit the sale of ice, tobacco and prepared foods of a
type and kind normally incident to the service and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, and glassware.
§ 100-10. Transfer of licenses; proximity to other licensed
establishments.
A. No plenary retail distribution license or plenary retail consumption
license shall be transferred to different premises within 625 feet of any
other licensed establishment as aforesaid, provided that nothing herein
shall prevent renewals or transfers to another licensee of licenses
heretofore issued for use on the same premises on which the license is
presently in operation. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, the
Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control of this City may, after hearing and
upon review of the location and availability of other licensed
establishments to persons living in and utilizing the facilities located in
and around the proposed location and review of general neighborhood
characteristics and boundaries, determine that approval of the transfer
shall be permitted upon a finding that the following conditions exist:
(1) There is a hardship confronting the licensee by reason of
acquisition by a public agency of the premises utilized by the
licensee.
(2) There is no undue concentration of establishments of the type to be
relocated in the immediate area.
(3) The proposed location is appropriate for the type of operation
anticipated.
§ 100-8 CHARTER § 100-10
C:721
§ 100-11. Suspensions and revocations.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Municipal Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the City for any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for the violation of any of
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96, or any amendments or additions
thereto, or of any of the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 100-12. Serving persons under legal age.148
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any
person under the legal age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages, or
allow, permit or suffer the consumption of any alcoholic beverage by any
such person in or upon the licensed premises.
§ 100-13. Serving intoxicated persons.149
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any
person actually or apparently intoxicated, or permit or suffer the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage by any such person in or upon the
licensed premises.
§ 100-14. Conspicuous posting of license certificate.
The holder of each license issued by the Municipal Board of Alcoholic
Beverage Control of the City shall display the license certificate
conspicuously in the place where intoxicating beverages are sold.
§ 100-15. View of interior of premises; exceptions.
B. The six-hundred-twenty-five-foot requirement as provided herein shall
be measured radially in all directions from the main entranceway of the
new proposed location of the licensed establishment seeking a transfer
to the main entranceway of existing licensed premises.
A. All premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed, except
licensed clubs and guest rooms and private dining rooms in hotels, shall
be so arranged that a full view of the interior may be had from a public
thoroughfare or from some adjacent room or hallway to which the
public is freely admitted.
B. No person shall be served in any room which is not open to the use of
the public generally, except that, in hotels, guests may be served in
their rooms or in private dining rooms, provided that this regulation
shall not apply to licensed clubs.
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-10 EAST ORANGE CODE § 100-15
C:722
§ 100-16. Removal of beverages during prohibited hours when food
is served.
The holder of any plenary retail consumption license whose bar is located
in a room in which food is served shall at all times during which the sale of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited remove all alcoholic beverages from the
bar and place the same in an enclosed and locked storage area concealed
from public view or lock the same in a storage room, and shall keep all
entrances to the interior of any such bar locked.
§ 100-17. Changes or alterations to premises.
No licensee under this chapter shall make, cause to be made or permit
any addition to, alteration of or other change in the physical structure
of the licensed premises without first having submitted to the Municipal
Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the City plans and specifications
for such addition, alteration or change in the physical structure of the
licensed premises and having obtained the approval thereof in writing by
such Board.
C. For the purpose of this section, a "licensed club" is defined as a
corporation or association operated for benevolent, charitable,
fraternal, social, religious, recreational, athletic or similar purposes
and not for private gain.
§ 100-15 CHARTER § 100-17
C:723

ARTICLE II
Use by Minors in Public Places
[Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980; 4-22-1985 by Ord. No.
5-1985]
§ 100-18. Possession or consumption unlawful; penalties.
§ 100-19. Purchase on behalf of minors unlawful.152
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, deliver, transmit or sell any
alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, on behalf of or for delivery to any
person under the age of 21 years.
§ 100-20. Immoral activities, disturbances on premises.153
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to have,
possess, carry, distribute, transport or consume any alcoholic beverage
on any public street, highway or place of public accommodation.150
B. For the purposes of this section, a "place of public accommodation"
shall include any tavern, roadhouse or hotel, whether for entertainment
of transient guests or accommodations of those seeking health,
recreation or rest; any retail shop or store; any restaurant, eating house
or place where food is sold for consumption on the premises; any place
maintained for the sale of ice cream, ice and fruit preparations or their
derivatives, soda water or confections, or where any beverages of any
kind are retailed for consumption on the premises; any garage, any
public conveyance and stations and terminals thereof; any auditorium,
meeting place or public hall; any theater or other public place of
amusement; motion-picture house; music hall, skating rink, swimming
pool, amusement and recreation park; fair, bowling alley, gymnasium or
billiard or pool parlor; any comfort station; any dispensary, clinic or
hospital; any public library; any kindergarten, primary or secondary
school, trade or business school, high school, academy, college and
university or any educational institution under the supervision of the
State Board of Education or the Commissioner of Education of the state.
C. Any violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not less than $100 or more than $2,000, imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, and/or 90 days of community service, for each
violation of this section.151
A. No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer on or about the
licensed premises:
(1) Any lewdness or immoral activity; or
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-18 CHARTER § 100-20
C:725
(2) Any brawl, act of violence, disturbance or unnecessary noise.
B. Every licensee shall operate its business in an orderly and lawful
fashion so as not to constitute a nuisance. A licensee's responsibility
under this subsection includes the conduct of the licensee, its
employees and patrons, if such conduct is contrary to the public health,
safety and welfare.
§ 100-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 100-20
C:726
Chapter 103
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Entertainment hours — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Outdoor activities — See Ch. 188.
Theaters, movies and exhibitions — See Ch.
252.
§ 100-20 CHARTER § 100-20
C:727

ARTICLE I
Coin-Operated Amusement Games
[Amended 10-12-1976 by Ord. No. 40-1976; 12-13-1976 by Ord. No.
59-1976; 7-17-1978 by Ord. No. 11-1978; 11-8-1979 by Ord. No.
48-1979; 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980; 9-27-1982 by Ord. No.
15-1982; 6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 23-1984]
§ 103-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purpose of regulation and control of coinoperated
amusement games of the type commonly known and designated
as "bagatelle," "Skee-Ball," "baseball," "golf," "pinball" or "pin amusement
games" or similar machines or devices, including coin-operated pool tables
and video games. Because these machines and devices may become a
public nuisance by reason of the manner in which they are distributed or
operated, it is hereby determined by the City of East Orange that control
and regulation of such machines and devices is necessary for the protection
and preservation of the public safety, morals and welfare.
§ 103-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A commercial establishment, the exclusive
purpose of which is public use of coin-operated amusement devices. The
establishment must maintain no less than 20 coin-operated amusement
devices for public use and provide 50 square feet per machine.
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any amusement machine or
device which is operated or put into operation, in whole or in part, by the
insertion of a coin, token, disk, slug, plate, key or similar object or by the
payment of any price. The term does not include coin-operated musical
devices hereinafter defined, bona fide vending machines in which gaming
or amusement features are not incorporated, any gambling device or slot
machine. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the use of any device
prohibited by law or the use of any device in any manner prohibited by law.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who sells, leases or rents out or places under
any kind of arrangement one or more coin-operated amusement devices as
defined herein.
DIVISION — The Licensing Subdivision within the Division of Tax Collection
and Revenue, which serves as the issuing officer for licensing of coinoperated
amusement devices.154
PROPRIETOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls premises
or a location within the City of East Orange in which a coin-operated
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 103-1 CHARTER § 103-2
C:729
amusement device is displayed for public patronage or is placed or kept for
operation by the public.
RECREATION CENTER — A commercial establishment, the primary
purpose of which is to provide recreational activities, such as indoor tennis
and racquetball courts, bowling alleys, skating rinks, billiard parlors
(having a minimum of 15 tables) or any other similar facility.
§ 103-3. License required.
All coin-operated amusement devices (as defined in § 103-2) located within
the City of East Orange are required to be licensed. Each machine or device
shall have a separate license. No such machine or device shall be operated
without such license. Each "distributor," as that term is used herein, is
required to be licensed.
§ 103-4. Fees.
The annual fee for the licensing of coin-operated amusement devices and
distributors of such devices shall be as provided in Chapter 170, Licenses
and Fees, of the East Orange City Code. Licenses shall be renewed annually
on or before June 1 of the calendar year. License fees for new applications
(not renewals) shall be prorated in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-18D. A proprietor may substitute one machine or device for a similar
one without paying any additional licensing fee, provided that he first
applies to the Division for permission to make the exchange and supplies all
the information required for the original license.
§ 103-5. Applications.
A. Applications to the Division for licenses shall be by the proprietor of the
premises where the machine is to be installed.
B. The word "person," as used in this section, shall mean any individual,
firm, member of a firm, partnership, member of partnerships,
corporation or any officer, director or stockholder of said corporation.
C. Completion of application; verification.
(1) A separate application for each automatic amusement device that
may be licensed hereunder shall be filed on a form to be furnished
by the Division, which form shall include but not be limited to the
following information:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) The post office address and telephone number of the applicant.
(c) Address of the premises proposed for location of the machines
or devices.
§ 103-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 103-5
C:730
(d) The name and address of every other person who has any
interest in any of the coin-operated amusement machines and
the nature of that interest, including owners and distributors.
(e) Whether or not the person making the application or any other
interested person has been convicted of a crime, disorderly
persons offense or a violation of any City ordinance or state or
federal statute.
(f) Whether or not the applicant has had a coin-operated
amusement machine operator's license or a license to sell
alcoholic beverages at retail revoked or suspended.
(g) Notification that all applicants must submit to fingerprinting
and that corporate applicants must submit fingerprints of the
corporate officers.
(2) All applications will be forwarded to the Police Department for
checking and verification, pursuant to §§ 170-12 and 170-13.
D. Information to be included or to accompany application.
(1) Application to the Division for a license of a distributor shall be
made by the distributor and shall provide the following information
about each applicant and, in the case of partnerships, each partner
and, in the case of corporations, each director, officer and
stockholder holding in excess of 10% of stock. The information
shall also be furnished for all partners, directors, officers or
stockholders holding in excess of 10% of stock for the six months
preceding the date of the application, as well as for the manager or
authorized agent who shall be in charge of or conduct the business
of the applicant within the City of East Orange.
(a) Name.
(b) Date and place of birth.
(c) Business address and telephone number.
(d) Home address and telephone number.
(2) The applicant shall be required to furnish fingerprints and
photographs.
(3) The application shall set forth the name and address of the
registered agent of the applicant or the person upon whom service
of process is authorized to be made.
(4) The application shall further set forth whether or not any of the
persons described in this section have ever been convicted of a
crime or of a violation of a City ordinance or disorderly persons
offense involving gambling.
§ 103-5 CHARTER § 103-5
C:731
§ 103-6. Permitted locations.
Coin-operated amusement devices regulated by this chapter shall be
allowed only in hotels, motels, amusement arcades, recreation centers and
establishments having permanent liquor licenses for on-premises
consumption. No device or machine may be placed in any permitted location
which is within 200 feet in all directions of the property of a school attended
by minors 16 years of age and under.
(5) The application shall contain a certification under oath by the
applicant or its authorized representative that the information
contained in the application and all attachments thereto is
complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his knowledge and
belief.
E. The license fee shall be payable upon the presentation of the
application and shall be returned less the sum of $20 in the event that
such license is not granted.
F. No license shall issue until all the information required on the
application has been submitted by the applicant.
G. All applications shall be referred to the Chief of Police for investigation.
The Chief of Police shall make a recommendation as to whether or not a
license should issue based upon his investigation of the applicant's
conduct as a law-abiding person and shall consider past operations, if
any; convictions of crimes and convictions of disorderly persons
offenses; or violations of City ordinances involving gambling or moral
turpitude. He shall also consider any convictions pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:33-12, maintaining a nuisance, which involve the subject premises.
If the Director shall disapprove a license based upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, he shall furnish the applicant
with written notice of the reasons for disapproval.
H. Restrictions.
(1) No license shall be issued to any person until all federal and state
laws and City ordinances have been complied with.
(2) No license shall be issued unless the prescribed license fee has
been paid.
(3) No license shall issue to any applicant where information furnished
on the application is false.
I. The fee to be paid for the license required by this chapter shall be $500
per annum. The license shall be valid for the period of one year from the
date of issuance unless sooner revoked or suspended.
§ 103-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 103-7
C:732
§ 103-7. Hours of operation.
Coin-operated amusement devices shall only be operated during the usual
business hours of the establishment where they are located. Amusement
arcades, recreation centers and commercial establishments with coinoperated
amusement devices shall not allow use of these devices prior to
3:00 p.m. on regular school days and after 10:00 p.m. on nights preceding
regular school days or 12:00 midnight on any other night.
§ 103-8. Age requirements.
Minors 16 years of age and under shall not be permitted to operate coinoperated
amusement devices during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on
days regular school is in session, nor shall they operate any such devices or
machines after any curfew imposed by the City of East Orange or the State
of New Jersey. In establishments having liquor licenses for on-premises
consumption, no persons under the legal drinking age as established by the
State of New Jersey shall operate coin-operated amusement devices which
are located within 50 feet from the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or dispensed.
§ 103-8.1. Conduct on the premises.
No proprietor by himself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or
employee, shall:
§ 103-8.2. Security guard.
Establishments having 20 or more licensed coin-operated amusement
devices are required to provide a licensed security guard on the premises
during hours of operation.
A. Offer to pay any reward, gift, prize or merchandise to any person using
or operating a coin-operated amusement device or use or permit to be
used any such machines or devices for the purpose of gambling.
B. Permit the premises to become a resort for disorderly persons of any
type.
C. Permit intoxicated persons to loiter on or about the premises.
D. Permit the possession or use of alcoholic beverages on or about the
premises except where a liquor license for on-premises consumption is
held.
E. Permit the possession or use of any unlawful drug or narcotic, including
marijuana, on or about the premises.
F. Permit loud, unruly or disorderly conduct on or about the premises.
§ 103-7 CHARTER § 103-8.3
C:733
§ 103-8.3. Existing businesses.
Any proprietor owning or operating a business with 20 or more licensed
machines at the time of the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject
to the square-footage requirements for an amusement arcade; however, no
additional machines may be placed on the premises without complying with
the requirements.
§ 103-8.4. Severability.
If any provisions of this chapter or the application of such provision to any
person or circumstances is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or application of this chapter which can be given effect,
and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 103-8.5. Construal.
This article, being necessary for the welfare of the City and its inhabitants,
shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose thereof.
§ 103-8.3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 103-8.5
C:734
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)155
§ 103-9. through § 103-11. (Reserved)
155. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Mechanical Amusement Devices, which consisted of §§ 103-9
through 103-11, was repealed 4-11-1983 by Ord. No. 19-1983. See now Ch. 188, Outdoor
Activities.
§ 103-9 CHARTER § 103-9
C:735

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 103-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980; amended 9-27-1982 by Ord. No. 15-1982; 6-11-1984 by
Ord. No. 23-1984156]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay of fine not less than $200 nor more than $2,000,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and/or 90 days of community
service for each offense, and the machine or device may be impounded after
notice and/or opportunity to be heard is provided. Impounded machines
shall be released upon payment of the fine in addition to any costs
associated with impounding or storage of the machines. Licenses may be
revoked by the Division in accordance with § 170-25.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 103-12 CHARTER § 103-12
C:737
Chapter 107
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and fees — Ch. 170.
§ 107-1. Authorization for games on Sundays.
Any license issued by the City of East Orange to a bona fide organization
or association of veterans of any war in which the United States has been
engaged, church or religious congregation or religious organization, civic
or service club, senior citizens' association or club, officially recognized
volunteer fire company or officially recognized volunteer first-aid or rescue
squad, pursuant to the provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-24
et seq., and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Legalized Games
of Chance Control Commission, shall include express authorization to hold,
operate and conduct bingo games on Sunday.
§ 107-2. Compliance with statute.
A licensee, as set forth in § 107-1 above, is hereby authorized to hold,
operate and conduct bingo games on Sundays; provided, however, that the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-33 restricting the frequency of days on which
games may be conducted is not thereby enlarged.
§ 107-3. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or any other part of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter, but shall be
confined in its effects to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or
other part of this chapter directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
Chapter 113
BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Court — See Ch. 21.
Housing Authority — Ch. 40.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 103-12 EAST ORANGE CODE § 107-3
C:738
§ 113-1. Initiation of proceedings; complaints and notices;
hearing.157
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority or
by at least five residents of the City, charging that any building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to the Public
Officer on his own motion that any building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Public Officer at his office in the City Hall on a date therein fixed,
which shall be not less than seven nor more than 30 days after service of
the complaint and notice.
§ 113-2. Basis for findings of unfitness.
In making a determination of whether a building is unfit for human
habitation or use, the Public Officer shall determine whether, by reason
of violations of this chapter existing in the building or on the premises,
the continued occupancy of the building will endanger and jeopardize the
health and safety of the occupants or persons in the vicinity of the premises,
and to that end he may consider, among other factors:
A. Whether the premises are so structurally defective that there is a risk of
collapse or of loose materials falling and injuring persons in and around
the building.
B. Whether, by reason of inadequate ventilation, there is a danger of
communicable diseases being contracted and spread in and among the
occupants or persons in the vicinity of the premises.
C. Whether, by reason of infestation or defective condition of plumbing or
the lack of maintenance of halls, floors, walls or other parts of the
premises, conditions exist which are conducive to the contracting and
spreading of diseases.
D. Whether, by reason of electrical wiring, conduits or equipment, heating
or cooking facilities or lack of proper means of egress, there is a danger
of fire or, in the case of fire, inadequate means of egress.
E. Whether the premises are deficient in one or more essential utilities,
including public sewer, water supply or electricity.
F. Where the premises were not designed or constructed for human
habitation, whether, by reason of the same, occupancy constitutes an
unnecessary hazard to safety or health.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 107-3 CHARTER § 113-3
C:739
§ 113-3. Rights of owner and parties in interest at hearing.
The owner and parties in interest may file with the Public Officer a written
answer to the complaint prior to the date of the hearing or may appear in
person or otherwise and give testimony at the hearing, or both. The rules of
evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before
the Public Officer.
§ 113-4. Service of orders to abate.
If, after such notice and hearing, the Public Officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair, alteration or
improvement of such building to be made by the owner within a reasonable
time as specified in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or
have such building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order,
and all doors to the exterior shall be locked and the first story or basement
and cellar windows barred or boarded to prevent entry. The order may also
prohibit occupants from paying, and the owner and operator from receiving,
rent or other compensation for use and occupancy from and after the date
on which such building or premises is ordered vacated or demolished. If
the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails to repair,
alter or improve such building within the time specified in the order, then
the owner shall be required to remove or demolish such building within a
reasonable time as specified in such order.
§ 113-5. Failure to comply with orders; enforcement.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed. The Public Officer may cause to be posted on
the main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use;
the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." If the
owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or, at the
option of the owner, to remove or demolish the building, the Public Officer
may cause such building to be removed or demolished or may contract for
the removal or demolition thereof after advertisement for and receipt of
bids therefor. Where the owner, operator, occupant or any party in interest
fails to comply with any order hereunder or removes any notice posted
pursuant hereto or any lock or bar without the permission of the Public
Officer, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalties provided in § 113-10. Upon failure to comply with any such order,
the premises shall constitute a public nuisance, and the Public Officer may
take such further action under the criminal or civil laws of this state through
§ 113-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 113-5
C:740
any court of competent jurisdiction as may be necessary to remove or abate
the nuisance.
§ 113-6. Costs of abatement as lien upon property.
§ 113-7. Emergencies: immediate vacancy of premises.
Where the Public Officer makes a preliminary finding that conditions on
the premises constitute an immediate and substantial threat to the safety
or health of occupants or persons in proximity to the premises, he may
order and direct that the premises be vacated immediately and that signs
or notice be posted prohibiting occupancy thereof and that the premises
be locked and boarded up as provided in § 113-5 pending the institution of
proceedings under this chapter.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter, and such cost of such repairs,
alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after
deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived
from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition
thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which
such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, he shall
sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the
cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Director of Property Taxation, and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the
credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in
the Superior Court by the Public Officer, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by such Court and shall be disbursed
according to the order or judgment of the Court to the person found to
be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such Court.
C. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in such lien certificate.158
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-5 CHARTER § 113-8
C:741
§ 113-8. Service of complaints or orders.159
Complaints or orders issued by the Public Officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once in one of the officially designated newspapers. In addition,
a copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on premises affected by the complaint or order and shall be duly recorded
or lodged for record with the Essex County Register, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.7.
§ 113-9. Court remedies of aggrieved parties.160
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Public Officer under this
chapter may, within 30 days after the posting and service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Public Officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The Court may proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by
an order of the Public Officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the Public Officer.
§ 113-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980161]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days, and/or 90 days of community service.
§ 113-11. Summary proceedings for demolition.162
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threat of collapse
of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the Public Officer
may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to make such building
temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary proceedings for the
demolition thereof.
§ 113-12. Other municipal powers not affected.163
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
162. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
163. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 113-12
C:742
their removal and abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor
is anything in this chapter intended to limit the authority of the enforcing
agency or the Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., or any rules or regulations adopted
thereunder.
§ 113-13. Designation of enforcing official.164
For the purposes of this chapter, the Public Officer shall be the Construction
Official.
Chapter 118
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II. Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
164. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-12 CHARTER § 113-13
C:743

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Peddlers and Transient Merchants
§ 118-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who travels from place to place, street to street
or from house to house to convey or transport goods, articles or property
of any kind or description for the purpose of offering for sale, selling and
delivering the same to customers, and shall include the words "hawker" and
"huckster."
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person who merchandises or sells with the
intent to close out or discontinue a business within a period of one year
from the date of commencement and occupies a room, building or other
permanently constructed premises for the purpose of selling merchandise.
The words "transient merchant" shall include the phrase "itinerant vendor."
§ 118-2. Standard of conduct.
§ 118-3. License requirements; applications; health regulations;
exemptions.
A. Under this article, it shall be unlawful for any applicant or licensee to
misrepresent the character or quality of any merchandise offered for
sale and to importune or otherwise annoy any person for the purpose of
effecting or inducing a purchase.
B. No person, whether or not licensed under the terms or provisions of this
article, shall scatter, throw or deposit any garbage, handbills,
advertisements, circulars or other printed matter in and about the
street, sidewalks, parks and public places within the City or upon the
premises of any resident or property owner.
C. The use of any sound system upon any vehicle, including but not limited
to bells, horns or musical playing devices used to attract patrons, is not
permitted while any such vehicle is stopped or standing. Any sound
device may only be used for a short period of time, not to exceed two
minutes of continual playing.
D. No person under this article shall stand or park for a period longer than
15 minutes on any public street on any one day.
E. Licensees shall carry their license on their person while engaged in the
business licensed. Every person peddling in the City of East Orange
shall have their photograph affixed to the license, which shall be
exhibited to any City official on request.
F. Licensees shall operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
§ 118-1 CHARTER § 118-3
C:745
A. No peddler or transient merchant, as defined herein, shall engage in
such business within the City of East Orange without first obtaining a
license, in compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. An application for license shall be made on forms provided by the Tax
Collector and contain the following information:
(1) For peddlers:
(a) The applicant's name, permanent address, local business
address (if different from permanent address) and telephone
number.
(b) The name and address of the applicant's business.
(c) A description of the items to be offered for sale.
(d) Two forms of photo identification.
(e) A copy of the applicant's social security card.
(f) Three reliable references, not related to the applicant, who will
certify as to the applicant's good character and business
responsibility.
(g) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, disorderly persons offense or fraud, or a violation of
any ordinance enacted in other municipalities with regard to
peddling, solicitation or transient merchandising, when and
where the offense(s) occurred and the penalty imposed, if any.
(h) A list of the municipalities in which the applicant or his or her
employer has conducted the business for the six months prior
to the date of the application.
(i) A statement setting forth any complaints that have been made
against the applicant or his or her employer by customers in
this City or elsewhere and the nature of said complaints.
(j) A letter, attached to the application, from the firm for which the
applicant purports to work authorizing the applicant to act as
its agent, employee or representative.
(2) For transient merchants:
(a) The applicant's name, permanent address, local address (if
any) and telephone number.
(b) A description of the nature of the business or activity, including
the quantity and value of the merchandise to be sold.
(c) The applicant's photo identification, which the Tax Collector
will photocopy and attach to the application.
(d) The days during which the business is to be conducted.
§ 118-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 118-3
C:746
(e) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly persons offense involving deceptive business
practices or fraud, or a violation of any ordinance enacted in
other municipalities with regard to peddling, solicitation or
transient merchandising, when and where the offense(s)
occurred and the penalty imposed, if any.
(f) A bond in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:24-5 in an amount equal
to 25% of the value of the personal property shown in the
disclosures required by Subsection B(2) above but in no event
less than $1,000. The bond shall be in effect for a period of one
year from the date of license issuance and shall indemnify and
pay the City of East Orange any penalties or costs incurred in
the enforcement of this section and the purchaser of personal
property a sum equal to at least the amount of any payment
such purchaser may have been induced to make through the
misrepresentation of the applicant, its agents, servants or
employees. The bond shall be in a form approved by the City.
(g) An instrument in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:24-6 appointing
the Clerk as the applicant's true and lawful agent.
(h) If the applicant is an agent, employee or representative, he or
she shall attach to the application a letter from the person or
organization for whom the applicant works or represents,
authorizing the applicant to act as its agent, employee or
representative and assuming responsibility for the applicant's
conduct.
(i) All transient merchants are subject to the statutory
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 et seq., and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth therein in the event of a
failure to comply with any of said requirements.
(j) All applicants shall submit a copy of a valid certificate of
authority issued by the Director of the New Jersey Division of
Taxation, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15, empowering the
applicant to collect sales tax. Certificates shall not be required
for the sale of property exempted from sales and use taxation
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-8.2. The licensee shall prominently
display the original certificate at his or her place of business as
may be authorized by the license, as required by N.J.S.A.
54:32B-15.
(k) All applicants selling food items for immediate consumption
shall submit a copy of the Board of Health license.
C. If applicable, no license shall be issued by City until the items to sold
have been inspected or approved by the Board of Health of the City. A
license shall be subject to revocation for failing to comply with any
ordinances or regulations promulgated by the Board of Health.
§ 118-3 CHARTER § 118-3
C:747
§ 118-4. Fingerprinting of applicants; background check.
§ 118-5. License fee; expiration; payments.
D. The license requirements under this article shall not affect any person
who:
(1) Was honorably discharged from the military of the United States as
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and N.J.S.A. 24-10, possessing
corresponding identification in conformity with said statute;
(2) Conducts a sale pursuant to a state statute or court order;
(3) Engages in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise in the
regular course of business to the premises of persons ordering or
entitled to receive same;
(4) Is an employee of any public utility which is subject to regulation by
the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New
Jersey when carrying an identification card, badge or insignia
issued by such a public utility;
(5) Works as an employee, representative or agent of a life insurance
company;
(6) Intends to distribute noncommercial or not-for-profit handbills,
pamphlets, leaflets, circulars, advertisements or printed material;
(7) Campaigns for any elected public office or public question, which is
to be voted on in the City; at a general, special, primary or school
board election, or in a national or state election; distributing
handbills, pamphlets, leaflets, circulars, advertisements or printed
material with respect thereto; or otherwise engaging in political
speech;
(8) Engages in the advocacy of noncommercial or not-for-profit causes,
whether or not in connection with a larger organization, or
engaging in spontaneous speech, including, but not limited, to
speech between neighbors.
A. Each applicant for a peddler's license shall be fingerprinted before a
license is issued, in accordance with applicable state and federal laws.
B. New applicants shall require a criminal history record check pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.4. All applicants must submit to being fingerprinted.
A. The license fee shall be the amount as set forth in Chapter 170,
Licenses and Fees.
B. All licenses shall expire pursuant to the applicable provision(s) under
Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, regardless of the month the license
was granted by the City.
§ 118-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 118-5
C:748
§ 118-6. License nontransferable.
All licenses under this article shall not be transferable to any other person.
§ 118-7. Refusal to issue or renew license; revocation or
suspension.
C. All fees shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time of completing the
application.
A. The City may refuse to issue or renew and revoke or suspend a license
as set forth under Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees. A peddler's license
shall be subject to revocation, after notice and hearing, as set forth in
Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, for any one of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for a peddler's license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of
carrying on the business as a peddler.
(3) Conducting business of a peddler in an unlawful manner or in such
a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
(4) Violating any provision under this article or applicable state laws.
§ 118-5 CHARTER § 118-7
C:749

ARTICLE II
Solicitors
§ 118-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR — Any person traveling by foot or vehicle of any kind, who sells
or offers to sell goods, articles or property of any kind or description by
sample or otherwise for future delivery, or who offers to render services
at some time in the future, with or without accepting payment or partial
payment for the same.
§ 118-9. Exempted persons.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 118-10. License required.
No solicitor, as defined herein, shall engage in such business within the City
without first obtaining a license, in compliance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 118-11. License application; fee; items submitted.
A. Persons engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise in the
regular course of business to the premises of persons ordering or
entitled to receive same;
B. Employees of any public utility which is subject to regulation by the
Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey when
carrying an identification card, badge or insignia issued by such a
public utility;
C. Employees or agents of life insurance companies; or
D. Corporations licensed by any state agency.
A. An applicant for a license under this article shall file with the Tax
Collector an application, on a form to be provided by the Tax Collector's
office, which shall contain the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, permanent home address and telephone
number.
(2) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(3) A copy of applicant's social security card.
(4) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced,
§ 118-8 CHARTER § 118-11
C:751
§ 118-12. Standards of conduct.
§ 118-13. Transfer of license.
A solicitor's license shall not be transferable, as provided in Chapter 170,
Licenses and Fees.
where such goods or products are located at the time said
application is filed and the proposed method of delivery.
(5) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(6) Three reliable references, not related to applicant, who will certify
as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility.
(7) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed.
(8) A list of the municipalities in which the applicant and his or her
employer have conducted the business for the six months prior to
the date of the application.
(9) A statement setting forth any complaints that have been made
against the applicant or his or her employer by customers in this
City or elsewhere and the nature of said complaints.
B. At the time of filing the application, a fee as provided in Chapter 170,
Licenses and Fees, shall be paid to the Tax Collector's office.
C. Items to be sold shall be submitted to the Tax Collector, or his or her
designee, upon submitting the application.
A. It shall be unlawful for an applicant or licensee to misrepresent the
character or quality of merchandise offered for sale and to importune or
otherwise annoy any person for the purpose of effecting or inducing a
purchase.
B. Each licensee shall also:
(1) Carry his or her license on his or her person while engaged in the
business licensed;
(2) Produce his or her license, upon the request of any City official;
(3) Allow City officials to conduct inspections, if applicable, pursuant
to § 170-24; and
(4) Solicit between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
§ 118-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 118-14
C:752
§ 118-14. Investigation of applicant.
Upon receipt of application, the Tax Collector, or his or her designee,
shall cause an inspection of the subject matter of licensing, including the
property, vehicles, equipment, facilities or books and records pertaining
to the subject matter of licensing, as may be necessary for purposes of
issuance, renewal or enforcement of any license.
§ 118-15. Refusal to issue or renew; revocation or suspension.
§ 118-16. Fingerprinting of applicants.
Each applicant for a solicitor's license shall be fingerprinted before a license
is issued.
§ 118-17. Identification card.
Every person soliciting in the City of East Orange shall have his or her
photograph affixed to the license, which shall be exhibited to any police
officer or other City official upon request.
A. The City may refuse to issue or renew and revoke or suspend a license
as set forth under Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees. A solicitor's license
shall be subject to revocation, after notice and hearing, as set forth in
Chapter 170, Licenses and fees, for any one of the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for a solicitor's license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of
carrying on his or her business as a solicitor.
(3) Conducting the business of soliciting in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
(4) Violating any provision under this article.
§ 118-14 CHARTER § 118-17
C:753

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 118-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions under Articles I and II shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, and/or 90 days of community service.
§ 118-18 CHARTER § 118-18
C:755

ARTICLE IV
Mobile Food Vendors
§ 118-19. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to anyone who sells food or
beverages from a truck or any comparable vehicle deemed appropriate by
the City, whether such food or beverages are prepared on site or prepared
elsewhere and transported to the site of the sale in the City of East Orange.
§ 118-20. Hours of operation.
§ 118-21. License required; number of licenses issued.
§ 118-22. Application for license.
All applicants attempting to apply or renew a license shall:
A. Weekdays: Sunday through Thursday, mobile food vendors shall operate
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
B. Weekends: Friday and Saturday, mobile food vendors shall operate
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or business to operate as a mobile
food vendor on any public property within the City of East Orange
without first obtaining a license granted by the City.
B. The number of licenses that may be issued to mobile food vendors shall
not exceed 30. In the event that a license is revoked or not renewed on
the date of the renewal year, then the license may be issued to another
applicant on a first-come-first-served basis. The Tax Collector shall
maintain a waiting list for revoked licenses and licenses not renewed
and shall notify the applicant at the top of the list that a license is
available.
A. Complete the application or reapplication with the Tax Collector;
B. Pay the applicable license's fee as provided in § 118-23; and
C. Provide all of the following:
(1) Certificate of registration issued by the New Jersey Division of
Taxation.
(2) Proof of ownership or rental of an approved vehicle.
(3) Proof of motor vehicle insurance as per N.J.S.A. § 39:6B-1 if the
mobile food vendor operates from a motor vehicle, in addition to
proof of general liability insurance providing a minimum of
$1,000,000 of coverage.
§ 118-19 CHARTER § 118-22
C:757
§ 118-23. License fee.
The license fee shall be $170. The cost of the health certificate shall be
included in this fee.
§ 118-24. Term of mobile food vendor license.
The mobile food vendor's license shall be valid for one year and expire on
June 1, regardless of the month the license was issued by the City.
§ 118-25. Transfer of license.
No person holding a mobile food vendor license shall sell, lend, lease or
in any manner transfer any interest in a mobile food vendor license. Any
unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer a license and/or permit shall
automatically void such item. Additionally, whoever violates this provision,
including both the transferor and transferee, shall be subject to penalties
set forth herein.
§ 118-26. Permitted area.
(4) A satisfactory motor vehicle inspection report issued no more than
30 days prior to a license being issued or renewed.
(5) The make and model of vehicle, state license plate number, driver's
identification number, and a copy of the state registration.
(6) An abstract of the applicant's driving record.
(7) A Type 2 propane permit from the City of East Orange Fire
Department, if the vehicle is carrying more than five pounds of
propane, issued by the East Orange Fire Department. (The
applicant is responsible for applicable fees.)
(8) Two forms of photo identification.
(9) A copy of a current East Orange mobile food vendor's license.
(10) Three professional references not related to the applicant.
(11) If the applicant is a corporation, the state in which its charter is
registered and the registered agent's name and address in this
state.
(12) The number and nature of any arrests or convictions against the
applicant, officers, partners or any salespeople to be employed.
A. All mobile food vendors are permitted to park in the following areas in
the City of East Orange:
(1) City Hall Plaza.
(a) South Munn Avenue to Winans Street.
§ 118-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 118-26
C:758
§ 118-27. Application for health certificate.
It shall be unlawful for any mobile food vendor to engage in such activity in
the City of East Orange without first obtaining a health certificate issued by
the City of East Orange's Department of Health. Any person attempting to
apply for or renew a health certificate shall provide all of the following:
§ 118-28. Health inspection; requirements.
§ 118-29. Standard of operation.
(2) Main Street.
(a) Winans Street to South Harrison Street.
(3) Central Avenue.
(a) South Munn Avenue to South Harrison Street.
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The address of the applicant and telephone number.
C. The place of residence of the applicant for the last three years.
D. A description of the food items to be sold.
E. A copy of the license payment receipt.
A. Mobile food vendors shall complete a heath inspection within 30 days
after being issued a health certificate. Failure to complete a health
inspection in the thirty-day time frame will result in revocation of the
license under this article.
B. All mobile food vendors under this article are subject to the applicable
safety regulations found in the City of East Orange's City Code and the
food safety regulations in Chapter 24 of the New Jersey Code.
A. Any mobile retail food vendor operating without a valid mobile food
vendor license and/or health certificate shall be deemed a public safety
hazard and may be ticketed and/or impounded.
B. All trash and recycling receptacles shall be adjacent to the mobile food
vendor.
C. Mobile food vendors shall collect all trash and debris within 25 feet
before leaving their site. Collected trash must not be deposited in
public trash receptacles.
D. No mobile food vendor shall serve food or drink to a motorist or
occupants of a vehicle blocking the passage of traffic.
E. No mobile vendor's vehicle shall occupy street space, blocking the
passage of traffic.
§ 118-26 CHARTER § 118-29
C:759
§ 118-30. License revocation or suspension.
The license of a person who violates any provision of this article may be
revoked or suspended after a hearing on 10 days' notice served upon the
licensee. Any licensee who is charged with a violation shall have the right to
be represented by an attorney, and said facts shall be stated on the notice
served upon the licensee. Any licensee whose license has been revoked or
suspended shall have a right to appeal such revocation or suspension to a
court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the rules of the Courts of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 118-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person operating as a mobile food vendor who violates any provision of
this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both. The amount of such fine and/or
imprisonment shall be determined by the Municipal Judge.
F. Grills, generators or other items related to the mobile food vending
operation shall be located inside the vehicle.
G. Mobile food vendors must have a portable water tank/sink for hand
washing attached to their vehicles, as per N.J.A.C. 8:24-5.3.
H. All motorized vehicles must abide by all existing traffic and parking
regulations.
I. No mobile food vendor shall operate on private property, unless consent
is given.
§ 118-29 EAST ORANGE CODE § 118-31
C:760
ARTICLE V
Incorporation of Provisions; Repealer; When Effective
§ 118-32. Incorporation of provisions.
The aforementioned recitals are incorporated herein as fully set forth
herein.
§ 118-33. Repealer.
All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such conflict or
inconsistency.
§ 118-34. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after the final passage and on the expiration
of 20 days following publication, unless otherwise provided by resolution by
this City Council.
§ 118-32 CHARTER § 118-34
C:761
Chapter 122
COMMUNITY GARDENS
§ 122-1. Location of gardens.
The Director of the Department of Policy, Planning and Development is
hereby ordered to develop and maintain a list that details vacant lots owned
by the City of East Orange that are suitable for hosting community gardens.
The Director of the Department of Policy, Planning and Development shall
also develop and maintain a list that details the locations of existing
community gardens that have been approved by the City of East Orange.
Both lists shall be published on the City's website and maintained by the
City's Custodian of Records. In addition, both lists shall be updated and
certified on an annual basis by the Director of the Department of Policy,
Planning and Development.
§ 122-2. Application process.
No person, group and/or entity shall be permitted to establish, maintain
and/or operate a plot in a community garden unless it has completed an
application, signed a license and indemnification agreement and paid the
requisite fee. The application, license agreement and fee must be submitted
on an annual basis. All plots shall be divided into eight-foot-by-eight-foot
sections. The annual licensing fee for an eight-by-eight plot shall be $30 for
residents and $50 for nonresidents. This fee is nonrefundable. Applications
and fees shall be submitted to the Tax Collector and/or her designee.
Persons who have been deemed to be one-hundred-percent disabled
veterans are still required to complete the registration process; however,
they will be exempted from paying the annual fee.
§ 122-3. Rules and regulations.
Participation in the community garden program will be subject to the
following rules and regulations:
A. Hours. Operating hours for community gardens shall be from 8:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m. No one is permitted to enter a community garden during
nonoperating hours. The entranceway to community gardens shall be
locked during nonoperating hours.
B. Gardening season. Planting, harvesting and work related to same may
only be performed during the gardening season. The gardening season
shall commence on May 1 and conclude on November 1.
C. Rules of conduct. All gardeners must maintain good conduct and civil
behavior at all times. Verbal and/or physically abusive behavior will not
be tolerated. All gardeners and their visitors shall comply with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations of the United States, the State of
New Jersey and the City of East Orange. Gardeners shall also be bound
§ 118-34 EAST ORANGE CODE § 122-3
C:762
by the rules and regulations that are in place for the use of the City's
parks and recreation areas.
D. Pets. Pets and other animals are prohibited from entering gardening
areas.
E. Structures. Elaborate garden structures, fountains or the use of
multiple decorative items are prohibited. The City of East Orange shall
have the sole discretion to determine whether a structure violates this
provision. In addition, no permanent improvements may be erected at a
community garden unless they are expressly approved by the City of
East Orange.
F. Smoking. Smoking is prohibited on the premises of community gardens.
G. Maintenance. All waste, weeds and other refuse shall be disposed of off
site by the licensee generating same. All areas of the garden shall
remain free of trash, dead plants and other debris. Tires and similar
structures that retain or allow standing water to accrue are prohibited.
This provision shall not be construed so as to bar licensees from
maintaining devices that are used to collect rain water. The City of East
Orange shall have the sole authority to determine whether a device
runs afoul of this provision.
H. Signage. Each community garden shall have a sign that is prominently
displayed, indicating that it is a community garden. Signs shall be
supplied by the City's Department of Policy, Planning and Development.
The rules and regulations governing activity at community gardens
shall also be prominently displayed at each community garden on signs
supplied by the City's Department of Policy, Planning and Development.
Each individual eight-by-eight-foot plot shall also have signage
indicating the identity of its current licensee.165
I. Invasive species. No invasive species of plants may be planted in a
community garden. The City of East Orange shall have the sole
authority to determine whether a plant is an invasive species.
J. Cultivation methods.
(1) Licensees shall nurture and develop plants in the garden, including
watering, fertilizing, pruning, weeding and harvesting, as required.
The City of East Orange reserves the right to bar the usage of
fertilizers and/or herbicides that it deems to be harmful. Licensees
must immediately notify the City's Department of Planning, Policy
and Development in writing if they unable or unwilling to maintain
their plot.
(2) In-ground conventional gardening, wherein plants are placed
directly into native soil, is banned. Raised bed gardening, wherein
soil and plants are placed into three-foot- to four-foot-wide beds
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 122-3 CHARTER § 122-3
C:763
Chapter 125
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 125-1. Enforcement agency established. [Amended 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 7-2015]
The Department of Property Maintenance is hereby designated as a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency.
§ 125-2. Designation of officials.
§ 125-3. Qualifications of officials.
Each official position designated in § 125-2 shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same
person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,
and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold such position.166
that are raised six inches to waist-high above native soil, shall be
the sole method of cultivation that is permissible in community
gardens. The City of East Orange shall have the sole authority
to determine whether a plot is in compliance with the raised bed
gardening requirement.
A. The Chief Building Inspector is hereby designated as Construction
Official.
B. The Assistant Chief Building Inspector is hereby designated as Building
Subcode Official.
C. The Deputy Fire Chief - Fire Prevention Officer is hereby designated as
Fire Protection Subcode Official. [Amended 11-16-1984 by Ord. No.
45-1984]
D. The Electrical Inspector is hereby designated as Electrical Subcode
Official.
E. The Plumbing Inspector is hereby designated as Plumbing Subcode
Official.
166. Editor's Note: P.L. 1975, c. 217 is the State Uniform Construction Code Act; see N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 122-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 125-4
C:764
§ 125-4. Hours of business.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at City Hall, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday,
legal holidays excepted.
§ 125-5. Appeals. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 19-1984;
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
All appeals from the enforcing agency shall be to the Essex County
Construction Board of Appeals in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2a.
§ 125-6. Permit fees. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 19-1984;
11-16-1984 by Ord. No. 45-1984; 12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 31-1985;
10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 4-1993; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999;
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 10-2015]
A. Department of Community Affairs surcharge fees.
(1) In order to provide for the training and certification and technical
support programs required by the State Uniform Construction
Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., the City shall collect a
surcharge fee to be based upon the volume of new construction
within the municipality. Said fee shall be accounted for and
forwarded to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs,
Division of Codes and Standards, in the manner herein provided.
(2) Amount. This surcharge fee shall be in the amount of $0.00334 per
cubic foot volume of new buildings and additions. Volume shall be
computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The surcharge fee
for all other construction shall be $1.70 per $1,000 of value of
construction. The following conditions shall also apply to the
surcharge fee:
(a) No surcharge fee shall be collected for pre-engineered systems
of commercial farm buildings.
(b) No surcharge fee shall be collected for permits to perform
asbestos abatement or lead abatement.
(c) No surcharge fee shall be collected for permits for the
construction or rehabilitation of residential units that are to be
legally restricted to occupancy by households of low or
moderate income, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:43-1.5.
(d) No surcharge fee shall be collected for demolition of buildings
or structures.
(e) No surcharge fee shall be collected for work consequential to a
natural disaster when the local code enforcement agency is
waiving its fee.
§ 125-4 CHARTER § 125-6
C:765
(f) The minimum permit surcharge fee shall be $1.
(3) Remitting and reporting. The City shall remit fees to the
Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and
Standards, on a quarterly basis, in conjunction with report number
R-840B, State Training Fee Report, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.5(e). Fees remitted shall be for the quarter. Checks shall be
made payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey."
B. Municipal fees.
(1) General.
(a) The fee for plan review, computed as a percentage of the fee
for a construction permit, shall be paid at the time of
application for a permit. The amount of this fee shall then be
deducted from the amount of the fee due for a construction
permit when the permit is issued. Plan review fees are not
refundable.
(b) The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum
of the basic construction fee plus all applicable special fees,
such as elevator or sign fees. This fee shall be paid before a
permit is issued.
(c) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be
paid before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition
to the construction permit fee.
(2) Construction permit fees.
(a) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be
charged for a construction permit.
(b) The basic construction permit fee shall be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of the volume or cost of construction,
the number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the
number of electrical fixtures and rating of electrical devices,
the number of sprinklers, standpipes and detectors (smoke and
heat) at the unit rates and/or the applicable flat fees as
provided herein plus any special fees.
(c) Building volume or cost. The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
[1] Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume
of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be
in the amount of $0.040 per cubic foot of volume for
buildings and structures of all use groups and types of
construction as classified and defined in Chapters 3 and 6,
respectively, of the state building subcode, except that the
§ 125-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 125-6
C:766
fee shall be $0.019 per cubic foot of volume for use groups
A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, and A-5.
[2] Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site
construction associated with pre-engineered systems of
premanufactured construction, and the external utility
connection for premanufactured construction, shall be
based upon the estimated cost of work. The fee shall be in
the amount of $30 per $1,000 for the first $100,000,
prorated. Above $100,000, the fee on the amount
exceeding $100,000 shall be in the amount of $25 per
$1,000 of estimated cost, prorated. For the purpose of
determining estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to
the Department of Community Affairs such cost data as
may be available produced by the architect or engineer of
record, or by a recognized estimating firm, or by the
contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall
be submitted. The City of East Orange shall make the final
decision regarding estimated cost.
[3] Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as
for new construction for the added portion.
[4] Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection B(2)(c)[2] and [3] above.
[5] Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection B(2)(c)[2] and [3] above.
[6] The fee for tents, in excess of 900 square feet or more than
30 feet in any dimension, shall be $116.
[7] The fee for roofing and siding work completed on
structures of Group R-3 or R-5 shall be $150.
[8] The fee for an aboveground swimming pool shall be $126
for a pool with a surface area greater than 550 square feet;
the fee in all other cases shall be $63. The fee for an inground
swimming pool shall be $189 for a pool with a
surface area greater than 550 square feet; the fee in all
other cases shall be $95.
[9] Fees for retaining walls shall be as follows:
[a] The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area greater
than 550 square feet that is associated with a Class 3
residential structure shall be $189;
§ 125-6 CHARTER § 125-6
C:767
[b] The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area of 550
square feet or less that is associated with a Class 3
residential structure shall be $95;
[c] The fee for a newly constructed retaining wall of any
size at other than a Class 3 residential structure shall
be based on the cost of the construction.
(d) Plumbing fixtures and equipment. The fees shall be as follows:
[1] The fee shall be in the amount of $23 per fixture, minimum
$150.
[2] The fee shall be $100 per special device for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, refrigeration units, utility
service connections, backflow preventers equipped with
test ports (double check valve assembly, reduced pressure
zone and pressure vacuum breaker backflow preventers),
steam boilers, hot water boilers, active solar systems,
sewer pumps and interceptors.
[3] The fee shall be $150 for any gas- or oil-fired appliance
connected to the gas piping or oil piping system.
(e) Electrical fixtures and devices. The fee shall be as follows:
[1] For the first block consisting of one to 50 receptacles,
fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $150. For each
additional block consisting of up to 25 receptacles, fixtures
and devices, the fee shall be $25. For the purpose of
computing this fee, receptacles, fixtures or devices shall
include lighting fixtures, wall switches, convenience
receptacles, sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and
heat detectors, communications outlets, light standards
eight feet or less in height, including luminaires,
emergency lights, electric signs, exit lights or similar
electric fixtures and devices rated 20 amperes or less,
including motors or equipment rated less than one
horsepower (hp) or one kilowatt (kw).
[2] For each motor or electrical device rated from one hp or
one kw to 10 hp or 10 kw; for each transformer or
generator rated from one kw or one kva to 10 kw or 10
kva; for each replacement of wiring involving one branch
circuit or part thereof; for each storable pool or hydro
massage bath tub; for each underwater lighting fixture; for
household electric cooking equipment rated up to 16 kw;
for each fire, security or burglar alarm control unit; for
each receptacle rated from 30 amperes to 50 amperes; for
each light standard greater than eight feet in height,
including luminaires; and for each communications closet,
the fee shall be $75.
§ 125-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 125-6
C:768
[3] For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 10 hp or 10 kw to 50 hp or 50 kw; for each unit of
service equipment, panelboard, switchboard, switchgear,
motor-control center, or disconnecting means rated 225
amperes or less; for each transformer or generator rated
from greater than 10 kw or 10 kva to 45 kw or 45 kva; for
each electric sign rated from greater than 20 amperes to
225 amperes, including associated disconnecting means;
for each receptacle rated greater than 50 amperes; and for
each utility load management device, the fee shall be $85.
[4] For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 50 hp or 50 kw to 100 hp or 100 kw; for each unit of
service equipment, panelboard, switchboard, switchgear,
motor-control center or disconnecting means rated from
greater than 225 amperes to 1,000 amperes; and for each
transformer or generator rated from greater than 45 kw or
45 kva to 112.5 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $150.
[5] For each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
hp or 100 kw; for each unit of service equipment,
panelboard, switchboard, switchgear, motor-control
center or disconnecting means rated greater than 1,000
amperes; and for each transformer or generator rated
greater than 112.5 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $625.
[6] The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently
installed private swimming pool as defined in the building
subcode, spa, hot tub or fountain shall be a flat fee of $175,
which shall include any required bonding and associated
equipment such as filter pumps, motors, disconnecting
means, switches, required receptacles, and heaters, etc.,
excepting panelboards and underwater lighting fixtures.
[7] The fee charged for the installation of single- and multiplestation
smoke or heat detectors and fire, burglar or
security alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwelling
shall be a flat fee of $100 per dwelling unit. For fire,
burglar and security alarm systems and detectors in
buildings other than one- or two-family dwellings, the fee
shall be charged in accordance with Subsection B(2)(e)[1]
and [2] above.
[8] For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee
shall be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and
not upon the number of meters or rating of disconnects on
the meter stack. Individual load side panelboards shall be
charged in accordance with Subsection B(2)(e)[3], [4], or
[5] above. There shall be no additional fee charged for the
concurrent installation of individual feeder conductors.
§ 125-6 CHARTER § 125-6
C:769
[9] For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent
installation of individual controls, relays and switches, the
fee shall be based only upon the rating of the motor or
device. There shall be no additional fee charged for the
concurrent installation of individual circuit components,
for example, controllers, starters, and disconnecting
means.
[10] For electrical work requiring replacement of service
entrance conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee
shall be based on the designated ampere rating of the
overcurrent device of the service or feeder as follows:
[a] For 225 amperes or less, the fee shall be $100;
[b] For 226 to 1,000 amperes, the fee shall be $150; and
[c] For greater than 1,000 amperes, the fee shall be $650.
[11] The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on
the ampere rating of the overcurrent device protecting the
conductor feeding the process equipment or the cutoff
device.
[12] For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilization equipment and motors
which are part of premises wiring, except those which are
portable plug-in type, shall be counted.
[13] For photovoltaic systems, the fee shall be based on the
designated kilowatt rating of the solar photovoltaic system
as follows:
[a] One to 50 kilowatts: The fee shall be $75;
[b] Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts: The fee shall be $150; and
[c] Greater than 100 kilowatts: The fee shall be $650.
(f) Fire protection and hazardous equipment. For fire protection
and hazardous equipment, sprinklers, standpipes, detectors
(smoke and heat), pre-engineered suppression systems, gasand
oil-fired appliances not connected to the plumbing system,
kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators and crematoriums, the
fee shall be as follows:
[1] The fee for 20 or fewer heads shall be $125; for 21 to and
including 100 heads, the fee shall be $151; for 101 to and
including 200 heads, the fee shall be $300; for 201 to and
including 400 heads, the fee shall be $748; for 401 to and
including 1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,036; for over
1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,323.
§ 125-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 125-6
C:770
[2] The fee for one to 12 detectors shall be $65; for each 25
detectors in addition to this, the fee shall be in the amount
of $25.
[3] The fee for each standpipe shall be $300.
[4] The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall
be $175.
[5] The fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance that is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $125.
[6] The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $200.
[7] The fee for each incinerator shall be $500.
[8] The fee for each crematorium shall be $750.
[9] For single- and multiple-station smoke or heat detectors
and fire alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwellings,
there shall be a flat fee of $100 per dwelling unit. For
detectors and fire alarm systems in buildings other than
one- or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be charged in
accordance with Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above.
[10] The fee for replacement of an existing transmission means
as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17A(c)5v, shall be $75.
(3) Fees for certificates and other permits.
(a) Fees for certificates and other permits are as follows:
[1] The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $200
for a structure of less than 5,000 square feet in area and
less than 30 feet in height for one- or two-family dwellings
(Group R-3 or R-5 of the building subcode), structures on
farms, including commercial farm buildings under N.J.A.C.
5:23-3.2(d), and $250 for all other groups.
[2] The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be as follows:
[a] Fees for pylon signs shall be $6, per square foot for
the first 100 square feet, $4.75 per square foot for the
next 400 square feet and $3.50 per square foot
thereafter;
[b] Fees for ground signs or wall signs shall be $3 per
square foot for the first 100 square feet, $2.10 per
square foot for the next 400 square feet and $1.40 per
square foot thereafter;
[c] The minimum fee shall be $100.
[3] The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $200.
§ 125-6 CHARTER § 125-6
C:771
[4] The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to
a change of use group shall be $200.
[5] The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy issued
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(c) shall be $200.
[6] The fee for the first issuance and the renewal of a
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $39.
[a] Exception: There shall be no fee for the first issuance
of the temporary certificate of occupancy, provided
the certificate of occupancy fee is paid at that time.
[b] Exception: Where a written request for a temporary
certificate of occupancy is made for reasons other
than uncompleted work covered by the permit (such
as prior approvals from state or municipal agencies),
no renewal fee shall be charged.
[c] The fee for plan review of a building for compliance
under the alternate systems and nondepletable energy
source provisions of the energy subcode shall be $383
for one- and two-family dwellings (Group R-3 or R-5 of
the building subcode), and for light commercial
structures having the indoor temperature controlled
from a single point, and $1,915 for all other
structures.
[7] The fee for an application for a variation in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $821 for Class 1 structures
and $168 for Class 2 and Class 3 structures. The fee for
resubmission of an application for a variation shall be $321
for Class 1 structures and $91 for Class 2 and Class 3
structures.
[8] The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall
be $196. The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate
shall be $39.
(b) For cross-connections and backflow preventers that are
subject to annual retesting, the fee shall be $12 for each
device.
(c) Annual permit requirements are as follows:
[1] The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit
shall be charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based
upon the number of maintenance workers who are
employed by the facility, and who are primarily engaged in
work that is governed by a subcode. Managers, engineers
and clericals shall not be considered maintenance workers
for the purpose of establishing the annual construction
§ 125-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 125-6
C:772
permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building/fire
protection, electrical and plumbing.
[2] Fees for annual permits shall be as follows:
[a] One to 25 workers (including foremen): $840 per
worker; each additional worker over 25: $292 per
worker.
[b] Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $176 per subcode and a list of not
more than three individuals to be trained per subcode
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Department
of Community Affairs, Bureau of Code Services,
Education Unit, along with a copy of the construction
permit (Form F170). Checks shall be made payable to
"Treasurer, State of New Jersey." The Department
shall register these individuals and notify them of the
courses being offered.
(d) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures of
Group R-3, R-4, or R-5, and for elevator devices wholly within
dwelling units in structures of Group R-2, shall be $150 for
each device.
(e) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures of
groups other than R-3, R-4, or R-5 and devices in structures of
Group R-2 exempted by Subsection B(3)(d) above shall be $300
for each device.
(f) The fee for a mechanical inspection in a structure of Group R-3
or R-5 by a mechanic inspector shall be $100 for the first
device and $25 for each additional device. No separate fee
shall be charged for gas, fuel oil, or water piping connections
associated with the mechanical equipment inspected.
(g) The fee for the annual electrical inspection of a swimming pool,
spa, or hot tub shall be $45. The fee for the annual electrical
inspection of each additional swimming pool, spa, or hot tub on
a site shall be $30.
(h) The fee for an application by a manufacturer, distributor,
owner or any other person for approval of any fixture,
appurtenance, material or method, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-3.8, shall an amount equal to the cost incurred, or to be
incurred, by the Department of Community Affairs for such
tests as the Department may require, plus an administrative
surcharge in the amount of 10% of such cost.
(i) Hourly charges and fees for development-wide inspection of
homes after issuance of certificate of occupancy shall be in
such amount as may be reasonable and necessary in order
§ 125-6 CHARTER § 125-6
C:773
ascertain whether a violation exists or to verify that any work
performed has abated the violation.
[1] The hourly charge shall be the same as the hourly charge
set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(b)(4) times the number of
hours spent by the Code Official in determining whether a
violation exists verifying that any work performed has
abated the violations.
[2] A fee of $68 shall be required for each structure
containing one or more elevator devices upon change of
ownership.
(4) Elevator test and inspection fees.
(a) The fees for witnessing acceptance tests and performing
inspections on new and altered elevator devices shall be as
follows:
[1] The basic fees for elevator devices in structures not of
Group R-3, R-4, or R-5:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[i] One to 10 floors: $350.
[ii] Over 10 floors: $600.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $300.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $350.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $300.
[e] Dumbwaiters: $68.
[f] Stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair
lifts and manlifts: $100.
[2] Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[a] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $75.
[b] Counterweight governor and safeties: $150.
[c] Auxiliary power generator: $150.
[3] The fee for elevator devices in structures of Group R-3,
R-4, or R-5 shall be $204. This fee shall be waived when
signed statements and supportive inspection and
acceptance test reports are filed by an approved qualified
agent or agency in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.19 and
2.20.
§ 125-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 125-6
C:774
[4] The fee for performing inspections of minor work shall be
$100.
(b) The City's fees for routine and periodic tests and inspections
for elevator devices in structures not of Group R-3, R-4, or R-5,
or otherwise exempt devices in structures of Group R-2, shall
be as follows:
[1] The fee for the six-month routine inspection of elevator
devices shall be as follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[i] One to 10 floors: $225.
[ii] Over 10 floors: $300.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $175.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $240.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $240.
[2] The fee for the one-year periodic inspection and
witnessing of tests of elevator devices, which shall include
a six-month routine inspection, shall be as follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[i] One to 10 floors: $325.
[ii] Over 10 floors: $375.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $235.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $285.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $436.
[e] Dumbwaiters: $108.
[f] Manlifts, stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical
wheelchair lifts: $164.
[3] Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator
devices equipped with the following features shall be as
follows:
[a] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $75.
[b] Counterweight governor and safeties: $125.
[c] Auxiliary power generator: $90.
[4] The fee for the three-year or five-year inspection of
elevator devices shall be as follows:
§ 125-6 CHARTER § 125-6
C:775
§ 125-7. Fire limits established. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No.
19-1984; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
The fire limits are established as to all land within the zoning districts as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of East Orange, latest edition.
Chapter 126
CRANES, OPERATION OF
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the
Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers' ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — A power-operated hoisting machine used in construction,
demolition or excavation work that has a power-operated winch, load line
and boom moving laterally by the rotation of the machine on a carrier and
has a manufacturer-rated lifting capacity of 10 tons or more. It shall not
include a forklift, digger derrick truck, aircraft, bucket truck, knuckle boom,
trolley boom or any vehicle or machine not having a power-operated winch
and load line.
CRANE OPERATOR — An individual engaged in the operation of a crane.
CRANE-RELATED EXPERIENCE — Operating, inspecting, training and
maintenance experience acceptable to the Board.
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — An examination demonstrating the
applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of crane.
Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators:
[i] One to 10 floors (five-year inspection): $525.
[ii] Over 10 floors (five-year inspection): $675.
[b] Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators:
[i] Three-year inspection: $400.
[ii] Five-year inspection: $245.
§ 125-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 126-1
C:776
categories: the lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC), lattice boom truck
cranes (LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab),
tower cranes and overhead cranes.
§ 126-2. General requirements.
A. Five days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the municipality a permit
shall be obtained. In emergent situations the building inspector may
waive this requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator
meets the balance of the requirements of this chapter.
B. The permit will be maintained with the municipality as well as with the
crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be produced on
the work site when requested.
C. The following documents must be provided to the municipality in order
to be granted a permit:
(1) Copy of a crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO).
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP).
(c) Crane Institute of America certification.
(2) New Jersey crane license.
(3) Current medical examiner's card;
(4) A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection (crane
owner).
(5) Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily injury:
[1] For any one person in the amount of $500,000.
[2] For any occurrence in the amount of $1,000,000.
(b) Property damage:
[1] For any one accident in the amount of $500,000.
[2] For any aggregate of occurrences in the amount of
$2,000,000.
(6) Proof that the crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program.
§ 126-1 CHARTER § 126-2
C:777
§ 126-3. Registration of cranes; crane inspection.
§ 126-4. Fee schedule.
The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each permit is valid for 60 days
and may be extended and/or renewed, provided that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter continue to be met. The fee for an extended or
renewal permit shall be $50.
§ 126-5. Notification of accident or safety issue required.
It shall be the duty of each crane operator or person employing such
crane operator to immediately report to the Building Department any and
all accidents or safety issues regarding the operating, assembly, and
disassembly or jumping of a crane.
(7) Proof of completion of signal person qualification or certification
course.
(8) Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance
with the requirements of this section, the Building Department
shall issue or deny the requested permit within five business days.
If the application is denied, the reasons for the denial are furnished
to the applicant in writing.
A. Licensure of crane operators, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-7. No person
shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself for employment
as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act, present or
represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as such under the
provisions of this act.
B. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for which
the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice boom crawler
crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT), telescopic boom cranes
(TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab), tower cranes and overhead cranes.
C. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the municipality, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
(1) Be at least 18 years of age;
(2) Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program
meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies;
(3) Have at least 1,000 hours of crane-related experience; and
(4) Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
§ 126-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 126-6
C:778
§ 126-6. Safety equipment required.
§ 126-7. Administration; enforcement.
§ 126-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 127
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 103.
Loitering — See Ch. 173.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 190.
Public parks — See Ch. 193.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
A. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
B. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to properly working order.
C. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Board,
Commissioner, or municipality must be adhered to at all times.
A. The Municipal Council may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the City's Property
Maintenance Department.
A. Any person who operates a crane without meeting the requirements of
this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 and no more than $10,000 for
each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
B. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than
$20,000 for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 126-6 CHARTER § 127-1
C:779
§ 127-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Juvenile Curfew
Ordinance for the City of East Orange 1997."
§ 127-2. Findings and purpose.
§ 127-3. Definitions.
A. The Municipal Council of the City of East Orange (the "Council") has
determined that there has been an increase in juvenile violence,
juvenile gang activity and crime by persons under the age of 17 years in
the City of East Orange and that much of said activity takes place
during night and evening hours and on school days during the hours in
which school is in session.
B. The Municipal Council has determined that persons under the age of 17
years are particularly susceptible, because of their lack of maturity and
experience, to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities and to
be the victims of older perpetrators of crime.
C. The Municipal Council has determined that a curfew for those under
the age of 17 years will be in the interest of public health, safety and
general welfare and will help to attain these objectives and to diminish
the undesirable impact of this conduct on the citizens of the City of East
Orange.
D. The Municipal Council has determined that passage of a curfew will
protect the welfare of minors by:
(1) Reducing the likelihood that minors will be the victims of criminal
acts during the curfew hours and during the hours that school is in
session.
(2) Reducing the likelihood that minors will become involved in
criminal acts or exposed to narcotics trafficking during the curfew
hours and during the hours that school is in session.
(3) Aiding parents or guardians in carrying out their responsibility to
exercise reasonable supervision of minors entrusted to their care.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
shall include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and
words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY — The City of East Orange, Essex County, a municipal corporation
in the State of New Jersey, whose principal place of business is located
at 44 City Hall Plaza, East Orange, New Jersey 07019.
§ 127-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 127-3
C:780
CURFEW HOURS — The hours from 11:00 p.m. until 5:30 a.m.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency"
includes but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile
accident or any situation that requires immediate action to prevent
serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any
place of amusement or entertainment, store, tavern, restaurant or any
other commercial or business establishment or place.
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of
the minor has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of
the parent or is responsible for the care, custody, control and welfare of
the minor. This shall include a person who stands in loco parentis and a
person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
KNOWINGLY —
MINOR or JUVENILE — Any person who has not attained the age of
17 years as of his/her last birthday prior to the date of the violation of
this chapter, but does not include a judicially emancipated minor or a
married minor.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company or other entity that operates,
manages or conducts any establishment. The term "operator" includes
the members or partners of an association, partnership or limited
liability company and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT — A natural parent, adoptive parent, stepparent or any person
over the age of 21 years of age who has legal custody by court order
or marriage of any minor and who is authorized by the natural parent,
adoptive parent, stepparent or custodial parent of a child to be a
caretaker for the child.
With respect to a parent or guardian, knowledge which a parent
or guardian is reasonably expected to have concerning the
whereabouts of a minor in his or her legal custody. It is intended
to include and require neglectful or careless parents to maintain a
reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through
an objective test. There shall be no defense of a parent who is
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
a minor when he or she has knowledge of that individual's
whereabouts and he or she is not in compliance with this chapter;
and
(1)
With respect to an owner, operator or employee of an
establishment, knowledge that a reasonable person is expected to
have concerning the status of a person as a minor, including prior
contacts with such person.
(2)
§ 127-3 CHARTER § 127-3
C:781
§ 127-4. Curfew of minors; prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any persons under the age of 17 to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of East
Orange between the time of 11:00 p.m. and continuing into the morning
hours of the following day until 5:30 a.m.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access, including but not limited to a public
street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley, plaza, recreation or
shopping area, public transportation facility, vehicle used for public
transportation, parking lot or any other parking, public building,
structure or area.
REMAIN — To linger or stay or fail to leave the premises when
requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other
person in control of the establishment.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or
organ.
TIME OF NIGHT — Based upon the prevailing time, whether it is
either Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, generally
observed at that hour by the public in the City.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place
on any school day during the hours in which such minor's school is in
session, unless such minor has been officially excused (excluding
suspensions and expulsion) from attendance at such school by school
authorities.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly
or negligently permit or by insufficient control allow the minor to be in
any public place or on the premises of an establishment within the City
of East Orange during the curfew hours.
C. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow or permit any
minor to be in or upon any public place at any time during the hours in
which said minor's school is in session, unless such minor has been
officially excused (excluding suspension and expulsion) from
attendance at such school by school authorities.
D. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or any employee of an
establishment to knowingly permit a minor to remain upon the
premises of an establishment during curfew hours.
E. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an
establishment to knowingly allow or permit any minor to remain in or
upon such establishment at any time during the hours in which such
minor's school is in session, unless such child has been officially
§ 127-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 127-4
C:782
§ 127-5. Verification of age.
§ 127-6. Exceptions.
excused (excluding suspension and expulsion) from attendance at such
school by the school authorities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to knowingly make
misrepresentation of his or her age to a police officer of the City or any
person, firm or corporation as specified in this chapter.
B. Once any person is detained under this chapter, it is his or her
responsibility to establish by sufficient proof that he or she is not
subject to the provisions of this chapter by virtue of having attained the
age of 17 years.
A. It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter if any of the following
applies. A minor on a City street during the hours listed in § 127-4 shall
not be considered in violation of this chapter in the following instances:
(1) The minor is accompanied by the minor's parents or guardian.
(2) When accompanied by the parents or guardian or other adult
person having the care or custody of the minor.
(3) The minor is accompanied by an adult over 21 years of age
authorized by a parent to accompany the minor for a designated
period of time and specific purpose within a specific area.
(4) The minor is exercising his/her First Amendment rights protected
by the Constitution, such as free exercise of religion, speech and
the right of assembly.
(5) There exists a case of an emergency or reasonable necessity, but
only after the minor's parent or guardian has confirmed the facts
establishing the emergency or reasonable necessity, including the
points of origin and destination, the specific streets and a
designated time for a designated purpose.
(6) The minor is on the sidewalk that abuts the minor's residence or
the sidewalk that abuts the residence of the next-door neighbor if
the neighbor did not object to the minor's presence on the
sidewalk.
(7) The minor is in attendance at, or returning home by a direct route
from and within 30 minutes of the termination of, an official school
activity or any activity of a religious, civic or voluntary association,
which entity takes responsibility for the minor.
(8) The minor is in a motor vehicle with the consent of his or her parent
or guardian engaged in normal travel, either intrastate or
interstate, through the City of East Orange.
§ 127-4 CHARTER § 127-6
C:783
§ 127-7. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent, as defined in § 127-3, having legal custody
over a minor, to knowingly permit or by insufficient or lack of control to
allow such minor in his or her control to remain upon any City street
or in any public place, as defined in § 127-3, under circumstances not
constituting an exception thereto, as defined in § 127-6, or otherwise
beyond the scope as contained in this chapter.
§ 127-8. Enforcement procedures.
(9) The minor is traveling, without detour or stop, to or from a business
or occupation which the laws of the State of New Jersey authorize
the minor to perform.
(10) The minor carries on his or her person a special permit from the
Chief of Police which has been issued upon written application
signed by the minor and by a parent or guardian of the minor,
which application includes the name, address and telephone
number of the minor; the name, address and telephone number of
the minor's parent or guardian; the height, weight, sex, color of
eyes and hair and other physical characteristics of the minor; and
the necessity which requires the minor to be present on the public
streets and the beginning and ending of the period of time involved
by date and hour. The Chief of Police may grant a permit, in writing,
for the use by the minor of such street and upon such hours as, in
the opinion of the Chief of Police, may be reasonably necessary. In
the case of an emergency, this may be accomplished by telephone
or other effective communication, with a corresponding record
being made contemporaneously by the Chief of Police or by his
designee.
(11) Juveniles that are on the sidewalks of their own home or that of a
neighbor, which is not considered loitering under the ordinances of
the City of East Orange.167
B. It is a defense to prosecution under § 127-4B and E that the owner,
operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the East
Orange Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours or school hours and refused to
leave.
A. Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reasons for being in
the public place. The officer shall first warn the minor that he or she is
in violation of curfew and shall, during curfew hours, direct the minor to
proceed at once to his or her home or usual place of abode or, during
school hours, to his or her school. The officer shall not issue a citation
or make an arrest under this chapter unless the officer reasonably
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Loitering.
§ 127-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 127-8
C:784
§ 127-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-28-1999 by Ord. No.
12-1999]
For each offense, violators of this chapter will be required to perform
community service of up to 50 hours and may be fined up to $1,000. For
each offense herein by a minor, the minor shall be required to perform
a mandatory minimum of 10 hours' community service. If both the minor
and the parent or guardian violated this chapter, they shall be required to
perform community service together.
believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response
and other circumstances, no defense in § 127-6 is proffered or is
present.
B. If a police officer determines that a minor is committing a curfew
offense, the police officer shall take the minor to the headquarters of
the East Orange Police Department.
C. A juvenile who violates this chapter shall be detained by the East
Orange Police Department at the police headquarters and released into
the custody of the minor's parent, guardian or an adult person acting in
loco parentis. The minor's parents, guardian or an adult person acting
in loco parentis with respect to the minor shall be called to the police
headquarters to take custody of the minor. The Police Department may
request that the parent, guardian or adult person acting in loco parentis
submit an appropriate form of identification and sign appropriate
authorization. A minor who is released to a person acting in loco
parentis with respect to the minor shall not be taken into custody for
violation of this chapter while returning home with the person acting in
loco parentis. If no one claims responsibility for the minor, the minor
may be taken to the minor's residence or placed in the custody of an
appropriate official of the Division of Youth and Family Services or
Juveniles in Need of Supervision shelter.
D. If a minor violates this chapter on more than four occasions, he or she
may be charged as a delinquent under the Code of Juvenile Justice,
N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-20 et seq. In appropriate cases, however, the Police
Department may refer the matter to the appropriate juvenile
authorities as a "juvenile family crisis" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-22.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not limit the power of the Police
Department to charge parents, guardians or the owners, operators or
employees of business establishments with violations of this chapter
pursuant to § 127-4.
A. If, after the receipt of a warning notice pursuant to § 127-8 of a first
violation by a juvenile, a second curfew violation is adjudicated against
the same minor, the parents of the minor shall be subject to prosecution
under this chapter. The parents of the minor shall be required to
perform community service for a period not to exceed 50 hours and may
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 but not more than $1,000.
§ 127-8 CHARTER § 127-9
C:785
Chapter 128
DANCE HALLS AND DISCOTHEQUES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 100.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANCING — Applies to exhibitions or performances in which the persons
gaining admission do not participate.
DISCOTHEQUE/DANCE HALL — Any business establishment or room,
place or space thereof where the primary use of the premises is dancing
and where recorded, taped or live music is supplied by the management
expressly for such purposes, excluding dancing schools, any restaurant,
tavern or similar establishment in which dancing may be merely incidental
to other operations in which the public is invited and admission may be
had either with or without payment of a fee or charge or the purchase,
possession or presentation of a ticket, token, membership card or other
thing.
Additionally, if any parent having the care or custody of a minor is found
to be in violation of this chapter and it is adjudged that both the juvenile
and the juvenile's parents violated this chapter, they may be required to
perform community service together.
B. If a minor has been found to violate this chapter twice within a sixmonth
period, the minor shall receive a summons and complaint from
the police officer who apprehended the minor for the violation of this
chapter.
C. If a juvenile is found to be in violation of this chapter on three occasions
within six months, then the minor as well as the parent having the care
or custody of the minor shall receive a summons and complaint for the
violation of this chapter.
D. Any juvenile who violates any of the provisions of the Curfew Ordinance
as contained in this chapter more than four times shall be reported by
the Chief of Police, or his designee, to the juvenile authorities as a
juvenile in need of supervision, and the Chief of Police, Corporation
Council or their designee may proceed to file such charges with the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Family Part, as he or she may deem
appropriate.
§ 127-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 128-1
C:786
ISSUING OFFICER — The Tax Collector.168
LICENSED PREMISES — The discotheque/dance hall, together with the
entire premises on which such is located and, except where inconsistent
with the context, parking facilities used in connection therewith and the
sidewalks abutting any of the foregoing.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, club,
association, society or any other organized group of individuals, including
the officers, directors, stockholders and trustees of a club, corporation,
association or society.
§ 128-2. License application procedure.
A. The premises to be licensed shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the laws, rules and regulations of the City of East
Orange, the State of New Jersey and the federal government, including
but not limited to:
(1) Zoning ordinances, as evidenced by a permit issued by the City
Construction Official.
(2) Health, safety, building and fire prevention regulations. The Health
Department shall satisfy itself as to compliance with state and local
sanitary and health laws; the Building Inspector, as to the safety of
the structure to be licensed; and the Fire Chief, as to the fire
hazards. A certificate of conformity produced by each official shall
be required prior to the issuance of any license as provided in
§ 128-2D of this chapter. [Amended 7-19-1982 by Ord. No.
38-1982]
(3) The Police Department shall produce a written report of the
applicant's record of convictions of crime, if any, and of any other
and further information or records regarding general compliance
of the applicant with the laws and ordinances of the City of East
Orange.
B. All applications for dance hall/discotheque licenses shall include the
following information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The location of the premises to be licensed.
(3) The trade name of the applicant, if any.
(4) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity.
(5) The name, home address and business address, if any, and home
business telephone numbers of the applicant, and if the applicant is
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-1 CHARTER § 128-2
C:787
a corporation or other legal entity, the same information plus title
shall be supplied for each director, officer and agent of the
corporation or principals of the entity.
(6) The name and address of the registered agent and date of
incorporation, if the applicant is a corporation.
(7) The name, home address and business address, if any, and home
and business telephone numbers of the owners of the premises, if
such owner is a person other than the applicant.
(8) The name, home address and home telephone number of the
manager or other agent of the applicant, if any, who shall be in
charge of the licensed premises.
(9) Past violations.
(a) Whether or not any person named in the application has ever
been convicted of:
[1] Any crime.
[2] Any violation of the Code of Criminal Justice, N.J.S.A.
2C:1-1 et seq.169
[3] Any violation of City ordinance involving breach of the
peace or immorality.
(b) If the answer to either Subsection B(9)(a)[1], [2] or [3] is "yes,"
the applicant shall state the date and nature of each conviction.
(10) The maximum occupancy, stated in number of persons, of the
premises for which the license is sought.
(11) The number of exits.
(12) A description of the off-street parking facilities, including but not
limited to location and capacity, stated in number of parking
spaces.
(13) The hours of operation.
(14) The minimum number of employees that will be on duty at any time
in solely a security or policing capacity.
(15) The amount, if any, charged for admission and the manner in which
that charge is to be made, whether by fee, ticket, token or other
device.
(16) The items of commerce that will be available for purchase on the
licensed premises.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 128-2
C:788
§ 128-3. License to be kept on file.
The original application shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the
licensing officer.
§ 128-4. Revocation of license.
(17) A copy of the floor plan with descriptive information for the use of
each area.
(18) Whether or not the sale of alcoholic beverages is intended and the
date of appropriate licensing.
(19) The application shall be signed by each individual applicant; by
each partner, if a partnership; or by the president or other
authorized officer of any corporation or legal entity.
C. Fees.170
(1) Application. Any person applying for a license under this chapter
shall pay a nonrefundable fee of $100 to the licensing officer. If the
license is denied, the fee is forfeited.
(2) License. Upon approval by the licensing officer, the application fee
is credited to the payment of an annual license fee. Any person
granted a disco/dance hall license shall pay the annual fee set forth
in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees. A license issued under this
chapter shall expire the first day of June of the year following
issuance.
D. License issuance.
(1) The issuing officer is hereby authorized to grant the licenses herein
provided for to persons of good moral character of demonstrated
capacity to operate such an establishment, thereby ensuring that
the proposed dance hall/discotheque will not present a traffic
hazard, will not interfere with the enjoyment of property in the area
by the owner or owners thereof, and assuring compliance with all
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The license shall not be issued until the fee, as provided herein, is
paid.
(3) No applicant may operate a dance hall/discotheque until the
license procedure is finalized.
A. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended after
written notice and full hearing of charges by the issuing officer for the
causes hereinafter specified. Such license when so suspended or
revoked shall not be eligible for reissuance until at least six months
following the date of such suspension or revocation. The following shall
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-2 CHARTER § 128-4
C:789
§ 128-5. Appeals to Mayor.
Any licensee or applicant aggrieved by the suspension, revocation or refusal
of a license shall have the right, within 10 days after the receipt of written
notice of the decision, to appeal such order or decision to the Mayor in
accordance with the provisions of § 170-32 of the Code of the City of East
Orange.
§ 128-6. License exemptions.
No person shall operate a dance hall/discotheque until the premises shall
first have been duly licensed for such purpose; provided, however, that no
license shall be required for dances or discotheques held in public or private
schools when held under the supervision of the Board of Education of the
City or any nonprofit organization or public charity approved first in writing
by the licensing officer.
§ 128-7. Renewal of license.
No license shall be renewed until approved by the licensing officer upon
completion and review of updated investigative reports such as those
required for an original application in accordance with § 128-2A, review
and investigation of previous years' operations and payment of the annual
licensing fee in accordance with § 128-2C.
constitute sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a license
issued hereunder:
(1) Lewd, disorderly or immoral conduct allowed, permitted or
suffered by the licensee in or upon the licensed premises.
(2) Conduct allowed, permitted or suffered by the licensee in or upon
the licensed premises which constitutes a nuisance.
(3) Conviction of the licensee for violation of the provisions of this
chapter, provisions of Title 2C and Title 33 of the New Jersey
Statutes, and such other laws of the City of East Orange and the
State of New Jersey which bear upon the preservation of the public
health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the City of East
Orange and persons patronizing such establishments.
B. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any portion of premises licensed
hereunder during the period of any suspension or revocation of license
as provided herein above.
§ 128-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 128-8
C:790
§ 128-8. Transferability.171
No license issued by the City shall be transferable as to persons or locations
unless otherwise expressly permitted by the provisions governing such
licenses. (See § 170-22.)
§ 128-9. Compliance with standards of conduct.
Any persons operating a dance hall/discotheque must comply with all
provisions of this chapter and the provisions regarding general standards of
conduct for licenses as set forth in § 170-5 of the Code of the City of East
Orange.
§ 128-10. Restrictions.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall observe the following
restrictions:
A. Hours of operation. The licensee shall not permit, suffer or allow the
licensed premises to remain open for business or use by patrons
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
B. Persons excluded. The licensee shall not permit, suffer or allow any
person who is less than the minimum drinking age, as defined by the
laws of the State of New Jersey, or any intoxicated or disorderly person
to be admitted to the licensed premises or to remain therein.
C. Good order. The licensee shall maintain good order throughout the
entire licensed premises, including any off-street parking facilities, and
shall not permit loitering in or about the entrances, exits, sidewalks or
other portion of the licensed premises.
D. Employees and attendants. At all times during business hours, the
licensee shall provide an adequate number of qualified security officers
continuously on duty, who shall patrol the licensed premises and its
entrances, exits, sidewalks and other portions of the licensed premises
to maintain order, to prevent disorderly or immoral conduct, to assure
that the licensed premises and its entrances and exits are kept free
from congestion and loitering and that the provisions of this chapter
and all other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws are complied
with.
E. Parking. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to provide
sufficient off-street parking for patrons and employees in the following
fashion: a minimum of one off-street parking space for every two
persons of rated capacity, plus one off-street parking space for each
employee.
171. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A of this section, pertaining to display of license or
insignia, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-8 CHARTER § 128-11
C:791
§ 128-11. Violations and penalties.172
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor exceeding
$2,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or 90 days of
community service. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 128-12. Waiver of provisions.
The City Council may, by resolution, waive the application of any provision
of this chapter to a particular licensee upon the written recommendation
of the Director of Property Maintenance. Said recommendation shall be
premised upon a showing that the literal application of the provision in
question is not necessary to protect the public health and safety and
otherwise results in an unreasonable hardship to the applicant.173
Chapter 132
DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
173. Editor's Note: Original § 128-13, Number of operations permitted, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 128-12
C:792
ARTICLE I
Household Pets and Domestic Animals
§ 132-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAT OR DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat or dog which has attained the
age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.[Added
12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
HOUSEHOLD PET — Birds, cats (excluding any cat naturally existing in the
wild state), dogs or other animals normally available at pet shops, which,
by reason of their species, condition or character, are domesticated and not
dangerous.174[Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
§ 132-2. Harboring wild unlawful. [Amended 10-10-1972 by Ord.
No. 43-1972; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
No person shall keep, maintain or harbor any wild animal within the City.
§ 132-3. Running at large and maintenance of household pets.
[Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
No person shall permit any household pet to run at large in any street or
public place, nor shall any person keep, maintain or harbor household pets
in such number, not to exceed six dogs or cats of a licensing age, or a
combination of either, or 10 birds, or manner as to constitute a nuisance or
to endanger the public health.
§ 132-4. Keeping of domestic animals.
No person shall keep, harbor, maintain or husband any domestic animal
(excluding household pets, as defined in § 132-1) within the City, nor shall
the owner or custodian of any such animal allow the same to be led or driven
on any public place or street, unless securely harnessed.
174. Editor's Note: The definition of "vicious dog and vicious animal," added 12-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 34-2006, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 7-2015.
§ 132-1 CHARTER § 132-4
C:793

ARTICLE II
Cats and Dogs175
§ 132-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Certified municipal animal control officer
or dog warden or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law
enforcement officer of the City or his designee.[Added 12-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 34-2006]
CAT — Any domesticated cat, neutered or spayed cat.[Added 12-26-2006
by Ord. No. 34-2006]
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health and Human Services. [Added
12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Health and Human
Services or his designee.[Added 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
DOG — Any dog, neutered dog, bitch or spayed bitch.[Amended
12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
DOGS COMMONLY AND FREQUENTLY USED FOR SECURITY PURPOSES
— Any dogs of licensing age kept or harbored that are or have been
traditionally used for household or commercial security purposes. Dogs
included are American pit bull terriers, American Staffordshire terriers,
bull terriers, doberman pinschers, rottweilers, Staffordshire bull terriers,
Staffordshire terriers or any dogs of mixed breed which have the
appearance or characteristics of being predominantly a dog listed above.
[Added 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
CAT OR DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat or dog which has attained
the age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent
teeth.[Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat or dog, includes
every person having a right of property in such cat or dog and every person
who has such cat or dog in his keeping.[Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord.
No. 34-2006]
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein any animal, bird, fish or reptile is held for sale.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of cats and dogs seized
under the provisions of this article or otherwise.[Amended 12-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 34-2006]
175. Editor's Note: As to dogs generally, see N.J.S.A. 4:19-1 et seq.
§ 132-5 CHARTER § 132-5
C:795
SHELTER — Any establishment where cats and dogs are received, housed
and distributed. [Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006;
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
§ 132-6. Animal Control Officer: employment, assistants,
supervision. [Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006; 2-14-2017
by Ord. No. 3-2017]
The Department of Public Safety shall employ a suitable person as Animal
Control Officer and may employ such assistants to the Animal Control
Officer as may be authorized in the City's budget. The Animal Control
Officer shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the Director of
Public Safety.
§ 132-7. Duties of Animal Control Officer. [Amended 12-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 34-2006]
§ 132-8. Annual canvass. [Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No.
34-2006; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015; 2-14-2017 by Ord. No.
3-2017]
The Animal Control Officer shall annually or biennially, as directed by the
City Council, cause a canvass to be made of all cats and dogs owned, kept
or harbored within the City and shall report the results thereof on or before
May 1 of each year or May 1 of every other year, as appropriate, to the
City Clerk, the Director of the Department of Public Safety, the Department
and the State Department of Health, setting forth in such report the names
and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed cats and
dogs and the number of unlicensed cats and dogs owned, kept or harbored
by each of such persons, together with a complete description of each
unlicensed cat or dog.
§ 132-9. Interference with authorized persons.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
A. The duties of the Animal Control Officer shall include:
(1) Collection and disposition of bodies of dead animals.
(2) Enforcement of this article.
(3) Control of animals to prevent destruction of property, disturbance
to peace and quiet and creation of hazard to public health and
safety.
B. The Animal Control Officer may be authorized to shoot squirrels and
other forms of wildlife and to capture and destroy or otherwise dispose
of other animals to effectuate the duties set forth in this section.
§ 132-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-10
C:796
§ 132-10. Regulation of dog sanitation. [Amended 7-20-1987 by
Ord. No. 22-1987; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
§ 132-10.1. Enforcement. [Added 7-20-1987 by Ord. No. 22-1987;
amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
Notwithstanding the enforcement powers granted by this chapter to the
Animal Control Officer and Police Department, the provisions of § 132-10
may also be enforced by the Sanitary Inspectors of the Department and by
the Property Maintenance Inspectors.
§ 132-11. Damaging shrubs, flowers or property. [Amended
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury or damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, ground or property.
(See § 132-29 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 132-12. Noisy dogs; control of dogs. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 4-1999; 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or harbor any dog on premises
under his control, which dog shall habitually bark, snarl, growl or make
other disturbing noises to other persons using the premises or residing in
close proximity to the premises. Any person having care or custody of any
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
permit, cause or suffer such dog to soil, defile or defecate on any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, street, passageway, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property. (See § 132-29 for violations
and penalties hereof.)
B. The person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
only permit, cause or suffer such dog to soil, defile or defecate in that
portion of the street between the curb and 36 inches towards the center
line of the street, or on private property owned or rented by the person
owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, and on private
property of another who gives permission, provided that: [Amended
12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
(1) The person with and in charge of such dog shall immediately
remove all feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary means
approved by the Department. (See § 132-29 for violations and
penalties hereof.)
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of such dog in a sanitary manner approved by the
Department. (See § 132-29 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 132-10 CHARTER § 132-12
C:797
dog shall at all times have the same under such control as to halt or prevent
any menacing, intimidation, continuing barking or making of other noises
disturbing to persons who are lawfully in the vicinity of such dog. (See §
132-29 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 132-13. Muzzles or leashes. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall permit or suffer it
to run at large on any public street or in any public area or public building
or on any premises other than those of which such person is owner or on
which such person is a tenant, unless:
§ 132-14. (Reserved)176
A. Such dog is controlled by a leash no longer than six feet in length. (See
§ 132-29 for violations and penalties hereof.) [Amended 12-26-2006
by Ord. No. 34-2006]
B. Such dog is prevented from biting by having its jaws confined by a
securely fastened muzzle. (See § 132-29 for violations and penalties
hereof.)
C. The owner or tenant of such other private premises expressly consents
to such dog being on such premises without a leash or muzzle. (See
§ 132-29 for violations and penalties hereof.)
D. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog commonly and
frequently used for security purposes as defined under § 132-5 above
shall permit or suffer it to run at large on any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, street, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place
where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property
whatsoever unless such dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a
leash or tether approved by the Animal Control Officer or other official
designated by the City and having a minimum tensile strength of 300
pounds sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the dog's
movement to a radius of no more than three feet from the licensee and
under the direct supervision of the licensee. (See § 132-29 for violations
and penalties hereof.) [Added 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
176. Editor's Note: Former § 132-14, Vicious dogs, as amended 10-10-1972 by Ord. No. 43-1972
and 11-27-1972 by Ord. No. 51-1972, was repealed 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 19-1998. See
now Art. VII, Vicious and Potentially Dangerous Dogs, of this chapter.
§ 132-12 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-14
C:798
ARTICLE III
Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds
§ 132-15. Maintenance and operation. [Amended 12-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 34-2006]
The maintenance and operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds
shall be subject to such regulations as the Department of Health and Human
Services shall adopt, and the issuance or renewal of licenses for such
establishments shall be subject to compliance therewith.
§ 132-16. Control of dogs allowed off premises.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises except on a leash or in a crate or under other safe control.
§ 132-15 CHARTER § 132-16
C:799

ARTICLE IV
Licenses and Registration
§ 132-16.1. Definitions. [Added 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DOGS COMMONLY AND FREQUENTLY USED FOR SECURITY PURPOSES
— Any dogs of licensing age kept or harbored that are or have been
traditionally used for household or commercial security purposes. Dogs
included are American pit bull terriers, American Staffordshire terriers,
bull terriers, doberman pinschers, rottweilers, Staffordshire bull terriers,
Staffordshire terriers or any dogs of mixed breed which have the
appearance or characteristics of being predominantly a dog listed above.
§ 132-17. License and registration required; issuance. [Amended
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999; 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
No person shall keep or harbor any cat or dog of licensing age within the
City without registering and obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by
the City Clerk upon application by the owner and payment of the prescribed
fee, and no person shall keep or harbor any cat or dog in the City except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (See § 132-29 for violations
and penalties hereof.)
§ 132-18. Applications; issuance of registration numbers; monthly
reports. [Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
The application for a cat or dog license and registration shall state the
breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat or dog for which the license
and registration are sought, and whether it is of a long-haired or shorthaired
variety; also, the name, street and post office address of the owner
and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat or dog. The information
on such application and the registration number issued for the cat or dog
shall be preserved for a period of three years by the City Clerk. In addition,
the City Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health each month,
on forms furnished by such Department, an accurate account of registration
numbers issued or otherwise disposed of. Registration numbers shall be
issued in the order of application.
§ 132-19. Time of procurement; registration tags. [Amended
12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat or dog of licensing age
shall, annually, in the month of February, apply for and procure from the
City Clerk a license and official metal registration tag for each such cat or
dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such cat or dog
a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 132-16.1 CHARTER § 132-20
C:801
§ 132-20. Fee exemption for service dogs.177
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye dogs," dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known
as "service dogs," and dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly
known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
hereinbefore provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall
not be required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 132-21. Newly acquired cats and dogs; dogs attaining licensing
age. [Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
The owner of any newly acquired cat or dog of licensing age or of any cat
or dog which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and
registration tag for each cat or dog within 10 days after such acquisition or
age attainment.
§ 132-22. Cats and dogs brought into City. [Amended 12-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 34-2006]
§ 132-23. Removal or unauthorized use of registration tags.
[Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove
a registration tag from the collar of any cat or dog without the consent of
the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a cat or dog for
which it was not issued.
§ 132-24. Kennel dogs: individual licenses not required.178
Any person procuring a license for the operation of a kennel, pet shop,
shelter or pound, where required under Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees,
shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs owned by such
licensee and kept at such establishment.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City any cat
or dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the City for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such cat or dog unless
such dog is licensed under a kennel license.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City any
unlicensed cat or dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the City for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such cat or dog unless
such dog is licensed under a kennel license.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
178. Editor's Note: As to kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, see N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8 and
4:19-15.9.
§ 132-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-24.1
C:802
§ 132-24.1. Liability insurance required for dogs commonly and
frequently used for security purposes. [Added 12-26-2006 by Ord.
No. 34-2006]
Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog commonly and frequently
used for security purposes, as defined by § 132-16.1 above, shall at the time
of registration and license application, whether initial or renewal, furnish
to the City Clerk proof of liability insurance, or a bond if insurance is not
available, in a minimum amount of $20,000 to cover any damage injury or
injury caused by the dog. Said liability insurance may be separate from
any other homeowner's or renter's policy and shall contain a provision
requiring the City to be named as an additional insured for the sole purpose
of being notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination
or expiration of the liability insurance policy. The City Clerk shall notify the
Animal Control Officer of any person who has been refused a license for
failing to provide liability insurance at the time of the initial application or
renewal application. (See § 132-29 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 132-24.1 CHARTER § 132-24.1
C:803

ARTICLE V
Impoundment179
[Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980; 12-26-2006 by Ord. No.
34-2006]
§ 132-25. Certain cats and dogs to be impounded.180
The Animal Control Officer of the City shall take into custody and impound
or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed
or offered for adoption pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 or disposed of as
provided in this article:
§ 132-26. Notice to owners of impounded cats or dogs.
A. Any cat or dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the cat or dog which the Animal Control Officer or his agent
have reason to believe is a stray cat or dog.
B. Any cat or dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the cat or dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female cat or dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring the cat or dog.
D. Any owner of a dog as defined by § 132-16.1 who fails to obtain liability
insurance for registration and licensing purposes. [Added 12-26-2006
by Ord. No. 34-2006]
A. If any cat or dog seized pursuant to this article wears a collar or harness
having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of
any person or a registration tag, or if the owner or the person keeping
or harboring the cat or dog is known, the Animal Control Officer shall
forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar or on
the owner or the person keeping or harboring the cat or dog, if known,
a notice in writing stating that the cat or dog has been seized and will
be liable to be disposed of or destroyed or offered for adoption if not
claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.181
B. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address on the collar.
179. Editor's Note: As to impoundment of dogs generally, see N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-25 CHARTER § 132-27
C:805
§ 132-27. Impoundment fees; redemption, destruction.
For every cat or dog seized pursuant to this article, there shall be an
impoundment fee as provided for in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees. When
any cat or dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as set forth in the preceding section, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not been and cannot
be given as set forth in the preceding section, and if the owner or person
keeping or harboring the cat or dog has not claimed the cat or dog and paid
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including the impoundment
fee, and if the cat or dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the
owner or person keeping or harboring the cat or dog has not produced a
license and registration tag for such cat or dog, the Animal Control Officer
may cause the cat or dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain
as possible.
§ 132-28. Invading premises to seize cats or dogs.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any cat or dog which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such cat or dog, except upon the
premises of the owner of the cat or dog if the owner is present and forbids
the same.
§ 132-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-28
C:806
ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 132-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord.
No. 15-1980; 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999; 12-26-2006 by Ord. No.
34-2006182]
A. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any part of this
chapter (except as provided in § 132-29B and C), or with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health governing
the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and
pounds to preserve sanitation therein and prevent the spread of rabies
and other diseases of dogs within and from such establishments, or who
fails or refuses to obtain a kennel license shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to a penalty of not less than $200 nor more than $2,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, and/or 90 days of
community service.
B. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with § 132-24.1, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$2,000 per day of the violation, imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days and/or 90 days of community service, and each day's
continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation.
C. Payment through Violations Bureau. If you wish to plead guilty of
violating or refusing to comply with § 132-10, 132-11, 132-12, 132-13 or
132-17, respectively, and give up your right to have a lawyer and a trial,
you may pay a fine of $500 by bringing or mailing the summons,
together with payment, within 14 days of notice of violation, to the
Violations Bureau located at:
Violations Bureau
Municipal Court - East Orange
221 Freeway Drive
East Orange, New Jersey 07018
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-29 CHARTER § 132-29
C:807

ARTICLE VII
Vicious and Potentially Dangerous Dogs
[Added 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 19-1998]
§ 132-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Certified municipal animal control officer
or dog warden or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law
enforcement officer of the City or his designee.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health and Human
Services.[Amended 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 34-2006]
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog or livestock other than poultry.
FIGHTING — The fighting or baiting of a living animal as set forth in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and 4:22-26.
PERSON — Any person, corporation, partnership or other association.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23, that
has:
PIT BULL DOGS PRESUMED POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS — There shall
be an irrefutable presumption that any dog registered within the City as a
pit bull is a dangerous dog and is therefore subject to the requirements of
this article.[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 33-2016]
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22, that has:
Caused bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a person during
an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of bodily injury or
death to a person; or
A.
Severely injured or killed another domestic animal; and:183
(1) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
(2) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal; or
B.
Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
C.
Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1b, to a person; or
A.
Engaged in dogfighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24 and
4:22-26.
B.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-30 CHARTER § 132-31
C:809
§ 132-31. Seizure and impoundment of dog by Animal Control
Officer; grounds.
§ 132-32. Notice of seizure and impoundment; determination of
identity of owner; notice of hearing; return of statement by owner;
destruction of dog.
A. An Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the
Officer has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
(1) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b, to that person;
(2) Caused bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
(3) Engaged in dogfighting activities; or
(4) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of the
Municipal Health Officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or
other structure agreeable to the owner.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court and the
Municipal Health Officer immediately that he/she has seized and
impounded a dog pursuant to § 132-31 or that he/she has reasonable
cause to believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and that
a hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer shall, through a
reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
dog seized and impounded. "Reasonable effort" shall mean that, if any
animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or
attached thereto the name and address of any person or a registration
tag, that person will be notified or the owner or the person keeping or
harboring said animal, if known, shall be notified. If the owner cannot
be identified within seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to § 132-26 above, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment
and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This
notice shall also require that the owner return, within seven days, by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether
he/she wishes the hearing to be conducted or, if not, to relinquish
ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be humanely
destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the certified letter or does not
§ 132-31 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-32
C:810
§ 132-33. Agreement between City and dog owner; settlement and
disposition; liability of City; legal expenses.
Notwithstanding any provision in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., or this article, to
the contrary, the City and the owner of the dog may settle and dispose of
the matter at any time in such manner and according to such terms and
conditions as may be mutually agreed upon. Notwithstanding any provisions
of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. to the contrary, neither the City nor any of its
employees shall have any liability by virtue of having entered into any
settlement agreement pursuant to this section, or for any action or inaction
related to the entry into such agreement, for any injuries or damages
caused thereafter by the dog. The City may, as a condition of the settlement,
also require that the owner of the dog hold the City harmless for any
legal expenses or fees the City may incur in defending against any cause
of action brought against the City, notwithstanding the prohibition against
such cause of action set forth in this section.
§ 132-34. Findings.
reply to the certified letter with a signed statement within seven days of
receipt, the dog may be humanely destroyed. If the dog is so destroyed,
any identified owner shall be responsible for the municipality's cost as
set forth in § 132-37 below.
A. Finding to declare dog vicious; grounds.
(1) The East Orange Municipal Court shall declare a dog vicious if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
(a) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury, as defined by
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b, to a person; or
(b) Has engaged in dogfighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and 4:22-26 or in § 132-31A(3) above.
(2) A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury, as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b, upon a person if the
dog was provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof
to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
(3) If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to § 132-36, the dog shall be destroyed
in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog may be
destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
B. Finding to declare dog potentially dangerous.
(1) The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially
dangerous if it finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
§ 132-32 CHARTER § 132-34
C:811
§ 132-35. Order and schedule for compliance for potentially
dangerous dogs; conditions. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
33-2016]
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous or if the
dog is determined to be a pit bull under this article, then the Animal Control
Officer or the Municipal Court, whichever is applicable, shall issue an order
and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
(a) Caused bodily injury, as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a
person during an unproved attack and poses a serious threat of
bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Severely injured or killed another domestic animal; and184
[1] Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person;
or
[2] Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal; or
(c) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged
to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic
animals.
(d) These findings are presumed if the dog is a pit bull, and the
requirements of this article automatically apply. [Added
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 33-2016]
(2) A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(a) Causing bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a
person if the dog was provoked; or
(b) Severely injuring or killing a domestic animal if the domestic
animal was the aggressor.185
(3) For the purposes of Subsection B(1) of this section, the municipality
shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the dog was not
provoked.
A. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(1) To apply, at his/her own expense, to the official designated to
license dogs for a special municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, municipal registration number and red identification tag
issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-30 and § 132-41 below. The owner
shall, at his own expense, have the registration number tattooed
upon the dog in a prominent location. A potentially dangerous dog
shall be impounded until the owner obtains a municipal potentially
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-34 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-35
C:812
§ 132-36. Procedures for appeal.
The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control Officer in the municipality
in which the dog was impounded, may appeal any final decision, order or
judgment, including any conditions attached thereto, of a Municipal Court
pursuant to this article and N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., by filing an appeal with
the Superior Court, Law Division, in accordance with the Rules Governing
the Courts of the State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of
limited jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting
a hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals from
courts of limited jurisdiction.
dangerous dog license, municipal registration number and red
identification tag.
(2) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his/her premises
warning that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The
sign shall be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure
required pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this section.
(3) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property, where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six feet
in height separated by at least three feet from the confined area.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the
enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude
any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
Animal Control Officer and having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet
from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner.
B. Shall require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court or Animal Control Officer,
whichever is applicable, to cover any damage or injury caused by the
potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which may be
separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a provision
requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to be named as
an additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the
liability insurance policy. The limits of liability insurance coverage shall
not be less than $100,000 per incident. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 33-2016]
§ 132-35 CHARTER § 132-37
C:813
§ 132-37. Liability of owner for costs of impoundment and
destruction.
§ 132-38. Right to convene hearing for subsequent actions of dog.
If the Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a hearing
to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous for any
subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 132-39. Duties of owner of potentially dangerous dog and owners
of residential units. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 33-2016]
A. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, or if the dog has been
destroyed, as set forth in §§ 132-26 and 132-27 above, the owner of the
dog shall be liable to the municipality in which the dog is impounded for
the costs and expenses of impounding and destroying the dog. The
municipality may establish by ordinance a schedule of these costs and
expenses. The owner shall incur the expense of impounding the dog in a
facility other than the municipal pound, regardless of whether the dog
is ultimately found to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
B. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to the
time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New Jersey
State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
A. Duties of owner of potentially dangerous dog. The owner of a
potentially dangerous dog shall:
(1) Comply with the provisions of this article in accordance with a
schedule established by the Municipal Court or the Animal Control
Officer, whichever is applicable, but in no case more than 60 days
subsequent to the date of determination;
(2) Notify the municipal licensing authority, City Police Department
and the Animal Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at
large or has attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
(3) Notify the municipal licensing authority, City Police Department or
force and the Animal Control Officer within 24 hours of the death,
sale or donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
(4) Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner,
in writing, that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
(5) Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the Department of Health and the
municipal licensing authority, Police Department or force and
Animal Control Officer of that municipality of the transfer of
ownership and the name, address and telephone of the new owner;
and
§ 132-37 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-39
C:814
§ 132-40. Violations and penalties; enforcement; seizure and
impoundment of dog; destruction by order of Court.
§ 132-41. Registration number, red identification tag and license;
issuance; telephone number to report violations.
The City shall:
§ 132-42. Fees for license.186
The sum to be paid annually for a potentially dangerous dog license and
each renewal thereof shall be as stated in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees,
per dog.
(6) In addition to any license fee required pursuant to law, pay a
potentially dangerous dog license fee to the municipality as
provided in this article.
B. Duties of owners of residential units. The owners of residential units are
responsible for the failure of their tenants to comply with this article.
For such violation, the owner shall be responsible for a fine of not less
than $500 and not more than $2,500 per day for each day that said
violation continues.
A. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found to have violated
this article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or to
have failed to comply with a court's order shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 per day of the violation, and
each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 33-2016]
B. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section. An
Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the
provision of this article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, or a court's order. The Municipal Court may order that the dog
so seized and impounded be destroyed in an expeditious and humane
manner.
A. Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a City potentially dangerous dog license
upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to the Animal
Control Officer that she or he has complied with the court's orders.
B. Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this article.
This telephone number shall be forwarded to the State Department of
Health, and any changes in this number shall be reported immediately
to the State Department of Health.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-39 CHARTER § 132-43
C:815
§ 132-43. Inspection to determine continued compliance.
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with § 132-35
of this article.
§ 132-44. Acts deemed exercise of government function; application
of Tort Claims Act.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-34, any action undertaken pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be deemed to be an exercise of a government
function and shall be subject to the provisions of the New Jersey Tort Claims
Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 132-43 EAST ORANGE CODE § 132-44
C:816
Chapter 138
HOURS OF OPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
§ 138-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby declared that the City wishes to address serious crime and
quality-of-life issues on a City-wide basis. The East Orange Police
Department has determined that a significant percentage of violent crime in
East Orange occurs between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., and the
operation of certain small retail businesses, places of public entertainment
and places of private entertainment and meetings during these hours is
a substantial contributing factor to, or source of, late-night robberies,
breaches of the peace and illegal drug activity.
§ 138-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and safe hours within
which retail businesses, places of public entertainment and places of private
entertainment and meetings may operate within the City. The governing
body deems that the time restrictions set forth herein are necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the City's residents.
Allowing certain businesses to operate at unreasonable and unsafe hours
not only hinders the provision of adequate police protection, but disrupts
the peace and tranquility of the community. Therefore, it is hereby
determined to be in the best interests of the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the City of East Orange that certain retail
businesses, places of public entertainment and places of private
entertainment and meetings cease to operate at unreasonable and unsafe
hours.
§ 138-3. Retail businesses.
A. For purposes of this section, "retail business" means any business
which holds itself out to the general public for the sale of retail, goods
or services. It does not include taverns, indoor theaters, motion-picture
theaters and other places where cultural and educational assemblies
are being conducted.
B. Retail businesses may operate in the City only within the time
restrictions set forth in this section:
(1) Sunday through Thursday: 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(2) Friday through Saturday: 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
§ 132-44 CHARTER § 138-3
C:817
§ 138-4. Places of public entertainment.
§ 138-4.1. Places of private entertainment and meetings.
C. The time limitations in this section do not apply to the following:
(1) Activities such as stacking of shelves, taking of inventory, and other
similar activities, provided that such activities do not cause noises
or sounds which may be heard outside of the walls of any building
on the premises where the retail business is located;
(2) Retail businesses which are accessible to the public for business
after 11:00 p.m. solely by means of a drive-up facility, containing a
protective enclosure from behind which transactions of business
with the public are conducted; or
(3) Retail business where the parking is contiguous and adjacent to the
front or rear entrance of the business and where the owner or
operator is the actual owner or tenant of the parking area. For the
purposes of this chapter, patrons utilizing the retail business must
be able to access the business through the entrance (front or rear)
that is contiguous and adjacent to the parking facility.
A. For purposes of this section, "places of public entertainment" shall
mean poolrooms, bowling alleys, motion-picture establishments and
other similar establishments.
B. Places of public entertainment may open to the public for business only
within the time restrictions set forth in this section.
(1) Monday to Saturday: 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the next succeeding
day, prevailing time;
(2) Sunday: 1:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. the next succeeding day, prevailing
time, except that, on Sunday, motion-picture establishments,
theaters and multipurpose spaces shall not open to the public
before 11:00 a.m. For purpose of this section, "multipurpose space"
means a room or space used to accommodate cultural functions,
social gatherings and other activities such as dining, plays, films,
assemblies, community meetings, physical education and large
group instruction.
A. For purposes of this section, "places of private entertainment and
meetings" shall mean churches, clubs, conference centers, lodge
buildings, private and parochial schools, or any other establishment
that rents or leases the premises for parties and other activities where
alcohol is consumed at a party or other social function. For the purposes
of this section, it shall be in effect irrespective of whether alcohol is
served or consumed.
B. Places of private entertainment and meetings shall conclude operations
Sunday to Saturday at 2:00 a.m. the next succeeding day, prevailing
§ 138-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 138-4.1
C:818
§ 138-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $750 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or both.
Chapter 140
EMPLOYER REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retail food-handling establishments — See
Ch. 288.
Sanitation standards — See Ch. 292.
time, and shall require that all patrons leave the area of the
establishment (as defined under this section) immediately after the
conclusion of operations.
C. The owners (or their designee) of any establishment as defined under
this section shall provide to the office of the Chief of Police a listing of
any social event or party located on the premises, the name, address
and telephone number of the individual or organization sponsoring the
event. Said listing shall be provided within 72 hours of the scheduled
event. In addition, the owners (or their designee) shall provide to the
office of the Chief of Police the name, address and telephone number of
the individual responsible for event operations at the establishment.
§ 138-4.1 CHARTER § 138-5
C:819

ARTICLE I
Paid Sick Leave
[Adopted 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 21-2014]
§ 140-1. Purpose.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The Department of Health and Human Services.
CALENDAR YEAR — A regular and consecutive twelve-month period, as
determined by an employer.
CONSTRUCTION UNION — A labor organization that represents, for
purposes of collective bargaining, employees involved in the performance
of construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication
or repair work and who are enrolled or have graduated from a "registered
apprenticeship program."
A. To ensure that all workers in the City of East Orange can address their
own health needs and the health needs of their family members by
requiring employers to provide a minimum level of paid sick time,
including time for care for family members;
B. To diminish public and private health care costs and promote
preventative health services in the City of East Orange by enabling
workers to seek early and routine medical care for themselves and their
family members;
C. To protect the public's health in East Orange by reducing the risk of and
spread of contagion;
D. To promote the economic security and stability of workers and their
families, as well as businesses serving the City of East Orange and its
residents;
E. To protect residents and all workers in the City of East Orange from
losing their jobs or facing workplace discipline as a result of illness and
the use of sick time to care for themselves or their family members;
F. To safeguard the public welfare, health, safety and prosperity of the
people of the City of East Orange; and
G. To accomplish the purposes described in Subsections A through F in a
manner that is fair and reasonable to both employees and employers
and rationally related to the objective sought, which is to promote the
overall health and safety of the residents and workers in the City of East
Orange by reducing the risk of and spread of communicable disease and
contagion.
§ 140-1 CHARTER § 140-2
C:821
EMPLOYEE — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(h), who works in the City
of East Orange for at least 80 hours in a year, except that "employee" for
purposes of this article does not include:
EMPLOYER — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(g), except that "employer"
does not include:
FAMILY MEMBER —
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed under federal or
New Jersey law to provide medical or emergency services, including but not
limited to doctors, nurses and emergency room personnel.
PAID SICK TIME — Time that is compensated at the same hourly rate and
with the same benefits, including health care benefits, as the employee
normally earns during hours worked and is provided by an employer to an
employee for the purposes described in § 140-5 of this article, but in no case
shall the hourly wage be less than that provided under N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a.
Any person employed by any governmental entity or instrumentality
including any New Jersey school district or board of education; or
A.
Any person who is a member of a construction union and is covered by
a collective bargaining agreement negotiated by that union.
B.
A. The United States government;
The state or its political subdivisions or any office, department, agency,
authority, institution, association, society or any instrumentality of the
state including the legislature or judiciary; or
B.
C. The City of East Orange.
A biological, adopted or foster child, stepchild or legal ward, a child of
a domestic partner, or a child of a civil union partner;
A.
A biological, foster, stepparent or adoptive parent or legal guardian of
an employee or of an employee's spouse, domestic partner or civil union
partner;
B.
A person to whom the employee is legally married under the laws of
New Jersey or any other state or with whom the employee has entered
into a civil union under N.J.S.A. Title 37;
C.
A grandparent or spouse, civil union partner or domestic partner of a
grandparent;
D.
E. A grandchild;
A domestic partner of an employee as defined in N.J.S.A. 26:8A-3 et
seq.; or
F.
G. A sibling.
§ 140-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 140-2
C:822
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM — An apprenticeship program
that is registered with and approved by the United States Department of
Labor and which meets not less than two of the following requirements:
RETALIATION — The denial of any right guaranteed under this article and
any threat, discipline, discharge, suspension, demotion, reduction of hours,
or any other adverse action against an employee for the exercise of any
right guaranteed herein, including for filing a complaint or informing any
person about any employer's alleged violation of this Act; cooperating with
the agency in its investigations of alleged violations of this Act; participating
in any administrative or judicial action regarding an alleged violation of this
Act; and informing any person of his or her potential rights under this Act.
§ 140-3. Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements.
§ 140-4. Accrual of paid sick time.
A. Has active, employed, registered apprentices;
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during a majority
of the years that the program has been in operation; or
B.
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during three of the
immediately preceding five years, provides each trainee with combined
classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close
supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an
apprenticeable trade and meets the program performance standards of
enrollment and graduation under 29 CFR Part 29, Section 29.63.1.
C.
A. All or any portion of the applicable requirements of this article shall not
apply to employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement, to
the extent that such requirements are expressly waived in the collective
bargaining agreement in clear and unambiguous terms.
B. With respect to employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement in effect at the time of the effective date of this article, no
provision of this article shall apply until the expiration of the collective
bargaining agreement; however, if the terms of an expired collective
bargaining agreement provide paid sick leave that is more generous
than provided by this article, those terms of the expired collective
bargaining agreement apply to the extent required by law.
A. All employees accrue a minimum of one hour of paid sick time for every
30 hours actually worked, subject to the limits set forth below in
Subsections B and C.
B. Employers who employ 10 or more employees for compensation are not
required to provide more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a calendar
year.
C. Employers who employ fewer than 10 employees for compensation are
not required to provide more than 24 hours of paid sick time in a
§ 140-2 CHARTER § 140-4
C:823
calendar year, except for employees who are child-care workers, home
health care workers and food service workers. For child-care workers,
home health care workers and food service workers, employers are
required to provide up to 40 hours of paid sick time, so long as the
hours are accrued in a calendar year as set forth in Subsection A above.
D. In determining the number of employees performing work for an
employer, all employees performing work for compensation on a fulltime,
part-time or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that
where the number of employees who work for an employer for
compensation fluctuates, business size may be determined for the
current calendar year based upon the average number of employees
who worked for compensation during the preceding calendar year.
E. Employees who are exempt from overtime requirements under 29
U.S.C. § 213(a)(1) of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act are assumed
to work 40 hours in each workweek for purposes of paid sick time
accrual unless their normal workweek is less than 40 hours, in which
case paid sick time accrues based upon that normal workweek.
F. Employees begin to accrue paid sick time on the first day of
employment. Employees are entitled to use accrued paid sick time
beginning on the 90th calendar day of their employment and thereafter
employees are entitled to use paid sick time as it is accrued.
G. Accrued but unused paid sick time shall be carried over to the following
calendar year, provided that no employer shall be required to carry over
more than 40 hours of unused paid sick time from one calendar year to
the next or allow the use of more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a
calendar year. An employer shall not be required to carry over unused
paid sick time if the employee is paid for any unused paid sick time at
the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued.
H. Any employer with a paid leave policy, such as a paid time off policy,
that provides an amount of paid leave sufficient to meet the total annual
accrual requirements of this section that may be used for the same
purposes and under the same conditions as paid sick time under this
article is not required to provide additional paid sick time.
I. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring financial or other
reimbursement to an employee from an employer upon the employee's
termination, resignation, retirement or other separation from
employment for accrued paid sick time that has not been used.
J. If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity or location,
but remains employed by the same employer in the City of East Orange,
the employee is entitled to all paid sick time accrued at the prior
division, entity or location and is entitled to use all paid sick time as
provided in this section. If there is a separation from employment and
the employee is rehired within six months of separation, previously
accrued unpaid sick time that had not been used shall be reinstated.
Further, the employee is entitled to use accrued unpaid sick time and
§ 140-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 140-4
C:824
§ 140-5. Use of paid sick time.
accrue additional unpaid sick time at the recommencement of
employment.
K. When a different employer succeeds or takes the place of an existing
employer, all employees of the original employer who remain employed
by the successor employer are entitled to all paid sick time accrued
when employed by the original employer and are entitled to use all paid
sick leave previously accrued.
L. At its sole discretion, an employer may loan paid sick time to an
employee in advance of accrual by such employee. A decision by an
employer to deny a loan request by an employee shall not subject the
employer to any liability under this article.
A. Paid sick time shall be provided to an employee by an employer for:
(1) An employee's mental or physical illness, injury or health condition;
an employee's need for medical diagnosis, care or treatment of a
mental or physical illness, injury or health condition; an employee's
need for preventive medical care;
(2) Care of a family member with a mental or physical illness, injury or
health condition; care of a family member who needs medical
diagnosis, care or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury
or health condition; care of a family member who needs preventive
medical care;
(3) Closure of the employee's place of business by order of a public
official due to a public health emergency, or an employee's need to
care for a child whose school or place of care has been closed by
order of a public official due to a public health emergency, or care
for family member when it has been determined by the health
authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider that the
family member's presence in the community would jeopardize the
health of others because of the family member's exposure to a
communicable disease, whether or not the family member has
actually contracted the communicable disease.
B. Nothing in this Act prohibits an employer from requesting that an
employee confirm in writing following use of paid sick time that the
paid sick time was used for an authorized purpose under this Act.
C. Where the need to use paid sick time is foreseeable, an employer may
require reasonable advance notice of the intention to use paid sick time.
In no event shall an employee be required to give notice more than
seven days prior to the date such sick time is to begin. Where such need
is not foreseeable, an employer may require an employee to provide
notice of the need for the use of sick time before the beginning of the
employee's work shift or workday or, in cases such as emergencies
§ 140-4 CHARTER § 140-5
C:825
§ 140-6. Exercise of rights protected; retaliation prohibited.
§ 140-7. Notice and posting and fines; penalties for violations of
notice, posting and other requirements.
where advance notice is not possible, notice shall be provided by the
employee as soon as practicable.
D. An employer may not require, as a condition of an employee's taking
paid sick time, that the employee search for or find a replacement
worker to cover the hours during which the employee is absent.
E. Accrued sick time may be used in the smaller of hourly increments or
the smallest increment that the employer's payroll system uses to
account for absences or use of other time.
F. After an employee has used paid sick time for three consecutive days or
three consecutive instances, an employer may require an employee to
provide reasonable documentation that the time has been used for a
purpose covered by Subsection A. In this instance, the employer may
require documentation signed by a health care professional indicating
that the paid sick time was necessary; however, an employer may not
require that the documentation explain the nature of the illness.
A. No person shall interfere with, restrain or deny the exercise of, or the
attempt to exercise, any right protected under this article.
B. No person shall retaliate against an employee because the employee
has properly exercised rights protected under this article.
A. All employers shall give written notice to each employee at the
commencement of the employee's employment (or as soon as
practicable if the employee is already employed on the effective date of
this article) regarding employee's rights under this article. Such notice
shall describe the right to paid sick time, the accrual rate and the
amount of paid sick time, and the terms of its use under this article; the
right to be free from retaliation for properly requesting use of paid sick
time; and the right to file a complaint or bring an action in Municipal
Court if paid sick time is denied by the employer or the employee is
retaliated against for requesting or taking paid sick time. Such notice
shall be in English and the primary language spoken by that employee,
so long as the primary language of that employee is also the primary
language of at least 10% of the employer's work force.
B. Employers shall also display a poster in a conspicuous and accessible
place in each business establishment where employees are employed
containing the information required in Subsection A. The poster shall
be in English and in any language that is the first language of at least
10% of the employer's work force.
C. The agency can create and make available to employers notices and
posters in English and Spanish and any other languages deemed
§ 140-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 140-7
C:826
§ 140-8. Fines.
Any employer who violates the provisions of this article is subject to a fine of
up to $500 for each day on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition
to the fines set forth above, any employer who violates this article is subject
to payment of restitution in the amount of any paid sick time unlawfully
withheld.
§ 140-9. Employer records.
Employers shall allow the agency reasonable access to records and to
monitor compliance with the requirements of this Act. An employer's failure
to maintain or retain adequate records documenting hours worked by an
employee and paid sick time taken by an employee creates a rebuttable
presumption that the employer has violated this article, absent clear and
convincing evidence otherwise.
§ 140-10. Enforcement and regulations.
§ 140-11. Confidentiality and nondisclosure.
appropriate by the agency that contain the information required under
Subsection A for employers' use in complying with this section.
A. The agency shall coordinate implementation and enforcement of this
article and promulgate appropriate guidelines or regulations for such
purposes.
B. The agency shall have broad powers to ensure compliance with this
article.
C. In the event an allegation of noncompliance cannot be resolved by the
agency with the employer, a complaint may be filed, by the agency and/
or the employee as the complainant, in the East Orange Municipal
Court for any alleged violation of this article.
D. The Municipal Court shall have the power to adjudicate all allegations
of violations of this article and impose fines or penalties provided for in
this article or any further relief deemed appropriate by the Court,
including but not limited to restitution, reinstatement, injunctive or
declaratory relief.
E. Submitting a complaint to the agency is neither a prerequisite nor a bar
to bringing a private action.
F. The agency shall have the power to do outreach to inform the residents
of the City of their rights under this Act and to publicize online and in
other media the names of employers who violate this Act.
A. An employer may not require disclosure of the specific details relating
to an employee's or an employee's family member's medical condition
as a condition of providing paid sick time under this article. If an
§ 140-7 CHARTER § 140-11
C:827
§ 140-12. No effect on more generous policies.
§ 140-13. Other legal requirements.
This article provides minimum requirements pertaining to paid sick time
and shall not be construed to preempt, limit or otherwise affect the
applicability of any other law, regulation, requirement, policy or standard
that provides for greater accrual or use by employees of sick time, whether
paid or unpaid, or that extends other protections to employees.
§ 140-14. Effective date.
This article will take effect 120 days following enactment except that, in
the case of employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement in
effect on the effective date prescribed herein, this article shall apply on the
date of the termination of such agreement unless the collective bargaining
agreement expressly waives the protections set forth in this article.
employer possesses health information about an employee or
employee's family member, such information shall be treated as
confidential and shall not be disclosed by the employer except to the
affected employee or with the permission of the affected employee.
B. The agency shall maintain confidential the identity of any complaining
person unless disclosure of the identity is necessary for resolution of
the investigation. The agency shall, to the extent practicable, notify a
complaining person that the agency will be disclosing his or her identify
prior to such disclosure.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to discourage or prohibit an
employer from the adoption or retention of a paid sick time policy more
generous than the one required herein.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed as diminishing the obligation
of an employer to comply with any contract, collective bargaining
agreement, employment benefit plan, or other agreement providing
more generous paid sick time to an employee than required herein.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed as diminishing the rights of
public employees regarding paid sick time or use of paid sick time as
provided in the laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining to public
employees.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed as diminishing the rights
secured by S2177, the "New Jersey Security and Financial
Empowerment Act," for domestic violence victims in the City of East
Orange.
E. Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted in a way that
would conflict with any state or federal law pertaining to paid sick time
or employee benefits.
§ 140-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 140-15
C:828
§ 140-15. Statement.
This article will require employers in the City of East Orange to provide a
minimum number of days of paid sick leave.
§ 140-15 CHARTER § 140-15
C:829
Chapter 142
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 184. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 238.
§ 142-1. Definitions. [Added 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012187]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFECTED RESIDENTS — Residents along any street between cross street
to cross street or cross street to dead end where a roadway opening is being
made.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work required to be performed by a utility company
in order to preserve public safety, life and property.
NOISE ORDINANCE — Chapter 184, Noise Pollution, of the East Orange
Municipal Code.
§ 142-1.1. Permit required; exceptions. [Amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986]
No person shall open, dig or excavate any street, avenue, sidewalk or public
place, or take up, obstruct or disturb the pavement, curbing, guttering,
flagging or other surface laid thereon, or dig, excavate or disturb the
subsurface thereof in any way for any purpose whatsoever, without first
obtaining from the Director of Public Works a permit therefor, provided
that no such permit shall be required for opening, digging, excavating,
taking up, obstructing, disturbing or other act in pursuance of some statute,
franchise or grant of the state; and provided, further, that, in case of
accident or emergency requiring immediate action, such permit may be
obtained within 24 hours after the work thereunder is begun.
§ 142-1.2. Certificate of insurance required. [Added 7-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 21-2012188]
No person shall be granted a permit to open any street unless he shall
furnish a certificate of insurance from a responsible insurance company
authorized to do business in New Jersey, to be filed with the Director
of Public Works, showing that he is adequately insured against liability
and property damage claims. The minimum amount of such comprehensive
public liability insurance shall be $1,000,000 for each claim for bodily
187. Editor's Note: Former § 142-1, Permit required; exceptions, was designated as § 142-1.1 to
account for the addition of § 142-1, Definitions.
188. Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted as § 142-1.1 but was redesignated
§ 142-1.2 to account for the addition of § 142-1, Definitions.
§ 140-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § 142-1.2
C:830
injury, $3,000,000 for multiple claims for bodily injury arising from a single
accident and $1,000,000 for property damage for a single accident. As
such insurance shall remain in full force and effect throughout the effective
period of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof, all such
insurance shall carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance
company will provide at least 10 days' written notice to the City prior
to any modification or policy cancellation. The City shall be named as
additional insured on all such insurance certificates or the certificate shall
contain adequate cross-indemnification provisions in favor of the City. The
certificate of insurance shall be in legal form satisfactory to the Corporation
Counsel.
§ 142-2. Applications for permits; issuance; duration. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
The Director of Public Works, upon application therefor, shall issue permits
for such acts referred to in the preceding section, subject to the conditions
of this chapter. All permits shall have a duration of 60 days with one thirtyday
extension. No extension shall be granted which allows permits to expire
past the street opening moratorium date. There shall be a street opening
moratorium for nonemergency street openings beginning on November 15
of each year and ending on January 31 of the following year. In the event of
an emergency, the requirements pertaining to permitted roadway openings
can be waived at the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works.
§ 142-3. Application fee; filing of plan. [Amended 9-12-1983 by Ord.
No. 32-1983; 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 44-1983]
A. Utility companies. The applicant for a permit under this chapter, if a
utility company operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission, shall first pay to the Collector of Taxes a nonrefundable
permit fee for each square foot of roadway opening, based on a chart
entitled "Roadway Opening, Permit Fees, (Utility Company), City of
East Orange" which is attached hereto and made part hereof;189 and/or
$3 for each square foot of roadway opening involving a vault or
manhole; and/or $0.25 for each square foot of sidewalk opening; and/or
$2 for each square foot of sidewalk opening involving a vault or
manhole. All such utility companies shall also provide the City of East
Orange with a performance bond in the amount of $50,000 at the time
that application to perform the roadway opening is submitted to the
City for approval. The surety shall be issued by a firm licensed to sell
surety bonds in the State of New Jersey. All such utility companies shall
also provide the City of East Orange with a one-year maintenance bond
for each roadway opening made in the amount of $10,000. The surety
shall be issued by a firm licensed to sell surety bonds in the State of
New Jersey. [Amended 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
189. Editor's Note: Said chart is on file in the office of the Director of Public Works.
§ 142-1.2 CHARTER § 142-3
C:831
§ 142-4. Contents of permit.
The permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall state, in effect, that the
receipt has been presented and plan filed as aforesaid and shall recite the
time within which the work shall be completed.
§ 142-5. Deposit and inspection required. [Amended 9-12-1983 by
Ord. No. 32-1983; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
No permit required by this chapter shall be issued unless, at the time of
application therefor, there shall be deposited with the Collector of Taxes
and Revenue such sum as shall be reasonably sufficient to cover the cost
and expense to the City of supplying the necessary material and labor
or otherwise providing for repairing, repaving, replacing or otherwise
restoring such street, avenue, highway or public place so opened, dug,
taken up, obstructed, excavated or disturbed, and providing against future
subsidence thereof. The amount of such deposit shall be $4 for each square
foot of roadway opening; $6 for each square foot of roadway opening
involving a vault or manhole; $1 for each square foot of sidewalk opening;
and $4 for each square foot of sidewalk opening involving a vault or
manhole. An inspection fee of $50 shall be charged for all sidewalk,
driveway, curb and leader drain work. For all roadway opening work, a fee
of $75 shall be charged. This fee shall be paid at the time the permit is
applied for. In the event that the inspection time exceeds three hours in the
aggregate, an additional charge of $20 per hour for inspection time shall be
charged.
§ 142-6. Return of deposit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
One hundred percent of the balance of such deposit, if any, shall, one
calendar year after the date of approval of such work, be paid to the
applicant for such permit upon the presentation to the Chief Financial
Officer, in writing, of such approval by the Director of Public Works.
B. Other applicants. All other applicants for a permit under this chapter
shall first pay to the Collector of Taxes a nonrefundable permit fee of $1
for each square foot of roadway opening and/or $0.25 for each square
foot of sidewalk opening.
C. Receipt and filing of plan. All applicants, including utility companies,
shall, upon paying the required fee or fees, obtain a written receipt
therefor and present the same to the Director of Public Works along
with a plan showing the extent and location of the work to be done and
the time when it will be commenced and completed. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
§ 142-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 142-7
C:832
§ 142-7. Bond in lieu of deposit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
The Director of Public Works may accept from an applicant for a permit
under this chapter, in lieu of the deposit required by this chapter, a bond
in amount and with surety satisfactory to the Director of Public Works,
conditioned for the payment by the applicant to the City, upon the written
demand of the Director of Public Works, of a sum sufficient to cover the
cost and expense to the City of supplying the necessary material and labor
or of otherwise providing for repairing, repaving, replacing or otherwise
restoring, as aforesaid, such street, avenue, highway or public place, and
of the cost of repairing any future subsidence thereof in the event of such
work being caused to be done, in whole or in part, by the Director of
Public Works. In the case of persons who, in the ordinary course of their
business, require permits from time to time during a stated period, the
Director of Public Works may accept, in lieu of the deposit or bond required
by this chapter for such permit, a general bond in amount and with surety
satisfactory to the Director of Public Works, covering the work, in whole
or in part, to be done under any and all permits issued during such stated
period and conditioned as aforesaid. All surety bonds shall have an effective
date that coincides with the date of issue of the permit and a life of one
calendar year.
§ 142-8. Restoration of surface to original condition. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
Excavations or openings, after the purpose thereof is accomplished, shall
consist of the excavation of the roadway surface course, intermediate
course, base course and subbase, the placing of pipe or conduit in the
trench and backfilling and paving.
A. Materials. Materials shall be as specified herein and shall conform to
the current version of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications, as amended and supplemented.
B. Method of construction.
(1) A neat line shall be saw cut in the pavement. The saw cut line shall
extend five feet beyond the width of the trench on each side of the
trench. See details below:
§ 142-7 CHARTER § 142-8
C:833
Plan View - Horizontal and Vertical Cuts
Plan View - Mixed
§ 142-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 142-8
C:834
Plan View - Mixed Cut
Section through Trench
(2) The existing pavement, base and subbase material shall be
excavated in such manner and using such equipment so as to
prevent damage to existing utility lines and conduit which are to
remain. The excavation of material within the vicinity of utility lines
shall be performed by hand. All material removed from the trench
shall be immediately removed from the site.
(3) The utility company/contractor shall replace/install its pipe or
conduit. Prior to the installation of conduit or pipe, the contractor
shall place a layer of pipe bedding, Class "B" or three-fourths-inch
crush stone, six inches below the pipe. The stone shall be
thoroughly compacted. Pipe should then be installed. Pipe bedding,
Class "B," shall be placed a width of 18 inches on each side of the
pipe and above the pipe for a distance of two feet. Work should not
§ 142-8 CHARTER § 142-8
C:835
§ 142-9. Failure to restore. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
In the event of the failure of the applicant to restore the surface to its
original condition, the Director of Public Works may, at the option of the
Director of Public Works, cause the excavation or opening to be filled,
rammed, packed and puddled and the surface replaced and restored, either
in whole or in part, and the expense thereof or incurred thereby, including
the cost of any new material, shall be deducted from the deposit theretofore
made. The City shall, in addition to any sums so deducted, retain 15% of
such deposit, which 15% is hereby estimated to be the cost of repairing any
be performed on wet, muddy or frozen areas. All irregularities must
be corrected.
C. Backfill.
(1) The contractor shall provide subbase as described in Section 208 of
the NJDOT Standard Specifications. Material shall be free of clay,
large stones and organic matter.
(2) Backfill shall be placed in six-inch lifts and compacted to 95% dry
density. Backfill shall be placed until a space of 10 inches exists
between the top of the compacted backfill and the finished grade of
the roadway.
(3) A concrete base course, eight inches thick, as described in Section
305 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications, shall be poured,
properly worked and allowed sufficient time to adequately cure.
During the time that the concrete is setting up, the contractor shall
provide adequate safeguards in the form of steel plates to cover the
trench and or sufficient barricades with flashing lights and signage
as necessary to warn and direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
Next, apply tack coat, at the rate of 0.08 to 0.15 gallon per square
yard to the top of the concrete base and all edges of the trench.
Special care should be taken to ensure that all trench edges are
thoroughly coated with tack coat prior to the placement of the Mix
I-5.
(4) Place hot mix asphalt surface course Mix I-5, two inches thick.
Meet existing grade, do not exceed grade level by more than 1/4
inch at center of trench. Compact and roll thoroughly.
(5) Permanent pavement shall be placed immediately after the
concrete base is sufficiently cured. All work shall be done to the
satisfaction and approval of the Director of Public Works within the
time limited in the permit. Failure to complete the permitted work
within the time frame shown on the permit will result in liquidated
damages of $50 per calendar day being assessed against the
permittee. The applicant warranties the street opening repair for a
period of one year from the date of final inspection and acceptance.
§ 142-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 142-9
C:836
future subsidence of such surface, and such sums so deducted or retained
shall be reported by the Director of Public Works to the Collector of Taxes.
§ 142-10. Guarding and safety lights required.
All excavations or obstructions shall be properly guarded or caused to be
so guarded by the permittee under this chapter and shall be provided with
safety lights at night from the time when the work shall be commenced until
the work is completed.
§ 142-11. Traffic control. [Added 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012;
amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-2016]
All traffic control plans shall comply with the latest edition of New Jersey
Department of Transportation Specifications for Roads and Bridges,
Sections 617.09 and 617.10, and with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, Part 6. All road construction, traffic control or public safety
functions required which interfere with motor vehicle traffic on City streets
(curb to curb) shall require the use of a uniformed police officer. The
applicant is required to contact the East Orange Police Department, Outside
Employment Unit, at least 48 hours in advance of opening to schedule
traffic protection.
§ 142-12. Notification of impending work. [Added 7-16-2012 by Ord.
No. 21-2012]
A. Any party making an excavation in the City's right-of-way shall notify, in
writing, residents of properties abutting the proposed work area. This
notification shall contain the following:
(1) The name of the company performing the work.
(2) The nature of the work being performed.
(3) When the project is scheduled to commence.
(4) Daily work hours.
(5) When the project is scheduled to be completed.
B. A copy of the written notice is to be provided to the Department of
Public Works at the time the roadway opening permit is applied for. This
notice shall be delivered to each property on the street where the work
is to be done at least 24 hours before work is scheduled to commence.
All contractors are to follow the City's Noise Ordinance during the
prosecution of their work. For emergency work, the notice is to be
delivered on the day that work is being done.
§ 142-9 CHARTER § 142-13
C:837
§ 142-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-16-2012 by Ord. No.
21-2012]
There shall be a penalty of $250 for all nonemergency street openings made
without a valid permit. There will be a penalty of $100 for failure to submit
a permit application for an emergency roadway opening within 24 hours
of street opening. There will be a penalty of $100 for failure to adequately
notice affected residents and the Department of Public Works of proposed
work.
Chapter 146
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of Fire — See Ch. 14A, Art. IV.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 97.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Housing standards and property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 142-13 EAST ORANGE CODE § 142-13
C:838
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 34-1972]
§ 146-1. Local enforcement of Uniform Fire Code. [Added 7-15-1985
by Ord. No. 17-1985190]
A. Local enforcement. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202 of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq., shall be locally enforced in the City of East
Orange. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
B. Agency designation. The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of
Fire Prevention in the Department of Fire of the City of East Orange.
C. Duties. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce the Uniform Fire
Safety Act191 and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the City of East Orange other than owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
D. Life-hazard uses. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life-hazard uses as required by the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
E. Organization. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be part of the
Department of Fire and shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Deputy Chief/Fire Prevention Officer, who shall be
responsible to the Chief of the Department.
F. Appointments; term of office; removal.
(1) Appointment of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be appointed
pursuant to the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code Act
(P.L. 1975, c. 217).192 [Amended 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
(2) Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve a term of office pursuant
to Title 11A, Civil Service, N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq. [Amended
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
(3) Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by
the Board of Fire Commissioners pursuant to law, upon the
recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department and the Fire
Official.
190. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 146-1, Adoption of standards by
reference, as amended.
191. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
192. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 146-1 CHARTER § 146-1
C:839
(4) Removal from office. Inspectors and other employees of the local
enforcing agency shall be subject to removal for inefficiency or
misconduct, pursuant to law, by the Board of Fire Commissioners
with advice of the Chief of Department and the Fire Official.
G. Board of Appeals. Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved
by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal
to the Construction Board of Appeals of the City of East Orange.
H. Additional required inspections and fees. [Amended 7-20-1987 by
Ord. No. 20-1987; 4-10-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000; 6-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 14-2011; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 34-2011]
(1) In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act,
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs and the
registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, all owners,
grantees, lessees, assignees and successors in interest (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "users") of buildings, structures and/or
facilities which have non-life-hazard uses must register with the
Fire Prevention Bureau. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall make
annual inspections of non-life-hazard uses. The annual inspection
fees shall be as follows:
Use Group Annual Fee
Business
B-1, under 2,500 square feet $40
B-2, 2,500 to 4,999 square feet $50
B-3, 5,000 to 9,999 square feet $75
B-4, 10,000 and over square feet $125
Factory
F-1, under 5,000 square feet $100
F-2, 5,000 to 11,999 square feet $125
Mercantile
M-1, under 6,000 square feet $50
M-2, 6,000 to 11,999 square feet $75
Storage
S-1, under 2,500 square feet $50
S-2, 2,500 to 11,999 square feet $75
Residential
R-A, non-owner-occupied 1 and 2 units $50*
R-B, 3 to 6 units $50
R-C, 7 to 12 units $75
§ 146-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 146-1
C:840
Use Group Annual Fee
R-D, 13 to 20 units $200
R-E, over 20 units $375
Utilities
U-1, under 2,500 square feet $50
U-2, 2,500 and over square feet $75
Reinspection fees
First reinspection Free
Second reinspection Equal to original
fee
Third and subsequent reinspections Equal to original
fee
NOTES:
* R-A shall be inspected and charged a fee only upon sale or
change of tenant.
(2) Uses not classified above that are subject to the Uniform Fire Code
will be classified as a business use.
(3) Users required to register with the state for life-hazard uses shall
not be required to register under this section.
I. Permits. The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code [N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.9(c) et seq.] shall be as follows: [Amended 6-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 14-2011; 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 26-2012]
Permit Fee
Type 1, Cooking, welding
The use of any open-flame or flame-producing device in
connection with the training of non-fire-service
personnel in fire suppression or extinguishment
procedures; bonfires; the use of torch or flame-producing
device to remove paint from, or seal membrane roofs on,
any building or structure; cooking; welding.
$100
Type 2, Flammable liquids
Use and application of flammable liquids or materials;
fumigation or thermal insecticide fogging; displaying
liquid- or gas-fuel powered equipment.
$200
§ 146-1 CHARTER § 146-1
C:841
§ 146-2. Amendments and supplements. [Amended 11-10-1980 by
Ord. No. 15-1980]
Said fire prevention standards are hereby amended and supplemented by
adding the following Appendix thereto:
APPENDIX A
App. A:1. Fire Hazards Generally.
No person shall, upon any property of which he is the owner, occupant,
lessee or of which he is in charge or for which he is responsible, cause or
suffer the creation, maintenance or continuance of any condition whatever
so constituted or located as to result in a fire hazard.
App. A:2. Authority of Fire Chief to Promulgate Regulations Relative
to Fire Hazards.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall promulgate regulations from time
to time, defining fire hazards and setting forth methods and procedures
for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree of life and property from
the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and
use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or
premises. Such regulations shall be consistent with the standards set forth
in this code. Such regulations, in writing, shall be approved by the Board
of Fire Commissioners. A copy of same shall be filed with the Mayor, City
Council, City Clerk, Health Officer, Public Officer and Director of Public
Works at least 20 days before such regulations shall become effective. Such
regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this
article, and violations thereof shall be enforced as violations of the express
provisions of this article.
App. A:3. Obstructing Fire Hydrants.
No person owning or occupying any premises in front of which a fire
hydrant is located shall place or plant any hedge or other shrubbery so
near any such hydrant as to interfere with ready access to the same for
water supply.
App. A:3-1. No person shall place any material or thing or throw or deposit
snow or ice on or against any hydrant or so near it as to interfere with
ready access to the same for water supply.
App. A:4. Inspection of Buildings: Authority of Fire Chief.
Permit Fee
Type 3, Ovens, furnaces
Industrial processing ovens or furnaces operating at
approximately atmospheric pressures and temperatures
not exceeding 1,400° F. which are heated with oil or gas
fuel or which contain flammable vapors from the product
being processed.
$350
§ 146-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 146-2
C:842
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect or
to cause to be inspected by members of the Fire Department as often
as he may deem necessary, but not less than twice a year, all public
buildings as the same are defined in the Building Code of the City and all
buildings used in whole or in part for business, industrial or commercial
purposes and, as often as he may deem necessary, all other buildings and
properties whatever to which lawful entry may be had, for the purpose
of ascertaining, disclosing and causing to be corrected conditions likely
to cause fire hazards and violations of any of the provisions of this code
or other ordinances of the City or laws of the state having to do with the
prevention of and protection against fire.
App. A:5. Inspection of Buildings: Notice to Owner or Occupant to
Abate Fire Hazards.
Whenever any member of the Fire Department authorized to make
inspections shall find in any building or upon any property or premises any
fire hazard, the Chief of the Fire Department shall notify the owner, lessee,
occupant or persons in charge to have the same removed or remedied
within 48 hours.
App. A:6. Inspection of Buildings: Manner of Giving Notice to Abate.
Unless emergency conditions shall require immediate oral directions, such
notices shall be in writing and served in the manner set forth in Chapter
159, Housing Standards; Property Maintenance, § 159-27. If thereafter
within the space of one year there shall be a second violation by the same
owner, operation or occupant of the provisions of this code discovered
on the same premises, the offender may be prosecuted for the second
violation without the Chief of the Fire Department giving notice to the
owner, operator or occupant by the filing of a complaint by the Chief of the
Fire Department in the Municipal Court.
App. A:7. Approval of Fire Prevention Measures. [Added 3-14-1977
by Ord. No. 16-1977; amended 12-27-1978 by Ord. No. 50-1978]
The owner, his architect, engineer or agent shall submit plans and
specifications for any work required by these regulations to the Fire
Protection Subcode Official for his approval before any work is
commenced, and the work shall be inspected and approved by the Fire
Protection Subcode Official.
App. A:8. Vertical shafts. [Added 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 16-1977;
amended 12-27-1978 by Ord. No. 50-1978]
All vertical shafts in all existing buildings, including but not limited to
dumbwaiters, garbage chutes and incinerator chutes, but not including
stair towers and elevator shafts, shall either:
a) Be sprinklered at top of shaft and one floor above lowest level; or
b) Have permanently sealed every opening into the shaft with masonry,
including all doors, the top of the shaft and all openings in the
basement.
§ 146-2 CHARTER § 146-2
C:843
App. A:9. Attic Space. [Added 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 16-1977;
amended 12-27-1978 by Ord. No. 50-1978]
In every existing building with a space between the top floor ceiling and
the roof beams, this attic space shall be divided into areas not greater than
3,000 square feet by partitions with not less than a one-hour fire rating.
App. A:10. Smoke Detectors. [Added 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 16-1977;
amended 12-27-1978 by Ord. No. 50-1978; 3-28-1983 by Ord. No.
15-1983]
Every residential dwelling unit shall be provided with an operating
automatic smoke-detecting equipment with an audible alarm approved
by Underwriters' Laboratories or Factory Mutual System. The smokedetecting
equipment shall be located in accordance with the applicable
section of NFPA No. 74, Standard for the Installation, Maintenance and Use
of House Fire Warning Systems, and BOCA Basic Building Code, Section
1716.
App. A:11. Storage Rooms. [Added 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 16-1977;
amended 12-27-1978 by Ord. No. 50-1978]
All wood storage bins shall be removed in basement and cellar areas of
multifamily dwellings. Where storage areas are deemed necessary, they
shall be in one-hour fire-rated compartments equipped with self-closing,
self-locking door, operated by a key under management control.
App. A:12. Building Security. [Added 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 16-1977;
amended 12-27-1978 by Ord. No. 50-1978]
In all buildings, except one- and two-family dwellings, every exterior
doorway shall be self-closing and self-locking.
App. A:13. Portable Liquid Fuel Heaters, Stoves and Lamps. [Added
2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 11-1983]
a) It shall be unlawful to use any portable appliances using kerosene,
gasoline, oil or other liquid fuels for heating, cooking or illumination
in any commercial building or structure or in any building containing
three or more residential dwelling units.
b) It shall be unlawful to install, maintain and use any fixed kerosene,
gasoline, oil or other liquid-fuel-burning stove or heater or appliance
for cooking or heating purposes in any commercial building or
structure or in any building containing three or more residential
dwelling units.
App. A:14. Sprinkler Valve Supervision. [Added 7-15-1985 by Ord.
No. 17-1985]
All sprinkler valves shall have flow switches and tamper devices installed
and shall be supervised electrically according to the BOCA Building Code
in effect at the time of the inspection. The requirement of this section shall
apply to existing as well as new buildings.
App. A:15. Elevator Key Boxes. [Added 7-15-1985 by Ord. No.
17-1985]
§ 146-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 146-2
C:844
All buildings that have elevators shall have a key box installed as approved
by the Fire Official. The requirements of this section shall apply to new as
well as existing buildings.
§ 146-3. Arson Investigation Unit. [Added 1-23-1984 by Ord. No.
3-1984]
§ 146-4. Duties and responsibilities of superintendents of multiplefamily
dwelling units. [Added 11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 46-1986]
Superintendents of all buildings with five or more units, where the owner
is not an occupant, shall be required to perform inspections and to keep
daily, monthly and yearly logs. No superintendent shall be relieved from any
such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge
of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner is also responsible
therefor and in violation thereof.
A. The Arson Investigation Unit shall be established and designated the
"Arson Investigation Unit" within the Fire Prevention Bureau in the Fire
Department of the City of East Orange. [Amended 3-5-1984 by Ord.
No. 8-1984]
B. Before any member is assigned to the Arson Investigation Unit, he shall
have attended and successfully completed a basic training course for
police officers at a school approved by the Police Training Commission
and an arson investigation course approved by the Division of Criminal
Justice. All members shall attend and successfully complete in-service
training programs as required by the Division of Criminal Justice.
C. Any member who is assigned full-time to the Arson Investigation Unit
shall have the same powers and authority of police officers within the
municipality while engaged in the actual performance of arson
investigation duties. Such members shall submit to a psychiatric/
psychological screening test and, upon successful completion thereof,
shall be authorized to carry a firearm while engaged in the actual
performance of arson investigation duties.
D. Arson Unit investigators shall carry out their duties in accordance with
rules, regulations and procedures as established by the Board of Fire
Commissioners and any special requirements made by the Chief of
Police, as may be required by law.
A. Daily inspection. Superintendents shall be responsible for performing
daily inspections of buildings they maintain as follows. They shall:
(1) Inspect hallways to see that all extinguishers are in the proper
place and hallways are free of storage, debris, rubbish and that all
vacant apartments are properly secured.
(2) Inspect the cockloft area to see that it is properly secured.
§ 146-2 CHARTER § 146-4
C:845
(3) Inspect the roof door to see that it is in proper order with selflocking
hardware and capable of being opened from the inside.
(4) Inspect the roof area to see that it is free of debris and mantraps.
(5) Inspect the basement area for the following:
(a) Fire-resistive ceiling is intact with no breaks, tears, holes, etc.
(b) Area is free of storage, debris and rubbish.
(c) Adequate illumination is provided.
(d) Boiler room is free from debris and furnished with proper
extinguishers.
(e) Exterior windows are intact and free from breakage.
(f) Utility meters are free from all obstructions and well lit at all
times.
(g) Electric wiring is in proper order and free from dangling or
unsupported wiring and that cables are secure and free from
open junction boxes.
(6) Inspect the garbage disposal area to see that it is in proper order.
(7) Inspect the exterior grounds to ensure that they are free of rubbish
and debris.
(8) Inspect all exterior and exit doors to see that self-closing and selflocking
mechanisms are in proper working condition.
B. Monthly inspections. Superintendents shall also be responsible for
performing monthly inspections of buildings they maintain as follows:
(1) They shall inspect and test hard-wired smoke alarm systems and
logs.
(2) They shall check operation of fire escapes and ladders to assure
that they are counterbalanced and working properly.
(3) All monthly inspections are to be logged in accordance with forms
provided by the Department of Property Maintenance.
(4) Superintendents must check all buildings with standpipe systems
in the following manner:
(a) Check outside Fire Department connection to see if they are in
proper order, free from debris and all parts are in working
order with caps in place.
(b) All valves in open position.
(c) Hose cabinets and valves in good order with hose intact and
outlets properly capped.
§ 146-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 146-4
C:846
§ 146-5. Fire lanes on private property; violations and penalties.
[Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005]
(5) Superintendents must check all buildings with sprinkler systems in
the following manner:
(a) Check outside Fire Department connection to see if they are in
proper order, free from debris and all parts in working order
with caps in place.
(b) All valves in open position.
(c) All sprinkler heads free from blockage.
(d) Check pressure gauges to see that system is operational.
C. Yearly inspections. Superintendents shall also be responsible for
performing yearly inspections of buildings they maintain as follows:
(1) They shall replace all batteries and test all smoke detectors in
individual apartments.
(2) They shall check all fire-escape windows, including those within
individual apartments, to ensure proper opening.
(3) They shall check to see that the fire-protection envelope is intact
without breaks in walls, ceilings, floors, doors or windows.
(4) All yearly inspections are to be logged in accordance with forms
provided by the Department of Property Maintenance. These
inspections shall be accomplished by the superintendent between
the first and 15th day of October in each year.
D. Notice to owner of fire prevention. Superintendents shall be
responsible for notifying the owner and the Fire Prevention Bureau
immediately of any condition that exists which is not in compliance with
Subsections A through C of this section.
E. Penalties. Upon failure of a superintendent to perform the duties and
responsibilities outlined in this section or to promptly notify the owner
or Fire Prevention Bureau in accordance with Subsection D of this
section, the superintendent and the owner or operator of the dwelling
shall be liable for the penalties prescribed by each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the City of East Orange,
Chapter 146, Article I.
F. Hearings. Upon failure of a superintendent to comply with the
requirement of Subsection A through E of this section, the Fire Officer
may request a hearing before the Public Officer.
A. Upon the approval of the Fire Official, fire lanes shall be designated on
public and private property devoted to public use, including but not
§ 146-4 CHARTER § 146-5
C:847
limited to shopping centers, churches, hospitals, schools, apartment
houses and similar uses.
B. These fire lanes shall be established to ensure fire equipment and other
emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress and egress to such
properties and the buildings, persons and vehicles thereon in case of
fire or other emergency.
C. The number, location, width, length and markings of such areas shall be
determined by the Fire Official of the City of East Orange.
D. Any person violating this section shall be subject to impoundment of the
vehicle and a fine not less than $74 and not more than $2,000, 90 days'
imprisonment and/or 90 days of community service. Each day that such
violation occurs shall be construed as a separate offense. [Amended
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
E. Licensed fire inspectors assigned to the East Orange Fire Prevention
Bureau and police officers employed by the City of East Orange shall be
authorized to issue summonses on and have offending vehicles removed
from these fire lanes, regardless of whether on public or private
property.
§ 146-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 146-5
C:848
ARTICLE II
Knox-Boxes®
[Adopted 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
§ 146-6. Knox-Box® required for new commercial buildings.
All newly constructed structures, communities, or complexes subject to this
section shall have the key lock box installed and operational prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit. All structures, communities, or complexes
in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section
is derived and subject to this section shall have one year from the effective
date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to have a key lock
box installed and operational.
§ 146-7. Knox-Box® required for existing commercial buildings
with improvements.
All existing constructed structures, communities, or complexes constructing
improvements shall have the key lock box installed and operational prior
to the issuance of an occupancy permit. All structures, communities, or
complexes in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which
this section is derived and subject to this section shall have one year from
the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to have
a key lock box installed and operational.
§ 146-8. Knox-Box® required for existing commercial buildings.
All existing commercial structures, communities, or complexes equipped
with automatic fire detection and/or suppression systems shall have the key
lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit. All structures, communities, or complexes in existence on the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and
subject to this section shall have one year from the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived to have a key lock box installed
and operational.
§ 146-9. Knox-Box® required for multifamily residential structures.
All multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units shall
have the key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit. All structures, communities, or complexes in existence
on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived
and subject to this section shall have one year from the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived to have a key lock box installed
and operational.
§ 146-6 CHARTER § 146-10
C:849
§ 146-10. Knox-Box® contents.
All Knox-Boxes® shall contain labeled keys and any other items deemed
necessary, easily identified in the field, to provide access into the property
and/or building and to any locked areas within the said building as the City
of East Orange may direct.
§ 146-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who owns or operates a structure, community, or complex
subject to this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in all sections
of this Code for any violation of this article, provided that the maximum fine
for a conviction for a violation of this article shall be $1,000.
§ 146-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOX-BOX® — A secure rapid entry system that is designed to be used
by public safety personnel in the event of an emergency to gain entry into
a structure by using the enclosed owner-provided key(s) and any other
items deemed necessary. This box is usually mounted on the exterior of the
building in a location that is specified by the Fire Chief. All boxes shall be
certified and approved by the Fire Chief.
§ 146-10 EAST ORANGE CODE § 146-12
C:850
Chapter 150
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Excavations — See Ch. 142.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 150-1. Adoption of standards.
§ 150-2. Copies on file.
Three copies of the rules and regulations adopted by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, as above described, have been placed on
file in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain on file until final action
is taken on this chapter so that the public at large might view and examine
the same.
§ 150-3. Adoption of Flood Insurance Study and Map.193
The City of East Orange adopts by reference the Flood Insurance Study
prepared for it, dated February 4, 1988, listed as Community No. 340181,
as well as the countywide Flood Insurance Map which is dated June 4,
2007, listed as Community Panel No. 340181-0112F, which map identifies
the floodways and flood hazard areas within the City of East Orange.
§ 150-4. Designation of official.
The City of East Orange hereby designates the City Construction Official as
the official of the City of East Orange responsible for complying with the
eligibility requirement set forth in 44 CFR 59.21 et seq.
A. The provisions of Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59,
and, more particularly, Part 60.3, thereof, entitled "Floodplain
Management Criteria for Flood-Prone Areas," are hereby adopted by
reference.
B. A copy of the regulations above described is annexed hereto by
reference.
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 146-12 CHARTER § 150-4
C:851
Chapter 153
FUEL OIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 113.
Construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 150-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 150-4
C:852
ARTICLE I
Emergency Delivery
[Adopted 1-26-1981 as Ord. No. 1-1981194]
§ 153-1. Designation and powers of agent.195
§ 153-2. Payment.
The City of East Orange shall issue a voucher to any fuel oil dealer who
delivers fuel oil or refires the burner as set forth in § 153-1 hereinabove for
the money amount due on the fuel oil delivered and the service for refiring
the burner, if any. The voucher shall be paid in the manner provided for the
approval and payment of claims pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.
§ 153-3. Penalty; reimbursement of costs.
A. The Tax Collector is hereby designated, whenever necessary to protect
the health and safety of residential tenants, to act as an agent for any
landlord of a residential rental property within the City of East Orange
where the landlord has failed to maintain heat in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
B. The designated agent may engage a fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil at a
reasonable price per gallon and to refire the burner in order to restore
the proper heating of any residential property rented by said landlord;
provided, however, that at least 12 hours have elapsed if the outside air
temperature is between 33º F. and 55º F., inclusive, or at least four
hours have elapsed if the outside air temperature is 32º F. or less since
the affected tenant has lodged a complaint with the Department of
Property Maintenance, prior to which complaint a bona fide attempt
has been made by the tenant or his representative to notify the landlord
of the lack of heat and the landlord has failed to take appropriate
action.
A. Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
municipal action pursuant to § 153-1 of this article shall be liable to a
civil penalty of not more than $300 for each affected dwelling unit in the
residential rental property. Pursuant to P.L. 1980, c. 170,196 such
penalty shall be recoverable by the City in a civil action by a summary
proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.
Any action to correct or enforce any such penalty shall be brought in
the Superior Court or Municipal Court. The amount of such penalty
shall be paid to the City of East Orange to be used for general municipal
purposes.197
194. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 160 and redesignated as Ch.
153 by Ord. No. 38-1982, adopted 7-19-1982.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
196. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.4 et seq.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 153-1 CHARTER § 153-3
C:853
§ 153-4. Liability.
Neither the City of East Orange nor any of its employees shall be liable for
any damages to any person or property in enforcing this article, except for
the gross negligence or malfeasance of any official, officer or employee of
the City of East Orange, and under no circumstances shall the City of East
Orange be held liable for damages from the lack of heat in the residential
property.
§ 153-5. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to owner-occupied residential
rental properties containing five units or fewer.
B. In any penalty enforcement proceeding brought pursuant to P.L. 1980,
c. 170, the Court shall also order the landlord or his agent to reimburse
the City of East Orange for the actual costs incurred for any fuel oil
delivered and the service charge for refiring the burner, if any, and for
reasonable attorney's fees and costs. The Court shall further be
empowered to issue any appropriate injunctive orders and to authorize
immediate collection of reimbursable costs due the City of East Orange
out of the goods and chattels of the landlord, including all sums due or
which may come due, as present or future rents. Any landlord who
prevails in such an action shall be entitled to reimbursement by the City
of East Orange for all reasonable costs and expenses. Such landlord,
however, shall still remain responsible for the cost of any fuel oil
delivered and any charge for refiring the burner incurred by the City.
§ 153-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 153-5
C:854
Chapter 156
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Littering — See Ch. 172.
Newspapers, advertisements and
periodicals — See Ch. 182.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 153-5 CHARTER § 153-5
C:855

ARTICLE I
Collection and Transportation of Waste
[Adopted 12-3-1984 by Ord. No. 52-1984; amended in its entirety
7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 22-2011]
§ 156-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — The corporation, firm or individual who has
been awarded the current scavenger contract by the City of East Orange.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste which, because of their size
or weight, cannot be contained in suitable receptacles. These items include
but are not limited to appliances, furniture, plumbing fixtures and lumber.
CATCH BASIN — A reservoir for collecting surface drainage or runoff.
CATCH BASIN BUFFER ZONE — The area that is 10 feet on either side of
the catch basin.
CITY — The City of East Orange, New Jersey.
COMMERCIAL SOURCE — A wholesale, retail or service establishment,
including but not limited to restaurants, markets, offices, retail and
wholesale outlets and theaters, excluding industrial establishments.
DEBRIS — Items including but not limited to lawn and garden material,
hedge clippings, leaves, small bushes, Christmas trees, wallboard and
plaster.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food.
GENERATOR — Any individual, public or private corporation or firm
owning, operating or in charge of any residential, nonresidential,
commercial, industrial or institutional source who produces or has charge
of producing solid waste or recyclable material.
HAZARDOUS REFUSE — Any waste which poses a present or potential
threat to human health, living organisms or the environment. It shall
include waste material that is toxic, corrosive, irritating, radioactive,
biologically infectious, explosive or flammable.
INSTITUTIONAL SOURCE — Any property which is not a residential,
commercial or industrial source, which includes but is not limited to public
or private schools, hospitals and medical care facilities.
LEAVES — The foliage material naturally formed from trees and bushes that
are suitable for composting and mulching.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste material which, if
thrown or deposited as prohibited in this article, tend to create blight and a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
§ 156-1 CHARTER § 156-1
C:857
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person appointed by the
Mayor who shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of East Orange or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public rights-of-way and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Any material designated by the City to have a
recycling value.
RECYCLING — A process by which materials which would otherwise be
disposed of as solid waste are separated, collected, processed and
converted into economically valuable raw materials or products.
RECYCLING BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY — A business which collects,
processes, sells, purchases or converts recyclable materials.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible waste, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, industrial waste and
hazardous refuse.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails and plastic trash bags.
RESIDENTIAL SOURCE — A household and other dwelling unit not defined
as a "commercial source."
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse, debris and other discarded materials
from residential or commercial sources, excluding recyclable material.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The collection and transportation of solid
waste from its source or location to a disposal site, a resource recovery
facility or a recycling facility.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The detaching, sorting and setting apart from
residential, nonresidential, commercial, industrial or institutional solid
waste, by the generator at the point of generation, of all designated
recyclable materials, for the purpose of recycling.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 156-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-1
C:858
SUFFICIENT RECEPTACLE — Receptacles provided with covers
constructed to prevent spillage or leakage of contents in a number sufficient
to contain the solid waste accumulated, pending collection in conformance
with the City's solid waste collection schedule.
SUITABLE RECEPTACLE FOR COLLECTION OF MIXED RECYCLABLES —
A reusable receptacle made of metal or plastic, with a capacity of no more
than 50 gallons for residential property of less than 50 units or no larger
than 110 gallons for residential properties of more than 50 units, with
handles and solidly constructed, or a container of a size and dimension
approved by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator. Paper bags are not
"suitable receptacles."
SUITABLE RECEPTACLE FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — A receptacle
made of metal or plastic, with a capacity of no more than 35 gallons, with
handles, solidly constructed so as to prevent spillage or leakage of contents
and weighing not more than 100 pounds when placed for collection; or, in
the alternative, plastic bags that shall be securely closed and not more than
18 inches in diameter and 26 inches high and not more than 35 gallons in
capacity and with sufficient strength to maintain physical integrity when
lifted. Paper bags and cardboard boxes are not "suitable receptacles."
USED CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — All corrugated cardboard of the
type commonly used for boxes, shipping containers and packing materials,
having exterior cardboard piles separated by air spaces created by one or
more fabricated cardboard piles.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
YARD WASTE — Grass, leaves, cutting of tree branches, shrubbery or other
vegetation.
§ 156-2. Receptacle requirement.
Except where an alternate method providing equivalent health and safety
methods is utilized, such as incineration or compaction, the owner, agent,
lessee, tenant or occupant of every dwelling, market, restaurant or other
premises where solid waste accumulates in the City shall provide and
maintain in a suitable place on the premises sufficient receptacles to
contain the accumulated solid waste.
§ 156-2.1. Refuse containers/dumpsters.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
§ 156-1 CHARTER § 156-2.1
C:859
§ 156-3. Placement of receptacles for collection.198
No receptacle or solid waste referred to in this article shall be placed for
collection on the curb or sidewalk or the public right-of-way prior to 5:00
p.m. preceding the day on which such receptacle or solid waste is scheduled
to be collected, nor shall receptacles be permitted to remain thereon longer
than two hours following collection at any commercial source or residential
source with four or more dwelling units and seven hours following collection
at any residential source with four or fewer dwelling units. (See § 156-15 for
violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 156-3.1. Accessibility of recycling containers.
The owner of each residential property shall supply sufficient containers,
as described in § 156-1, for the temporary storage of recyclable material
pending collection. The location of said containers shall be in an area that
is easily accessible by residents and which shall not create a nuisance. (See
§ 156-15 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 156-4. Limit of solid waste for collection.
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of East Orange.
C. Exceptions to prohibition:
(1) Permitted temporary demolition containers.
(2) Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
(3) Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
(4) Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
(5) Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
A. Residential sources. All residential sources shall be allowed to place
solid waste at the curb for collection by the City's authorized collector,
provided that all garbage and refuse is contained in suitable
receptacles. Recyclable material is to be separated from other solid
waste and recycled in a manner and according to a schedule
promulgated and published by the City. Loose wood and tree limbs are
to be cut into four-foot lengths and tied in bundles not more than 25
pounds each. Debris such as grass clippings and similar material shall
be placed in receptacles of sufficient strength to prevent breaking while
handling and weighing not more than 75 pounds when filled. Leaves,
dirt, stones, broken concrete, debris or other construction material or
items of an unreasonable nature will not be collected by the authorized
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-2.1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-4
C:860
§ 156-5. through § 156-5.3. (Reserved)199
§ 156-6. Tampering with solid waste or recyclable material for
collection.
No person other than those authorized by the City shall tamper with,
collect, remove, cut or untie any bundle of newspaper or any other
recyclable material or solid waste placed at the curb for collection. (See
§ 156-15 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 156-7. Deposit on private property without consent of owner.
No person shall throw, drop, dump, tow or otherwise place any solid waste,
abandoned automobile, automobile parts or any excavated material on
private property without first obtaining the permission of the owner or
person in possession of such property.
§ 156-8. Interference with City employees or agents.
No person shall prevent or interfere with any City employee or agent in
the discharge of his/her duties in inspecting for the proper placement of
receptacles or recyclable material for collection or the sweeping or cleaning
of any street or in the removal of sweepings, snow, ice or other refuse
material or in the removal of solid waste or other recyclable materials.
§ 156-9. Collection and transportation of solid waste or recyclable
material upon City streets.
No person engaged in the collection or transportation of solid waste or
recyclable material shall cause or permit any such material to be dropped
or scattered upon City streets. No person engaged in the collection or
collector. Hazardous refuse shall not be placed for collection but shall
be disposed of at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof in
accordance with laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
B. Commercial sources. All commercial sources shall be allowed to place
solid waste at the curb for collection by the City's authorized collector,
provided that all garbage and refuse is contained in no more than four
suitable receptacles and recyclable material is separated from other
solid waste. Used corrugated cardboard, bulky waste, dirt, stones,
broken concrete, debris or other construction material or items of an
unreasonable nature will not be collected by the authorized collector.
Hazardous refuse shall not be placed for collection but shall be
disposed of at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof in
accordance with laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
199. Editor's Note: Former § 156-5, Mandatory source separation and recycling of designated
material; § 156-5.1, Removal of recyclables; § 156-5.2, Residential disposition of
recyclables; and § 156-5.3, Proper placement of yard waste; violations and penalties, were
repealed 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 10-2012. See now Art. II, Recycling, of this chapter.
§ 156-4 CHARTER § 156-9
C:861
transportation of solid waste or recyclable material shall occupy any street
for an unreasonable length of time in loading or unloading.
§ 156-10. Condition of vehicles used in collection and
transportation of solid waste.
All vehicles used in transporting solid waste through City streets must be
furnished by the owner with a sound and watertight body and shall be
completely and securely covered as to prevent their contents from being
scattered upon the streets. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a
broom and shovel to remove any solid waste dropped during collection or
transportation. No such vehicle shall be in a filthy or offensive condition.
§ 156-11. Condition of vehicles used in collection and
transportation of recyclable material.
All vehicles used in transporting recyclable materials through City streets
must be furnished by the owner with a sound and watertight body and shall
be securely covered when loaded so as to prevent the contents from being
scattered upon the streets. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a broom
and shovel to remove any recyclable material dropped during collection or
transportation. No such vehicle shall be in a filthy or offensive condition.
§ 156-12. Sanitary storage of vehicles and implements.
When not in use, all vehicles referred to in §§ 156-10 and 156-11 of this
article, and all implements used in connection therewith, shall be stored and
kept in a place where there is no danger to the health, safety or welfare of
any person within the City.
§ 156-13. Allowing solid waste to stand overnight.
No person collecting solid waste shall keep, suffer or permit to remain
overnight in the City any solid waste collected within or outside of the City.
§ 156-14. Registration required to collect, transport, store or
otherwise handle recyclable materials; exception.
A. No recyclable materials shall be brought into, gathered, collected,
accumulated, stored, exposed, carried or transported in any manner
through any street or public place or into any structure in the City,
except by persons registered with the City through the Sanitation
Division of the Engineering Department.
B. Such registration shall be revocable by the City at any time, after notice
and hearing.
C. No registration shall be necessary under this section for the reasonable
temporary storage of their own material by private individuals,
corporations or institutions.
§ 156-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-14
C:862
§ 156-15. Violations and penalties.
D. Any person or business engaged in collecting, transporting, storing
and/or processing of any recyclable materials in the City shall submit
periodic reports on forms prescribed by the Sanitation Superintendent.
A. Penalties.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation or entity who or which violates or
neglects to comply with any provision of this article, except as
provided in § 156-15A(3) or any rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto, shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a
fine and/or penalty as provided below:
(a) First offense: a fine of $200.
(b) Second offense: a fine of $200 and discontinuance of collection
service until compliance is met.
(c) Third offense: a fine of $500 and discontinuance of collection
service until compliance is met.
(d) Fourth and each subsequent offense: a fine of $1,000 and
discontinuance of collection service until compliance is met.
(2) Each day such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as
such, except as provided in § 156-15A(3).
(3) Payment through Violations Bureau:
(a) If you wish to plead guilty of violating or refusing to comply
with § 156-3, 156-3.1 or 156-6, respectively, on your first
offense of any of the sections hereof, and give up your rights to
have a lawyer and a trial, you may pay a fine of $200 by
bringing or mailing the summons together with payment
within 14 days of notice of violation to the Violations Bureau
located at:
Violations Bureau
Municipal Court - East Orange
221 Freeway Drive
East Orange, New Jersey 07018
(b) Second and each subsequent offense: "plea of guilty" not
applicable. Fine and penalty is pursuant to § 156-15A(1) and
(2), as provided hereinbefore.
B. Fines levied and recovered for noncompliance with any and all
provisions of this article shall be transmitted by the Court Clerk within
48 hours after the receipt thereof to the Tax Collector, who shall deposit
§ 156-14 CHARTER § 156-15
C:863
all such funds within 48 hours after the receipt thereof to the credit
of the local unit in its designated recycling grant fund account or
revolving relocation assistance fund account of its legal depository.
The recycling grant fund is to be utilized for the purpose of the City's
recycling program, to include, but not be limited to, the purchase
of materials, education, awareness and improvement in services in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39.
C. This article shall be enforced by the Water Department, Public Works
Department, Property Maintenance Department and Health
Department of the City of East Orange.
§ 156-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-15
C:864
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 10-2012]
§ 156-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
COVERED PROJECT — A construction, renovation or demolition project for
which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and for which a
dumpster or roll-off container shall be placed on premises for the purpose
of placement of solid waste materials.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Essex County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be source
separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include:
Residential. All homes, condominiums, townhouses, apartments, trailer
parks, etc., including certain housing types considered institutional
(i.e., senior citizen homes) are to recycle the following materials. There
are no de minimis standards based upon amount or weight:
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Mixed paper (i.e., junk mail, office paper, all marketable grades).
(3) Old corrugated containers.
(4) Glass food and beverage containers.
(5) Aluminum beverage containers.
(6) Leaves.
(7) Used motor oil.
(8) White goods.
(9) Lead acid batteries (vehicle batteries).
(10)Plastics (#1 and #2).
(11)Steel/tin containers.
(12)Ferrous scrap.
A.
Commercial. All places of business (wholesale, retail, service, food,
transportation, etc.) are included in this sector.
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Glass food and beverage containers.
B.
§ 156-16 CHARTER § 156-16
C:865
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
a television, and cell phones.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes (see
(3) Aluminum beverage containers.
(4) Leaves.
(5) Old corrugated containers.
(6) Office paper (all marketable grades).
(7) Used motor oil.
(8) White goods.
(9) Lead acid batteries (vehicle batteries).
(10)Plastics (#1 and #2).
(11)Steel/tin containers.
(12)Ferrous scrap.
Institutional. All government buildings, schools, colleges, hospitals,
clinics, etc., are included in this sector.
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Glass food and beverage containers.
(3) Aluminum beverage containers.
(4) Leaves.
(5) Old corrugated containers.
(6) Office paper (all marketable grades).
(7) Used motor oil.
(8) White goods.
(9) Lead acid batteries (vehicle batteries).
(10)Plastics (#1 and #2).
(11)Steel/tin containers.
(12)Ferrous scrap.
C.
§ 156-16 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-16
C:866
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels or other guesthouses
serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under
subsection (j) of section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L. 1967,
c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to,
among other things, enforce the provisions of this article, and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the City of East Orange.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste and which may be collected, separated or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 156-17. Source separation; exemption from source-separation
requirements.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the City of East Orange, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other
solid waste generated by the owners, tenants or occupants of such
premises and shall be placed separately at the curb in a manner and on
such days and times as may be hereinafter established by regulations
promulgated by the City of East Orange.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the sourceseparation
requirements of the ordinance which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source-separate from the municipal solid waste stream the specified
recyclable materials, if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this article, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this
§ 156-16 CHARTER § 156-17
C:867
§ 156-18. Collection of recyclable materials.
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
§ 156-19. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 156-20. Commercial/nonresidential establishment compliance
requirements. [Amended 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 21-2019]
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity; the
street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official
title and phone number of the person making application on behalf
of the commercial or institutional entity; the name, address, official
contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides
the service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a
certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled,
and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation
to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the total number of tons
collected and recycled for each designated material.
A. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk
or, in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above anytime after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection. After collection, any
containers shall be removed from the curbside by no later than 7:00
p.m. of the day of collection. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015]
B. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be kept clean and in a safe manner.
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 156-17 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-20
C:868
§ 156-21. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional or industrial properties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 13:1E-99.16c:
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or its designee, unless the municipality provides for the
collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials for those materials
commonly deposited in the location of the litter receptacle and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Every business, institution or industrial facility shall report on March
30 of each year to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at its premises, including the amount
of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled, and the
vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products and maintain such records as may be
prescribed for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
E. Any owner, agent or lessee of a commercial establishment in the City
must keep the outside of their premises free of garbage, refuse, rubbish
and all other waste material, including those items which are defined in
this article as litter, which tend to create blight and a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the municipality of the City of
East Orange for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multifamily dwellings of 25 or more units, single-family developments
of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional or industrial
development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land
must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a minimum,
the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
§ 156-20 CHARTER § 156-21
C:869
§ 156-22. Prohibition of collection of solid waste mixed with
recyclable materials.
§ 156-23. Construction, renovation and demolition debris recovery
plan.
A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator prior to the commencement of any activity for which municipal
approval is further identified above. The debris recovery plan shall identify
the types and estimated quantities of construction and demolition debris to
be generated from the project, how each material will be managed, and the
name of each facility or service provider that the entity will use to manage
each material. The plan shall further detail how the applicant shall ensure
that a minimum of 50% of the materials to be generated will be separated
and recycled.
§ 156-24. Review of debris recovery plan.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the City of East
Orange, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Director of Public Works.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
A. Approval. A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and approved if it provides for all of the
information required by this article. An approved debris recovery plan
shall be marked "Approved" and returned to the owner of the entity
which submitted the plan.
§ 156-21 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-24
C:870
§ 156-25. Diversion requirement adjustment.
§ 156-26. Debris recovery plan reporting requirements.
Documentation. Upon completion of the covered project, but before the
final inspection, the owner of the entity carrying out a covered project
shall submit in person or by certified mail to the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator, the documentation required to demonstrate that the applicant
has met the diversion requirement. The required documentation shall
include the following:
B. Denial. A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not
provide all of the information required by this article. If a debris
recovery plan is not approved, the owner of the entity which submitted
the plan shall be notified in writing that the plan has been rejected,
including the reasons for the rejection. In order to obtain the building
or demolition permit sought, the owner of the entity which will carry
out the construction, renovation or demolition project shall make the
required changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
A. Application. If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project
experiences circumstances that makes it infeasible to comply with the
diversion requirement cited in this article, the owner of the entity may
apply for an adjustment. The owner shall indicate in writing why it is
infeasible to divert 50% of the materials being generated from the
covered project and specify what percentage of diversion could be
achieved. Increased costs to the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project will not be an acceptable justification for an
adjustment.
B. Review. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the
information supplied by the owner. If warranted, the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator shall attempt to contact the owner to discuss
possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement.
C. Granting of an adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is infeasible for the entity carrying out a covered
project to divert 50% of the generated C&D debris from the covered
project, the percent of diversion required shall be adjusted. The owner
shall be notified in writing of the adjusted diversion requirement. The
owner of the entity carrying out the covered project shall be required to
divert the percent of C&D debris required by the adjustment.
D. Denial of adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is feasible for the owner of an entity carrying out a
covered project to meet the diversion requirement cited in this article,
the owner shall be notified in writing of the denial of the diversion
requirement adjustment.
§ 156-24 CHARTER § 156-26
C:871
§ 156-27. Compliance with diversion requirement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information
submitted pursuant to this article and determine whether the owner of the
entity carrying out the covered project has complied or failed to comply
with the diversion requirement. The determination regarding compliance
will be provided to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project
in writing.
§ 156-28. Appeal.
An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project may appeal a
determination of failure to comply under this article to the Municipal Court
within 30 days of the decision or determination. The appeal shall be in
writing and shall state the facts and basis for the appeal. A decision by the
City's Municipal Court shall be final.
§ 156-29. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Health, the Police
Department, the Recycling Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official,
the Housing Officer, and the Essex County Department of Health are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and opening
of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any
recyclable material.
§ 156-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $250 or more than $1,000. Fines levied and collected
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be immediately deposited
into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or equivalent). Monies in the
Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for the expenses of the
municipal recycling program, including community education programs.
A. A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the entity
carrying out a covered project, indicating the quantity of each material
generated during the covered project diverted or disposed;
B. Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and
dispose materials generated during the covered project; and
C. Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirement.
§ 156-26 EAST ORANGE CODE § 156-30
C:872
Chapter 157
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Littering — See Ch. 172.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 157-1. Findings; purpose.
The City Council of the City of East Orange, New Jersey, hereby finds and
declares that graffiti is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
community and that there is a perception in the community that the laws
protecting public and private property can be disregarded with impunity.
This perception fosters a sense of disrespect of the law that results in an
increase of crime, is detrimental to the property values of the community,
degrades the community and leads to urban blight, and is inconsistent
with the City of East Orange's property maintenance goals and aesthetic
standards.
§ 157-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of East Orange, New Jersey.
DEFACE — To cover, mark, write on, paint, color or otherwise mar, disfigure
or draw whatsoever on any private or public property of any nature without
the express consent of the owner.
GRAFFITI — Any form of inscription, word, figure, marking or design that
is marked, etched, scratched, drawn down or painted on any building,
structure, fixture or other improvement, whether permanent or temporary,
including, by way of example only and without limitation, fencing
surrounding construction sites, whether public or private, without the
consent of the owner of the property or the owner's authorized agent, which
is visible from the private right-of-way.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tip marker, china marker or similar device
that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/2
inch or greater.
A. Graffiti results in visual pollution and is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a mechanism in which
individuals may be prosecuted for defacing public and private property.
§ 156-30 CHARTER § 157-2
C:873
KNOWINGLY — Includes knowledge or information which a parent should
reasonably be expected to have pertaining to the marking of graffiti. It is
intended to include and require neglectful or careless parents to maintain
a reasonable community standard of parental respectability through an
objective test. There shall be no defense of a parent who is indifferent to the
activities or conduct of a minor in their custody, when they have knowledge
of the individual's actions that are not in compliance of this chapter.
MINOR or JUVENILE — Used interchangeably, and shall mean any person
under the age of 17, any person less than 17 years of age or any person who
has not celebrated his or her 17th birthday.
OWNER — The owner of record of the property as set forth in the records
of the Tax Assessor for the City of East Orange.
PARENT — Any person to whom legal custody of a juvenile has been given
by court order or is acting in the place of the parent or is responsible for
the care and welfare of the juvenile and shall include:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle use for public transportation, parking lot or any other parking,
public building, structure or any municipal parking signs, etc., or area.
§ 157-3. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are prohibited:
A. Natural or adoptive parents.
B. Legal guardians.
C. A person who stands in loco parentis.
D. A person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
A. No person shall willfully or maliciously damage, deface or vandalize any
public or private property by painting, writing, drawing or otherwise
inscribing in any fashion graffiti thereon without the express
permission or consent of the owner. However, this prohibition shall not
apply to easily removable (which are water soluble) chalk markings on
public sidewalks or streets, written or drawn in connection with
traditional children's games, or in any lawful business or public purpose
or activity.
B. It shall be unlawful to aid anyone in defacing public or private property.
C. No person shall possess a spray container or indelible marker in any
public place or on any public facility or private property with the intent
to use the same to deface said public building, property or private
property, absent express permission to the contrary.
§ 157-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 157-4
C:874
§ 157-4. Parental responsibility.
It should be unlawful for a parent as defined in § 157-2 of this chapter
having legal custody over a minor to knowingly permit or by inefficient or
lack of control to allow such minor in their control to place graffiti on any
private or public property as defined in § 157-2 of this chapter.
§ 157-5. Enforcement.
§ 157-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Any minor under the age of 17 years found by a police officer to be in
violation of this chapter shall be brought to the nearest police station,
where the minor shall be released to his or her parent or guardian. The
parent, as defined in § 157-2, shall be immediately notified and required
to report to police headquarters to procure the juvenile.
B. When a parent immediately called has come to take charge of the
juvenile and the appropriate information has been recorded, the
juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If a parent
cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then the
juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities except to the extent
that, in accordance with police regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police, approved in advance for juvenile authorities, the juvenile may
temporarily be entrusted to an adult, relative, neighbor or other person
who will, on behalf of the parent, assume responsibility for caring for
the juvenile pending availability of the parent or guardian.
C. In the case of a first violation by the juvenile, the juvenile and parent
shall receive, both in person and by certified mail, a written warning
notice from the officer in charge of the police station indicating the
circumstances under which the minor was found to be in violation of
this chapter.
D. If the minor has been convicted of violating this chapter on a prior
occasion within six months of the date of the present violation, there
shall be a presumption that, whenever a minor has been convicted for a
violation of this chapter, the parent or guardian having care of the
minor knew or should have known of the minor's violation of this
section.
A. Adults who are not parents of offenders as defined in § 157-2 of this
chapter. Any adult who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by one or more of the
following penalties:
(1) A fine of not less than $500 and not exceeding $1,000.
(2) Imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
(3) A period of community service not to exceed 90 days.
§ 157-4 CHARTER § 157-6
C:875
§ 157-7. Special account.
All fines collected, not to exceed 70% of the total cost, shall be placed in
a special account to be used as assistance to homeowners for removing
graffiti. (It is presumed that 30% of the fees collected are needed to defray
court costs.) This account will also be used to purchase graffiti cleaning
equipment.
§ 157-8. Removal of graffiti.200
B. Juveniles and/or parent violators as defined in § 157-4 of this chapter.
(1) After the receipt of a warning notice pursuant to § 157-5C of a first
violation by a juvenile, when a second graffiti violation is adjudged
against the same minor the parents of the minor shall be subject to
prosecution under this section. Violators of this chapter shall be
required to perform community service of a period not to exceed 90
days and may be subject to a fine of not less than $500 but no more
than $1,000. Additionally, any parent having the care or custody of
a minor found to be in violation of this section, if it is adjudged that
both the juvenile and the juvenile's parents violated this chapter,
they shall be required to perform community service together.
(2) If a minor has been found to violate this chapter twice within a sixmonth
period, the minor shall receive a summons and complaint
from the police officer who apprehended the minor for the violation
of this chapter.
(3) If a juvenile is found to be in violation of this chapter on three
occasions within six months, then the juvenile as well as the parent
having the care and custody of the minor shall receive a summons
and complaint for the violation of this chapter.
(4) Any juvenile who violates any of the provisions of this chapter as
contained in § 157-3 more than four times shall be reported by the
Chief of Police to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile in need of
supervision, and the Chief of Police, Corporation Counsel or their
designee may proceed to file such charges with the Superior Court
of New Jersey, Family Part, as he or she may deem appropriate.
A. Notice. The owner of any premises that is determined by the City to
have any form of graffiti upon any building or structure shall be
delivered a written notice both by ordinary mail and certified mail of the
order to remove the graffiti. The order shall afford the owner 90 days
from the date that the notice is sent to remove the graffiti. However, the
Department of Transportation shall be afforded, from the date that a
notice is sent, 120 days to remove graffiti from property owned by the
Department (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.59c). The notice shall contain a form to be
utilized by the property owner to inform the City that the graffiti has
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 157-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 157-8
C:876
§ 157-9. Payment of reward.
A reward of $250 shall be paid to any person who provides information
or assistance leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person
violating this chapter. This reward shall be payable after conviction out of a
fund established for this purpose, but no reward shall be paid to any public
employee whose duty it is to investigate or enforce this chapter. The Chief
of Police is hereby authorized to grant such reward with the consent of the
Municipal Council, and said reward shall only be given upon notification by
the Municipal Court that the matter has been adjudicated.
been removed. The form shall contain a provision stating that by
affixing a signature to the form indicating that the graffiti has been
removed the owner is certifying that the facts set forth therein are true
and that the certification shall be considered as if made under oath and
subject to the same penalties as provided by law for perjury.
B. Requirement to remove graffiti. An owner who has been ordered to
remove graffiti shall respond to the City by personal delivery or
certified mail of any objection to the order within 30 days of the date of
the order or of notice that the graffiti has been removed within 90 days
of the date of the order or, in the case of the Department of
Transportation, 120 days of the date of the order.
C. Remedies.
(1) An owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti may institute
an action challenging the order before a court of competent
jurisdiction within 60 days of the date of the order.
(2) If said graffiti is not corrected within 90 business days after written
notice is issued, then the City of East Orange shall have the right to
issue a summons and to enter the premises to remove the graffiti
and/or repaint the premises, and the cost of the removal of the
graffiti and/or repainting shall be at the sole cost and expense of
the occupant, lessee, agent and/or landlord of said building or
structure. The actual cost of the removal of the graffiti and/or
repainting, plus the cost of inspection of said graffiti and/or
repainting and other costs incidental to such removal, shall be
certified by the City Administrator to the City Council, which may
authorize the institution of an action at law for the collection
thereof. The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of any such
action.
§ 157-8 CHARTER § 157-9
C:877
Chapter 159
HOUSING STANDARDS; PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization generally — See
Ch. 5.
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 40.
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Emergency delivery of fuel oil — See Ch. 153,
Art. I.
Solid waste — See Ch. 156.
Licenses and fees — See Ch 170.
Rent control and conversions — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 238.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
Nuisances — See Ch. 282.
Licensing of retail food handling
establishments — See Ch. 288.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 292.
§ 157-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 157-9
C:878
Part 1
General Housing And Property Maintenance Standards
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 159-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-27-1968 by Ord. No. 31-1968;
4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 15-1971]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
A. Word usage. Whenever the words "accessory structure,"
"boardinghouse," "building," "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "establishment
subject to licensing, habitable room," "independent rooming unit,"
"lodging house," "nursing home," "premises," "room," "rooming unit,"
"structure" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed, unless
expressly stated to the contrary, to include the plurals of these words
and as if they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." The
word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as prospectively.
B. Terms defined.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental
to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on
the same premises.
AREA INSPECTION — A systematic inspection of more than one
premises in close geographic proximity within an area designated in
the City for concentrated area code enforcement in order to implement
urban renewal, property conservation or other programs for
neighborhood maintenance or improvement adopted by the City.
BASEMENT — The portion of a building that is partly underground and
which has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from clear floor to
ceiling, above the average adjoining ground level. Where the natural
contour of the ground level immediately adjacent to the building is
interrupted by ditching, pits or trenching, then the average adjoining
ground level shall be the nearest natural contour line parallel to the
walls of the building without regard to the levels created by the
ditching, pits or trenching.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which shall also include toilets, lavatories or
fixtures serving similar purposes.
BOARDINGHOUSE (Class A) — Any dwelling, whether furnished or
unfurnished, with one or more independent rooming units in which
there are sleeping accommodations occupied by or available for
occupancy by four or more persons and where meals are regularly
served by the owner or operator of such dwelling, and where there is
no agreement between operator and occupant to assist in bathing or
dressing or to provide other type of supervision; and by reason of the
§ 159-1 CHARTER § 159-1
C:879
same, the accommodations are not suited for occupancy by disabled
persons or persons requiring special care; except that hotels, as defined
by N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3, containing 10 or more rooms or accommodating
25 or more persons, shall be excluded therefrom.[Amended
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
BOARDINGHOUSE (Class B) — Any dwelling, whether furnished or
unfurnished, with one or more independent rooming units in which
there are sleeping accommodations occupied by or available for
occupancy by one or more adult persons and where meals are regularly
served by the owner or operator to the occupants, and where, by reason
of the needs of the occupants, there is provided assistance in bathing
or dressing or other type of supervision to assure safety at all times
to all of the occupants; and thereby occupancy is suited to persons
requiring special care but not for disabled persons. Where not more
than two disabled persons or persons requiring special care live with
persons to whom they are related by blood or marriage as part of a
common household, the dwelling unit in which they reside shall not be
a "boardinghouse (Class B)" pursuant to this definition.
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, including outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
BUILDING CODE — Chapter 125, Construction Codes, Uniform, of the
Code.
CELLAR — Lowermost portion of the building partly or totally
underground, having half or more of its height, measured from clear
floor to ceiling, below the average adjoining ground level. Where the
natural contour of the ground level immediately adjacent to the
building is interrupted by ditching, pits or trenching, then the average
adjoining ground level shall be the nearest natural contour line parallel
to the walls of the building without regard to the levels created by the
ditching, pits or trenching.
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM — A heating system in a fire-resistant
enclosed space or spaces, separate and apart from the area to be
heated, which system is permanently affixed on a fireproof base and
connected by breaching to a stack in accordance with Chapter 125,
Construction Codes, Uniform. Direct electric or gas heating systems
without the use of a boiler, serving all dwelling units in a structure, are
exempt from the above requirements.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any private child-care center, day nursery,
nursery school, boarding school or other establishment of similar
character for the care of children in which any tuition fee, board or
other form of compensation for the care of children is charged and in
which more than five children over the age of two years and under the
age of five years are cared for. It shall not include the State Board of
Children's Guardians of the Department of Institutions and Agencies,
or any aid society of a properly organized and accredited church or
fraternal society organized for aid and relief of its members, or any
§ 159-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-1
C:880
children's home, orphan asylum, children's aid society or society for the
prevention of cruelty to children, incorporated under the laws of this
state and subject to visitation or supervision by the State Department
of Institutions and Agencies, except in the conduct of a philanthropic
day nursery, or any other public agency operated by a county, city,
municipality or school district. (Standards for Approval of Child Care
Centers, New Jersey Department of Education, 1965.)[Added
5-22-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972; amended 4-23-1973 by Ord. No.
17-1973]
COMMUNITY KITCHEN — A kitchen facility shared by occupants of
one or more rooming units or dwelling units.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling,
rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DISABLED PERSON — Any person who, by reason of his physical or
mental condition, is not sufficiently ambulatory or otherwise by reason
of physical or mental incapability able to reach or use the two means
of egress most accessible to his living quarters without assistance and
with reasonable facility, or who is unable to attend to his daily personal
and bodily needs.
DRUG CENTER — Any building or structure of any kind or description
which is used for habitation or otherwise, wherein the acts of
prevention of drug addiction, attempted cure of drug addiction or
treatment of the same is carried on.[Added 7-17-1972 by Ord. No.
25-1972]
DWELLING — Any structure designed for use by human occupants
for sleeping and living purposes, whether occupied or vacant, except
that this definition shall not apply to hotels, as defined in N.J.S.A.
55:13A-3.201
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling, forming a single habitable unit, which includes facilities for
living, sleeping, cooking, eating, bathing and toilet purposes.
EMANCIPATED MINOR — Any person under the age of 21 years who
is gainfully employed and self-supporting or who is married to a spouse
who is gainfully employed and who supports the minor, or who is
a student living away from home and in regular attendance at an
institution of higher learning.
ESTABLISHMENT SUBJECT TO LICENSING — Any lodging house,
boardinghouse or nursing home which is required to be licensed
pursuant to this chapter.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or any part thereof or any
building or any part thereof which may be lawfully viewed by the public
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-1 CHARTER § 159-1
C:881
or any member thereof from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, licensed openair
parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Open space on the premises outside
of any building thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
and vermin by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible material that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping or by other approved means of pest
elimination.
FAMILY — See "immediate family."
FIRE HAZARD —
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The total area within a dwelling unit or
rooming unit available and accessible to the occupants thereof for all
purposes associated with living in the unit.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The net floor area within the dwelling unit or
rooming unit, as the case may be, shall be computed by deducting from
the gross floor area the following:
Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which is so situated
as to endanger either persons or property.
(1)
The creation, maintenance or continuance of any physical condition
by reason of which there exists a use, accumulation or storage of
combustible or explosive material sufficient in amount or so located
or in such a manner as to put in jeopardy, in event of ignition, either
persons or property.
(2)
The obstruction to or of fire escapes, ladders which may be used
as escape, stairways, aisles, exits, doors, windows, passageways or
halls, likely in the event of fire to interfere with the operations of
the Fire Department or of the safety and ready egress of occupants.
(3)
The violation of any rule promulgated by the Fire Department or
the City.
(4)
Built-in equipment, wardrobes and closets, bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, serving and storage pantries, cellars,
heating rooms, boiler rooms, utility rooms, kitchens, kitchenettes
and areas utilized for cooking purposes.
(1)
Other rooms or spaces that are not used frequently and regularly
for living purposes.
(2)
Such parts thereof as are used exclusively as hallways or corridors,
entrance foyers or vestibules or, where part of a larger area, so
much thereof as is required to provide a means of passage three
feet in width through the room or foyer immediately adjoining from
any point of ingress from the exterior of the dwelling unit to any
exit from such room or foyer.
(3)
§ 159-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-1
C:882
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABILITY — A state of being in compliance with and in conformity
with the provisions of the codes of the City of East Orange.[Amended
4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 15-1971; 11-25-1974 by Ord. No.
61-1974202]
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room in a dwelling unit constituting all or
part of a rooming unit, having a net floor area of 50 square feet or
more.[Amended 5-27-1968 by Ord. No. 31-1968]
HOTEL — Any building kept, used, maintained, advertised as or held
out to be a place where sleeping accommodations are supplied for
pay to transient or permanent guests, in which 15 or more rooms
are rented, furnished or unfurnished, including any room found to be
arranged for or used for sleeping purposes, with or without meals, for
the accommodation of such guests, or every building or part thereof
which is rented for hire to 30 or more persons for sleeping
accommodations. There shall not be included rooms which are
physically a part of a self-contained and enclosed dwelling unit. This
definition shall not be construed to include any building defined as a
"tenement house" pursuant to Title 55 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, or any amendments enacted thereto.
HOUSING INSPECTORS — All officials, officers or employees of the
City entrusted with the enforcement of this chapter.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as
a single housekeeping unit and using certain rooms and housekeeping
facilities in common. The residents present a picture very much akin
to that of a traditional family, and their lifestyle is not of a transient or
temporary nature.203
INCIDENTAL COOKING — Cooking facilities containing no more than
two plates or burners not exceeding six inches in diameter.
INDEPENDENT ROOMING UNIT — A rooming unit in other than a
single-family dwelling which opens directly to the exterior of the
premises by way of a common hallway, common areaway or common
stairway or door to the exterior of the premises without passing
through any other rooming unit or dwelling unit.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard.
Such part of any room where floor-to-ceiling height is less than
seven feet.
(4)
Any room or part remaining after eliminating areas in subsection
(3) or (4) above which would then contain less than 50 square feet.
(5)
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-1 CHARTER § 159-1
C:883
KITCHEN — Any room or part of a room used for cooking or the
preparation of food.
LODGING HOUSE — Any dwelling, whether furnished or unfurnished,
in which there are one or more independent rooming units where there
are sleeping accommodations for occupancy or available for occupancy
by four or more persons, and where there is no agreement between
the operator and any occupant for feeding, personal care or special
supervision or attention; except that hotels, as defined by N.J.S.A.
55:13A-1 et seq., containing 15 or more rooms or accommodating 30 or
more persons, shall be excluded therefrom.204
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building containing one or more dwelling
units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to
nondwelling uses or as a hotel.
NUISANCE —
NURSING HOME — Any building in which two or more disabled
persons are housed for purposes of care, special attention, treatment
Any public nuisance known at public law or in equity jurisprudence
or as provided by the statutes of the state or this Code or any other
ordinances of the City.
(1)
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a
building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes but is not limited
to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations; abandoned
iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles; any structurally unsound
fences or structures; lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation
such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for
inquisitive minors.
(2)
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist.
(3)
(4) Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of this chapter.
(5) Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter.
Inadequate or insanitary sewer or plumbing facilities in violation of
this chapter.
(6)
Insanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health in violation of this chapter.
(7)
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings.
(8)
(9) Fire hazards.
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-1
C:884
and supervision and are housed for such purposes overnight or longer,
but dwellings where not more than two disabled persons live with
members of their families to whom they are related by blood or
marriage shall be excluded from this definition.
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping or having actual possession
of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have charge, care
or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the
owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession
regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is
a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or
dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and
shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or
assigned by such lessee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations or corporations
who or which have interests of record in any premises or are in actual
possession thereof.
PERSON REQUIRING SPECIAL CARE — Any person who does not
suffer from such physical or mental incapacity as to be classified as
a disabled person, but by reason of physical or mental limitations or
advanced years does require a limited degree of care and attention to
assure personal safety at all times.
PLUMBING — All of the following supplies, facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch
basins, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines, and water pipes and lines
utilized in conjunction with air-conditioning equipment.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — The Housing Authority of the City205 or any
officer in charge of any department of the City, the county or the
state relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other activities
concerning buildings in the City.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Director of the Department of Property
Maintenance and Code Enforcement or such other person as the City
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Housing Authority.
§ 159-1 CHARTER § 159-1
C:885
Council may specifically designate and such other officials as the Public
Officer may designate to act in his behalf.[Amended 5-23-1977 by
Ord. No. 72-1977; 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 26-2014; 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 7-2015]
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid
market and industrial wastes.
REFUSE CONTAINER (MECHANICAL PICKUP) (commonly called a
"dumpster") — Any refuse container used in conjunction with vehicles
equipped with hoisting mechanisms for loading the containers on the
chassis of a vehicle and dumping the contents of the containers.[Added
11-16-1984 by Ord. No. 49-1984]
REGISTERED MAIL — Registered mail or certified mail.
ROOM — Space in an enclosed building, or space set apart by a
partition or partitions, and any space in a building used or intended to
be used as a bedroom, dining room, living room, kitchen, sewing room,
library, den, music room, dressing room, enclosed sleeping porch, sun
room, party room, recreation room, breakfast room, study, storage
room and similar uses.
ROOMING HOUSE — See definitions of "lodging house" and
"boardinghouse."
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit other than a dwelling unit, which is rented or available
for rent for sleeping purposes, with or without cooking facilities.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SANITARY SEWER — Any sanitary sewer owned, operated and
maintained by the City and available for public use for the disposal of
sewage.
SEWAGE — Waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory, dishwashing
or laundry machine, or the water-carried waste from any other
fixture or equipment or machine.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling containing one and only
one dwelling unit, but which may contain in addition thereto one
rooming unit with incidental cooking facilities.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that
the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
If the finished ceiling level directly above a basement or cellar is more
§ 159-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-1
C:886
§ 159-2. Findings and policy declarations.
than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered
a "story."
STRUCTURE — Combination of any materials, whether fixed or
portable, forming a construction, including buildings.
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from any space by
natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or without winddriven
devices.
WASHROOMS — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both. Such term shall also include toilets, lavatories or
fixtures serving similar purposes.
WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT — Enclosed space containing one or
more toilets, which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and
other plumbing fixtures.
WEATHERING — Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure
to the elements.
A. It is found and declared that there exist in the City structures used for
residential and nonresidential uses which are or may become in the
future substandard with respect to structure, equipment or
maintenance, and, further, that such conditions, including but not
limited to structural deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance
of exterior of premises, infestation, lack of essential heating, plumbing,
storage or refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of
essential utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate
provisions for light and air, insanitary conditions and overcrowding,
constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and
reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the City. It is
further found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and
progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of
creating blighting conditions and initiating slums and that, if the same
are not curtailed and removed, the above conditions will grow and
spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of
public funds to correct and eliminate the same and that, by reason of
timely regulations and restrictions as contained in this chapter, the
growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and
property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of
residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced, and
the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
B. It is further found and declared that, by reason of the peculiar and
special conditions existing in lodging houses, boardinghouses and
nursing homes, the licensing and regulation of same is necessary so
§ 159-1 CHARTER § 159-2
C:887
§ 159-3. Purpose. [Amended 5-22-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972;
7-17-1972 by Ord. No. 25-1972; 4-23-1973 by Ord. No. 17-1973]
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and
nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing
utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential
to make such facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix
certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators, and distinct
and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to require the
licensing and regulation of lodging houses, boardinghouses and nursing
homes, child-care centers and drug centers; to authorize and establish
procedures for the inspection of residential and nonresidential premises;
to fix penalties for the violations of this chapter; to provide for the right
of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs; and to provide for
the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use. This chapter is declared to be remedial and essential for
the public interest, and it is intended that this chapter be liberally construed
to effectuate the purposes as stated in this section.
that the regulations of this chapter may be better enforced in the public
interest for the protection of health, safety and welfare of the public to
prevent slum and blighted conditions from expanding in the City and
for the social and economic stability of the City.
C. It is further found and declared that there exist in the City certain
buildings and structures which are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use because of dilapidation; defects increasing the
hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; lack of ventilation, light or
sanitation facilities or because of other conditions rendering such
buildings and structures or parts thereof unsafe or unsanitary or
dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical
to the welfare of the residents of the City.206
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 113, Buildings Unfit for Habitation.
§ 159-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-3
C:888
ARTICLE II
Applicability of Provisions and Standards
§ 159-4. Applicability of provisions.
Every residential and nonresidential building and the premises on which it
is situated in the City, used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial,
business or industrial occupancy, shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered
or repaired before or after the enactment of this chapter and irrespective
of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the building or premises, for the construction or repair of the
building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior
to the effective date of this chapter. This chapter establishes minimum
standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such
buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established
for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment
or facilities contained herein, except as provided in § 159-5. Where there
is mixed occupancy and residential or nonresidential use therein, such
structure shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 159-5. Conflict with other regulations.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than set forth elsewhere in this Code or in any other ordinances of the City
or under the laws of the state, then the standards as set forth in this chapter
shall prevail, but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower standard
than this Code or any other ordinances of the City or the laws of the state,
then the higher standard contained in this Code or any such other ordinance
or law shall prevail.
§ 159-6. Issuance of permits and licenses conditional on
compliance.
All licenses and permits shall be issued upon compliance with this chapter
as well as compliance with any other provision of this Code or any other
ordinances under which licenses and permits are granted.207
§ 159-7. Effect on other laws.
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any part of this Code or
any other ordinance of the City applicable to any structure or premises, nor
shall any provision in this chapter relieve any owner, operator or occupant
from complying with any such other provision, nor any official of the City
from enforcing any such other provision.
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Licenses and Fees.
§ 159-4 CHARTER § 159-7
C:889

ARTICLE III
Administrative Provision and Enforcement
§ 159-8. Designation of Public Officer; powers and duties.
[Amended 1-25-1975 by Ord. No. 5-1975; 10-14-2014 by Ord. No.
25-2014; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
The Director of the Department of Property Maintenance and Code
Enforcement is hereby designated to serve as the Public Officer under
this chapter. All inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings on
violations of the provisions of this chapter, unless expressly stated to the
contrary, shall be under his direction and supervision. He may appoint or
designate such other public officials or employees of the City to perform
duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this chapter, including the
making of inspections and holding of hearings.
§ 159-9. Public Officer authorized to act as custodian to enforce
compliance; cost of services.
In addition to other remedies provided in this chapter, where the Public
Officer has issued an order requiring the abatement of a nuisance, the
correction of a defective condition or the maintenance of the premises in a
proper condition so as to conform to this chapter and other ordinances of
the City and laws of the state applicable thereto, and the owner, operator,
lessor or agent charged with the premises has failed to comply therewith,
the Public Officer may, for the purposes of correcting any of the foregoing
conditions, act as custodian of any building or structure subject to
registration in accordance with the provisions of § 159-55 and may, as
custodian, enter into and take charge of the premises and supervise the
abatement of any nuisance, correction of defect or placing of the premises
in compliance with this chapter and any other municipal ordinances and
state laws. For the performance of the duties of custodian, the City shall
receive for the services from the owner, operator or lessor of the premises
compensation approved by the City Council, not to exceed $0.50 a day in
costs and expenses, on the basis of 5% of the rent paid or payable for
each occupied dwelling unit and 5% of the rental value of any unoccupied
dwelling unit, the same to be certified and collected as provided in § 159-33,
plus any actual disbursements required of the City while serving as
custodian herein.
§ 159-10. Appointment of Public Officer as receiver; no fees
allowed.
A. Where the owner, operator or lessor of a building required to register
under § 159-55 violates this chapter, this Code or any other municipal
ordinance pertaining to such structure, or fails to abate any violation of
this chapter, or violates an order of the Public Officer with respect
thereto, the Public Officer, upon resolution duly approved by the City
Council, may commence an action in the Superior Court seeking
appointment of the Public Officer as receiver ex officio of the rents and
§ 159-8 CHARTER § 159-10
C:891
§ 159-11. Appointment of mortgagee as agent of receiver.
The Public Officer, when acting as receiver pursuant to § 159-10, may, when
authorized by resolution of the City Council, appoint as agent the holder of
any first mortgage upon the premises if such mortgagee or assignee of the
mortgage is a proper person and is willing to accept such appointment to
serve as agent to the receiver for the purpose of collecting rent and income
from the premises and manage the same. If there is no first mortgage or
assignee of the mortgage or if such person is unsuitable or unqualified
for performing duties as set forth in this section or unwilling to accept
appointment, the City Council may, by resolution, upon recommendation of
the Public Officer, designate some other person to perform such duties and
functions. The agent shall account promptly to the receiver for the rents
and income so collected, provided that, if the mortgagee or other person so
designated is derelict in collecting or accounting for such rents and income
or in the management of such real property, the receiver shall apply to the
Court for the removal of such designated mortgagee or other person upon
notice in writing to him and the Court, upon removing such designated
mortgage or other person, in its discretion, may designate another person
to collect the rents and income from such real property and manage the
same and account to the receiver for the rents and income of such real
property.
§ 159-12. Interference with City officers.
Where the Public Officer has assumed responsibility as custodian or the
Court, pursuant to this chapter, has designated a receiver, any interference
with or refusal to comply with the requests of such officers in the
performance of their duties shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
income from the property. The rents and income shall be collected by
such receiver and shall be expended and allotted as follows:
(1) To secure compliance with this chapter, this Code or any other
ordinance of the City and laws of the state as set forth in the order
of the Public Officer.
(2) To defray such costs and expenses of the receivership as may be
adjudged by the Superior Court.
(3) As payment to the City of any fines or penalties with costs which
may have been imposed on the owner, operator or lessor for such
violation and which have remained unpaid.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the procedure in respect
to any receivership provided by this chapter shall be as in the case of
receiverships to secure the payment of delinquent taxes, penalties,
interest, costs and expenses.
C. In any such receivership, no fees shall be allowed the receiver or his
counsel for acting as such receiver or counsel.
§ 159-10 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-12
C:892
ARTICLE IV
Inspections, Variances and Modifications Procedures
§ 159-13. Supplementary regulations: formulation and approval,
effect. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Public Officer is authorized to promulgate such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper interpretation and
administration of the provisions of this chapter, provided that such rules
and regulations do not conflict with this chapter but conform to the general
standards prescribed by this chapter. The Public Officer shall file copies
of such rules and regulations with the City Clerk, Health Officer, Director
of Public Works and Fire Chief and shall make available in the Public
Officer's office a copy for inspection by members of the public during
regular business hours. Such rules and regulations shall have the approval
of the Health Officer, Director of Public Works and Fire Chief, respectively,
where the provisions thereof relate to matters which are also in the
jurisdiction of and supervision of each officer. In case of conflict, the rule
or regulation may be promulgated by direction of the Mayor. Such rules
and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of
this chapter, and the violation thereof shall be enforced as violations of the
express provisions of this chapter.
§ 159-14. Annual review of provisions by officials. [Amended
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Public Officer shall, in the month of December of each year, review with
the Fire Chief, Health Officer, Director of Public Works, Housing Director
and Corporation Counsel the procedure and operation of this chapter and
report to the Mayor and City Council on or before January 1:
§ 159-15. Inspections: residential buildings and premises.
All residential buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject
to inspections from time to time by the enforcing officer of the City. At
the time of such inspections, all rooms in the building and all parts of
the premises shall be available and accessible for such inspections, and
the owner, operator and occupant are required to provide the necessary
A. Any recommended amendment, addition or modification of provisions
of this chapter consonant with the field experience of the personnel
charged with enforcement.
B. A summary of the enforcement experience, indicating number of
violations abated, number of cases processed in the Municipal Court,
number of inspections made and such other and further pertinent
information as will provide the Mayor and City Council with an annual
account of progress in securing the standards required by this chapter.
C. Any further recommendation as to how this chapter and the procedure
and operations thereunder can be improved.
§ 159-13 CHARTER § 159-15
C:893
arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such inspections shall be made
between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. unless one of the following conditions
exists:
§ 159-16. Inspections: nonresidential buildings and premises.
All nonresidential buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject
to inspection from time to time by the enforcing officer. At the time of
such inspections, all rooms and parts of the premises shall be available and
accessible for such inspections, and the owner and operator are required
to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such
inspections shall be made during regular open hours of the business
occupying the premises unless there is reason to believe a violation exists
of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring
inspection and abatement without delay.
§ 159-17. Inspectors: identification and conduct.
Inspectors shall be supplied with official identification and, upon request,
shall exhibit such identification when entering any dwelling unit, rooming
unit or any part of any premises subject to this chapter. Inspectors shall
conduct themselves so as to avoid intentional embarrassment or
inconvenience to occupants.
§ 159-18. Refusal of entry for inspection; use of search warrants.
A. The premises are not available during such hours for inspections.
B. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can only be apprehended and proven by inspections during other
than the prescribed hours or which require immediate inspection after
being reported, such as failure to supply heat.
C. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an
immediate threat to health or safety, requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
A. Where the Public Officer or his agent is refused entry or access or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator
from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties hereunder.
B. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the Public
Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an
immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall only
take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition.
C. The Public Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the City for a search warrant, setting forth factually
the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis
§ 159-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-18
C:894
§ 159-19. Warrants to conduct area inspection.
In addition to the provisions of § 159-18, the Public Officer may, upon
affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City for a search
warrant to conduct an area inspection as that term is defined in § 159-1B.
§ 159-20. Modifications or variances.
for believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter may exist on
the premises, including one or more of the following:
(1) The premises require inspection according to the cycle established
by the City for periodic inspections of premises of the type
involved.
(2) Observation of the external condition of the premises and its public
areas has resulted in the belief that violations of this chapter exist.
(3) Circumstances such as age of building, type of building, particular
use of premises or other factor render systematic inspections of
such building necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
D. If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in such affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a
search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. Warrant for
access may be issued by the Judge of the Municipal Court upon affidavit
of the Public Officer establishing grounds therefor pursuant to
§ 159-40.
A. The Public Officer shall have the power to withhold strict enforcement
of the requirements of this chapter upon written application therefor by
an owner, operator or occupant, after making determination that:
(1) Any variation or modification of structure or use approved by the
Public Officer will not in any material way alter the standards of
this chapter and cannot affect detrimentally the health or safety of
occupants of the premises or the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or owners of adjacent premises or of the neighborhood.
(2) Strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, operator or occupant because it would
compel expenditures on the premises which would be substantially
disproportionate to any benefit to health, safety or welfare that
might be derived therefrom.
(3) The owner, operator or occupant is without any practical or feasible
means to comply with the strict provisions of this chapter.
(4) The strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
require the installation of repairs and improvements estimated to
exceed $300 in cost, and the premises subject to this chapter are
§ 159-18 CHARTER § 159-20
C:895
§ 159-21. Record of modifications and variances.
Where variations or modifications of any section of this chapter are
approved by the Public Officer or by action of any court, a written record
thereof, stating the name of the applicant, the address of the premises,
the variation or modification approved, date of approval and the reasons
therefor satisfying the provisions contained in this section, shall be
prepared by the Public Officer and filed both under the section or sections
of this chapter to which the variation or modification applies and under
the address of the premises, and such files shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Public Officer during regular business hours.
§ 159-22. (Reserved)208
§ 159-23. (Reserved)209
contemplated for acquisition or are within an area where
acquisition is contemplated by a public agency having the power
of eminent domain and there is a reasonable likelihood that such
premises will be acquired within a period of two years, provided
that any waiver of the provisions of this chapter shall be canceled,
and the Public Officer shall strictly enforce this chapter if it shall
be ascertained subsequent to the granting of the waiver that the
premises are in fact not to be acquired for any public use or
purpose.
(5) Strict compliance with this chapter would require substantial
structural changes to the premises.
(6) The nonconformity is of a technical and insubstantial character or
there is an alternative means, satisfactory to the Public Officer, to
be used which will eliminate violations of this chapter constituting
hazards to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the
premises and persons in the immediate vicinity thereof.
B. Upon denial of any such application, the owner, operator or occupant
may request a hearing, which shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of § 159-28.
C. Such application shall not constitute a defense of any violation of this
chapter concerning which any proceedings are pending in the
Municipal Court when the application is filed, nor shall any variance or
modification allowed under this section constitute a vested right
against any ordinance enacted by the City Council compelling strict
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.
208. Editor's Note: Former § 159-22, Inspections and status reports on request; applications,
was repealed 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004.
209. Editor's Note: Former § 159-23, Scope and effect on inspection and status reports, was
repealed 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004.
§ 159-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-24
C:896
§ 159-24. (Reserved)210
210. Editor's Note: Former § 159-24, Fees for inspection, was repealed 4-26-2004 by Ord. No.
10-2004.
§ 159-24 CHARTER § 159-24
C:897

ARTICLE V
Violations; Notices and Abatement; Certificates
§ 159-25. Notice of violation required.
Except as provided in § 159-30, where a violation of this chapter or the
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter is found to exist, a written
notice from the Public Officer shall be served on the person responsible for
the correction thereof.
§ 159-26. Contents of notice.
The notice of violation required by § 159-25 shall specify the violation or
violations committed; the work required to be done to correct same; a
reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, to correct or abate the
violation; the right of the person served to request a hearing; and that the
notice shall become an order of the Public Officer in 10 days after service
unless a hearing is requested pursuant to § 159-28.
§ 159-27. Service of notice.
§ 159-28. Notice of violation to become order unless hearing
requested. [Amended 12-14-1970 by Ord. No. 64A-1970]
Within 10 days of the date of service of a notice required by § 159-25, the
notice shall constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice
requests a hearing thereon and serves a written request within the ten-day
period in person or by mail on the Public Officer. Such request for a hearing
shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request for a
hearing is based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation
which are to be disputed at the hearing. The Public Officer, upon receipt of
A. Notice required by § 159-25 shall be posted in a conspicuous location in
or on any structure or premises in violation of regulations of this
chapter, whether residential or commercial, such notice to state where
and under what conditions a copy of the notice may be obtained.
Simultaneously with posting, the notice shall be mailed to the
responsible person, firm or corporation at the last known address of
principal place of business or to the agent appointed by such person,
firm or corporation pursuant to these regulations.
B. Service may also be effected in person upon the individual owner,
operator, occupant or agent or upon a member of the family over the
age of 14.
C. Where service is by mail, the date of service shall be determined as
being on the day following the day of mailing to addresses within the
City and as on the fourth day after the day of mailing to addresses
outside the City. Where the service would fall upon a Sunday or other
day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the day of service shall
be as of the next regular delivery day.
§ 159-25 CHARTER § 159-28
C:899
the request, shall, within 30 days therefrom and upon five days' notice to
the party aggrieved, set the matter down for hearing.
§ 159-29. Hearing.
At any hearing provided pursuant to § 159-28, the Public Officer shall be
vested with all the powers provided by law to compel the attendance of
witnesses and parties in interest by issuance and service of subpoena, to
require by subpoena the production of books, records or other documents
at any such hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be determined
by him, and to enforce any such subpoena or secure any order for the
enforcement of any such subpoena as provided by law. Determination shall
be made within 10 days from the completion of the hearing. The Public
Officer shall issue an order either incorporating the determinations and
directions contained in the notice, modifying the same or withdrawing the
notice.
§ 159-30. Notice and hearing not required under certain
circumstances.
A. Notwithstanding the requirements of §§ 159-25 to 159-29, violations of
the following sections may be prosecuted without notice by the filing of
a complaint by the Public Officer in the Municipal Court: §§ 159-18,
159-40, 159-45, 159-50, 159-55, 159-56, 159-57, 159-62D, 159-63,
159-64, 159-65, 159-67, 159-69, 159-70, 159-71, 159-72, 159-79,
159-82A and B, 159-86, 159-87, 159-91, 159-95, 159-101, 159-102,
159-103, 159-105, 159-114, 159-117 to 159-122, 159-125, 159-129,
159-137, 159-138, 159-150, 159-154, 159-162 and 159-203A.
[Amended 5-27-1958 by Ord. No. 31-1968; 11-25-1974 by Ord.
No. 61-1974; 4-12-1976 by Ord. No. 15-1976; 4-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 10-2004211]
B. No notice shall be required on the enforcement of § 159-62D as to the
removal of accumulated snow or ice from paths, walks, driveways,
parking lots and parking areas used by pedestrians and automobiles
where such snow or ice remains uncleared within four hours of daylight
after termination of the snowfall on commercial properties and eight
hours of daylight after the termination of the snowfall on residential
properties.212
C. Where the Public Officer, after hearing, shall determine that there was
a violation, and a notice was served upon the owner, operator or
occupant, whether or not the violation was abated prior to the issuance
of an order, if thereafter within the space of one year there shall be a
second violation by the same owner, operator or occupant of the same
provision of this chapter discovered on the same premises, the offender
may be prosecuted on the second violation without the Public Officer
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-28 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-30
C:900
§ 159-31. Extension of time for compliance.
The Public Officer may extend the time for correction or abatement of the
violations of this chapter for an additional period of time not to exceed 30
days, except where major capital improvements or renovations are involved;
in which instance the time for completion may be extended for a period not
to exceed 90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice.
§ 159-32. Summary abatement under certain conditions. [Amended
11-12-1968 by Ord. No. 58-1968]
§ 159-33. Abatement by City; cost.
Where abatement of any nuisance as defined in this chapter, correction
of a defect in the premises or bringing the premises into compliance with
the requirements of this Code or any municipal ordinance or state law
applicable thereto requires expending City funds therefor, the Public Officer
shall present a report of work proposed to be done to accomplish the
foregoing to the City Council with an estimate of the cost thereof, along with
first giving notice and opportunity for a hearing to the owner, operator
or occupant by the filing of a complaint by the Public Officer in the
Municipal Court. Where the Public Officer has on two different
occasions found violations by the same owner, operator or occupant
on the same premises and has issued notices on each and has held at
least one hearing and issued an order thereon, upon discovering a third
or subsequent violation by the same owner, operator or occupant on
the same premises within the space of one year, whether of the same
sections or of any other sections of this chapter, he may thereupon
prosecute the offender by filing a complaint in the Municipal Court for
the third or subsequent violation occurring within the period of one
year without first providing notice and opportunity for a hearing by the
Public Officer. [Amended 5-27-1968 by Ord. No. 31-1968]
A. Where the violation or condition existing on the premises under this
chapter is of such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life
and limb unless abated without delay, the Public Officer may either
abate the violation or condition immediately or order the owner,
operator or occupant to correct the violation or condition within a
period of time not to exceed three days, and upon failure to do so, the
Public Officer shall abate the condition immediately thereafter.
B. The Public Officer shall submit to the City Council a report of the work
done and expenses incurred to abate such condition, and the City
Council may thereupon, by resolution, approve the expenses and costs
therefor, whereupon the same shall become a lien against the premises,
collectible as provided by law. Copy of such resolution shall be certified
by the City Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the City, who shall
be responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of such report and
resolution shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of the premises.
§ 159-30 CHARTER § 159-33
C:901
a summary of the proceedings undertaken by the Public Officer to secure
compliance, including notices served upon the owners, operators, lessors or
agents, as the case may be, hearings and orders of the Public Officer with
reference thereto. The City Council may thereupon by resolution authorize
the abatement of the nuisance, correction of the defect or work necessary
to place the premises in proper condition and in compliance with the Code
or any ordinances of the City and laws of the state. The Public Officer
may thereafter proceed to have the work performed in accordance with
the resolution at City expense, not to exceed the amount specified in the
resolution, and shall, upon completion thereof, submit a report of the funds
expended and costs to the City Council. After review of the same, the City
Council may approve the expenses and costs, whereupon the same shall
become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy
of the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by
the City Council and filed with the Tax Collector of the City, who shall
be responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of this report and
resolution shall be sent by certified mail to the owner.
§ 159-34. Violations of other regulations.
Any violation of this Code or any other ordinance other than this chapter
discovered by a housing inspector shall be reported to the Public Officer,
who shall refer the alleged violation to the official agency responsible for
the enforcement of such other ordinance.
§ 159-35. Eviction of unlawful occupants.
Where there exists a violation of occupancy standards under this chapter,
an owner or operator, upon receipt of a notice of violation, if unable to
eliminate the violation by peaceable means within the period of time
specified in such notice, shall commence within such period legal action
to dispossess, evict or eject the occupants who cause the violation. No
further action shall then be taken against the owner or operator so long
as the action under this section is pending in the Court and is prosecuted
expeditiously and in good faith.
§ 159-36. Effect of notice of violation on owner.
For the purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the service of a notice on
an owner, whether or not the owner is also the operator, shall constitute
notice of violations set forth therein until such violations are abated in
conformity with this chapter, this Code and other applicable ordinances of
the City.
§ 159-37. Certificate of necessity for access to adjoining premises;
application.
Where any owner, operator or occupant is required to make repairs or
otherwise improve his property and is unable to comply with this chapter
without having right of access to the building or premises through or across
§ 159-33 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-37
C:902
adjoining premises not owned by him or under his control, and where right
of access has been refused the owner, operator or occupant, or where the
owner or person responsible for granting permission cannot be found or
located, then, upon the filing of affidavit setting forth the facts with the
Public Officer, the Public Officer shall serve a five-day written notice of a
hearing in accordance with the provisions for service contained in § 159-27
upon the owner, operator or occupant of any adjoining premises affected by
the application.
§ 159-38. Hearing on application for certificate of necessity.
On the day fixed for hearing on an application pursuant to § 159-37, the
Public Officer shall provide opportunity for the owner, operator or occupant
of the adjoining property or properties to state why access should not be
granted across the adjoining properties.
§ 159-39. Issuance of certificates; conditions; bond requirement.
If the Public Officer determines that access is necessary to accomplish
or complete repairs or improvements necessary for compliance with this
chapter, then the Public Officer shall issue a certificate of necessity, setting
forth therein the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply,
such conditions as shall be necessary to protect the adjoining property,
reasonable time limits during which such certificate shall operate,
precautions to be taken to avoid damage and, where the Public Officer
deems proper, that a bond be procured at the expense of any of the persons
seeking access to secure the adjoining property against damage to persons
or property arising out of such rights of access. The bond shall not exceed
in amount $10,000, and the amount set shall take into consideration the
extent, nature and duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvement
on the premises affected and potential risk of damage thereto. The bond
shall be filed with the Public Officer.
§ 159-40. Refusal to allow access.
Any refusal to comply with §§ 159-37 to 159-39 or any interference with
access to premises pursuant to a certificate issued under § 159-39 shall be
a violation of this chapter, and in addition to penalties provided for violation
of this chapter, the Public Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge for
a warrant under the procedure set forth in § 159-18, authorizing access to
the premises under appropriate conditions and circumstances as provided
under § 159-39.
§ 159-41. Each violation separate; continuing violations. [Amended
3-23-1987 by Ord. No. 5-1987]
Each violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation, independent of any other provision. Each day's failure
to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate
violation, provided that a summons is issued for each occurrence thereof.
§ 159-37 CHARTER § 159-42
C:903
§ 159-42. Where violator is not natural person.
Where a defendant charged with a violation of this chapter is other than a
natural person, any agent, superintendent, officer, member or partner who
shall, alone or with others, have charge, care or control of the premises
shall be liable for any penalty imposed upon conviction for such violation.
§ 159-43. Fine imposed to be lien. [Amended 11-10-1969 by Ord.
No. 39A-1969]
In the event of the imposition of a fine or penalty by the Municipal Court
or any other court of competent jurisdiction against the owner, operator
or lessor of any building or structure in the City required to be registered
pursuant to § 159-55 for violation of this chapter, this Code or any other city
ordinance or state law applicable to the City, the fine or penalty shall be
collectible as a lien against the premises and, in addition thereto, shall be
collectible pursuant to the procedures for appointment of a receiver as set
forth in § 159-10 in addition to any other remedies now provided by law.
§ 159-44. Fines and penalties for violations of general housing and
property maintenance standards.213 [Added 3-23-1987 by Ord. No.
5-1987; amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004; 8-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 24-2004; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 24-2006214]
Upon conviction of any provision of this chapter, the Court shall impose a
minimum fine of not less than $250 or a maximum fine not to exceed $2,000
for each offense, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or a
period of community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof. If a fine greater than $1,250 is imposed, the property owner shall
be afforded a thirty-day period in which to cure or abate the violation
and afforded a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an
independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the
expiration of said thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be
imposed if a court determines that the owner remains in violation or, upon
reinspection of the property, it is determined that the abatement has not
been substantially completed.
§ 159-45. Certificate of habitability required. [Amended 4-12-1971
by Ord. No. 15-1971; 11-25-1974 by Ord. No. 61-1974; 11-9-1981 by
Ord. No. 26-1981]
It shall henceforth be unlawful for any property owner, landlord or tenant to
rent, lease or in any way deliver up for occupancy any building, premises,
apartment or any other dwelling unit until a certificate of habitability to
the effect that said building, premises, apartment or any other dwelling
unit conforms to the provisions of this chapter shall have been issued by
the Public Officer or his designee. In such case, it shall be the duty of
213. Editor's Note: Former § 159-44, Certain fines payable without court appearance, as
amended, was repealed 1-23-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984.
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-42 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-45
C:904
the Public Officer or his designee to issue a certificate of habitability upon
inspection and approval by a housing inspector within 15 days after a
written request for such certificate shall have been filed with the Public
Officer by a property owner, landlord or tenant of a building, premises,
apartment or any other dwelling unit. Such certificate of habitability shall
be effective for a period of time that the premises again becomes occupied
and for as long as occupancy remains unchanged. If no inspection has been
made within 15 days after a written request for same, then a temporary
certificate of habitability shall be deemed to have been issued.
§ 159-46. Fee for certificate of habitability. 215 [Amended 4-12-1971
by Ord. No. 15-1971; 11-25-1974 by Ord. No. 61-1974]
§ 159-47. (Reserved)216
§ 159-48. (Reserved)217
§ 159-49. Certificates of habitability: contents, required signatures,
failure to obtain. [Added 11-25-1974 by Ord. No. 61-1974]
A. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of habitability shall be $100,
except in the case of new developments and substantially rehabilitated
units of 10 or more, for which the fee for issuance of a certificate of
habitability shall be $75. The first reinspection shall be no charge. The
fee for the second and subsequent reinspections shall be $75.
[Amended 2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 7-1983; 6-10-1987 by Ord. No.
18-1987; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 16-1992; 11-8-1993 by Ord. No.
10-1993; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999; 5-12-2014 by Ord. No.
6-2014]
B. The Housing Authority of the City of East Orange shall be exempted
from the requirements of this section, provided that the Public Officer,
in his discretion, finds said fee to create an unreasonable hardship on
said Housing Authority. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
repeal, supersede or prevent the Housing Authority of the City of East
Orange from complying with the regulations as prescribed in § 159-45
of this chapter, as amended and supplemented. [Added 10-10-1978 by
Ord. No. 33-1978]
A. Certificates of habitability and temporary certificates of habitability
issued pursuant to §§ 159-45 and 159-47 of this chapter shall contain
the maximum number of persons by which the dwelling unit involved
may be occupied under §§ 159-133 through 159-145 of this chapter.
215. Editor's Note: As to fees generally, see Ch. 170, Licenses and Fees.
216. Editor’s Note: Former § 159-47, Temporary certificate of habitability, as amended, was
repealed 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018.
217. Editor's Note: Former § 159-48, Fee for temporary certificate of habitability, as amended,
was repealed 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 16-1992 and 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 10-1993.
§ 159-45 CHARTER § 159-49
C:905
§ 159-50. Certificates of conformity; temporary certificates;
applications; inspections; insurance. [Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No.
36-1972; amended 5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 16-1987]
B. The owner of the premises for which a certificate of habitability is
issued, or his authorized representative, must sign said certificate of
habitability or temporary certificate of habitability.
C. Upon the renting of the premises involved, the owner or his authorized
representative shall have a copy of the certificate of habitability signed
by the tenant, give a copy of the certificate of habitability or temporary
certificate of habitability to the tenant and return a signed copy to the
Public Officer. An owner or his authorized agent may not rent, offer to
rent or offer to permit occupancy of any premises without obtaining the
required signature. The tenant's failure to sign the certificate of
habitability or temporary certificate of habitability shall be prima facie
evidence of violation of this article by the tenant, and the tenant shall be
subject to all penalties herein. [Amended 9-8-1975 by Ord. No.
60-1975]
D. If the provisions of this section are not met and the City of East Orange
is subsequently required to relocate the tenants of the dwelling unit
involved, the owner or the tenant, or both, shall be liable for all costs of
relocation and shall further be liable for any payments the City of East
Orange may be required to make to the relocated tenant under the
applicable laws of the United States of America or the State of New
Jersey.
A. It shall henceforth be unlawful for any owner and/or prospective
purchaser of real property to sell, convey, deliver or transfer and for any
purchaser to purchase, take title or possession of any building,
premises or unoccupied/vacant lot until a certificate of conformity has
been issued to the effect that said building or premises or unoccupied/
vacant lot complies with and conforms to the provisions of this chapter
by the Public Officer or his designee. The certificate of conformity shall
be issued after proper application has been executed and filed by the
owner and/or the purchaser, as required, and after inspection and
approval by a housing inspector designated by the Public Officer.
[Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004]
B. The Public Officer shall cause an inspection to be made within 15 days
after the request for the same has been made to the Public Officer. If
upon inspection/reinspection of the building, premises or unoccupied/
vacant lot it shall be determined that no evidence of any violation of this
chapter exists, the Public Officer or his designee shall, within 15 days
after the inspection/reinspection has been completed, cause to be
issued a certificate of conformity, stating that said building, premises or
unoccupied/vacant lot conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004]
§ 159-49 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-50
C:906
§ 159-51. Exemptions. [Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 36-1972;
amended 5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 16-1987; 10-10-2000 by Ord. No.
18-2000; 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004]
The following transfers, conveyances or deliveries of any building, premises
or unoccupied/vacant lot are hereby exempt from the requirement of an
application for certificate of conformity:
C. In the event that the agreement of sale, conveyance or transfer of
possession provides for or contemplates an as-is conveyance or
transfer, then a copy of said agreement shall be attached to the
application, which application must be signed by both the seller,
grantor or transferor and the purchaser, grantee or transferee. The
Public Officer shall cause an inspection/reinspection to be made within
15 days after the request for the same has been made to the Public
Officer. If the inspection/reinspection of the building or premises or
unoccupied vacant lot reveals violations of this Code or of applicable
City ordinances, and such violations will not be repaired or corrected
before title closing or transfer of possession, then the Public Officer or
his designee may issue a nonrenewable temporary certificate of
conformity, which certificate will be valid for a period not in excess of
six months from the date of conveyance or transfer of possession. The
written request must acknowledge the existing Code violations and the
obligation to correct or abate such violations in order to obtain a
certificate of conformity prior to the expiration of the temporary
certificate of conformity. No additional certificates of conformity will be
issued until all violations from the original inspection notice have been
abated. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004; 2-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 3-2018]
D. The responsibility and/or liability for obtaining the certificate of
conformity is both with the property owner and/or prospective
purchaser. The fact that one or both have abrogated the responsibility
hereinabove shall not diminish the liability of either one or the other to
the exclusion and/or inclusion of the other.
A. Wherever a transfer, conveyance or delivery of building, premises or
unoccupied/vacant lot is made between immediate members of a family,
including but not limited to husband and wife, and, in the case of a
building or premises, same contains less than four dwelling units.
B. Whenever premises are purchased specifically for the building thereon
to be demolished, then, in that event, said intention shall be given to the
Public Officer in writing, and the necessary demolition permit shall be
obtained from the applicable department in the City of East Orange.
This demolition must take place within 90 days of the date requested. If
demolition has not taken place within the 90 days, a certificate of
conformity must be applied for, with the necessary fee. [Amended
2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
§ 159-50 CHARTER § 159-51
C:907
§ 159-52. Fee for inspections. [Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No.
36-1972; amended 2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 7-1983; 6-10-1987 by Ord.
No. 18-1987; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 16-1992; 11-8-1993 by Ord. No.
10-1993; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999; 4-26-2004 by Ord. No.
11-2004]
C. Transfer or delivery of building, premises or unoccupied/vacant lot by
reason of probate proceedings. This shall be exempted only if the
grantee is an heir or beneficiary under a probated last will and
testament.
D. City-owned property.
A. Fees for inspections/reinspection for certificates of conformity required
by § 159-50 of the Code of the City of East Orange, notwithstanding
§ 159-44 as may be applicable, shall be as follows: [Amended
5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 6-2014]
Type Fee
Residential properties
Unoccupied/vacant lots $100
1- and 2-dwelling units $200
3 multiple-dwelling units $325
4 to 5 multiple-dwelling units $450
6 to 10 multiple-dwelling units $500
11 to 15 multiple-dwelling units $600
16 to 20 multiple-dwelling units $1,000
21 to 30 multiple-dwelling units $1,200
31 to 40 multiple-dwelling units $1,400
41 to 50 multiple-dwelling units $1,600
51 to 60 multiple-dwelling units $1,800
61 and more multiple-dwelling units $2,000
First reinspection No charge
Second reinspection $75
Third and subsequent reinspections $125
Commercial properties
1 to 1,000 square feet $100
1,001 to 2,000 square feet $150
2,001 to 3,000 square feet $175
3,001 to 4,000 square feet $200
4,001 to 5,000 square feet $225
§ 159-51 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-52
C:908
§ 159-53. (Reserved)219
§ 159-54. Judicial sales. [Added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 36-1972;
amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to judicial sales, except that,
after a title has been taken by the purchaser from such judicial offer,
then the purchaser shall make application for a certificate of conformity in
accordance with the provisions herein within 30 days.
The following formula will be used to determine the inspection fee for
any structures over 5,000 square feet:
Sample: 23,000 square feet
Fee: 4 x 5,000 square feet = $900
1 x 3,000 square feet = $175
Total = $1,075
B. Fees for inspections/reinspection for decontrol required by § 218-27 of
the Code of the City of East Orange218 shall be as follows:
Type Fee
First inspection/reinspection $125
First reinspection No charge
Second and subsequent reinspections $75
218. Editor's Note: See Ch. 218, Rent Control and Conversions.
219. Editor's Note: Former § 159-3, Conveyance of certificated premises: additional inspection/
reinspection, new certificates, added 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 36-1972, as amended, was
repealed 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015.
§ 159-52 CHARTER § 159-54
C:909

ARTICLE VI
Buildings Containing Five or More Dwelling Units
§ 159-55. Registration of building. [Amended 9-14-1970 by Ord. No.
43-1970]
By June 1 of each year and within two weeks of any change in owner,
registered agent, responsible individual, operator or superintendent, the
owner, operator and lessor of any premises within the City occupied by
five or more dwelling units shall, upon a form provided therefor by the
Public Officer and available at his office, register the premises, designating
thereon the name and address of the owner, the name and address of any
lessor or operator other than the owner, the name and address of any
agent in charge of the premises residing in the City who may be the owner,
operator or lessor and, if a corporation or company, the name and address of
the registered agent or responsible individual of the company, provided that
establishments subject to licensing which have secured licenses pursuant to
§§ 159-162 to 159-201 are exempted from the requirements of this section.
§ 159-56. Building directory.
§ 159-57. Designation of owner and superintendent; numbering of
units.
A. Except as hereinafter provided:
(1) There shall be posted in the vestibule, hallway or other prominent
place, at or near all public entrances of any building containing five
or more dwelling units, a directory designating each dwelling unit
by number or letter and setting forth the last name of the tenant
currently occupying each dwelling unit.
(2) On all premises containing five or more dwelling units in two or
more separate buildings containing common areas and operated as
a unit, a directory as described in Subsection A(1) of this section
shall be posted adjacent to each public sidewalk into the premises,
provided that no more than three such directories shall be
required. Each directory shall be accompanied by a diagrammatic
representation of the premises showing the location of the various
buildings thereon, their designated numbers or letters and the
designated numbers or letters of dwelling units therein. Each
building shall be designated with its respective number or letter at
a location thereon clearly visible from the walkway or sidewalk
adjacent thereto.
B. Directories as described in Subsection A(1) and (2) herein shall be
installed or enclosed beneath some protective covering of a substantial
nature to prevent removal of same. [Added 9-25-1972 by Ord. No.
37A-1972; amended 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 24-2014]
§ 159-55 CHARTER § 159-57
C:911
A. There shall be posted adjacent to or near the directory required by
§ 159-56 the name, address and telephone number of the owner or
agent in charge of the premises and, where required by § 159-86, the
name, address, apartment number and telephone number of the
superintendent. [Amended 12-14-1970 by Ord. No. 64A-1970]
B. There shall be affixed to the front entrance of each dwelling unit, plainly
visible from the common hallway or areaway, the number or letter
which corresponds to that set forth in the directory required by
§ 159-56.
§ 159-57 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-57
C:912
ARTICLE VII
Responsibilities of Owners, Operators and Occupants
§ 159-58. Duties of owners and operators generally.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in §§ 159-62 to 159-144 and the regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such
duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of
violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible
therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 159-59. Duties of occupants generally.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
§§ 159-147 to 159-161 and all the regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, and the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and
responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation
thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or operator is also responsible
therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 159-60. Duties not affected by agreements or contracts.
Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand and
the occupant on the other shall not be altered or affected by any agreement
or contract by and between any of such persons or between them and other
parties.
§ 159-61. Nonresidential lease exception. [Added 3-13-1972 by Ord.
No. 11-1972]
Any tenant or occupant of a nonresidential premises who assumes through
a lease agreement any portion of the responsibilities assigned to the owner
and operator within § 159-62 of this chapter shall, for the duration of such
lease, be liable for such responsibilities as operator within § 159-58 hereof
and notwithstanding § 159-60; except, however, that the owner shall under
all circumstances continue to be responsible for the following:
A. Toilet facilities, including a commode and hand basin with hot and cold
running water. Said facilities shall be adequate in number and within
the leased portion of the building or within its reasonably located
common areas.
B. Proper hookup to City sewer system.
C. Electrical power hookup, including safe wiring, with operating fixtures
and outlets.
D. Keeping the interior free of leaks originating from the exterior or from
outside of the confines of the leased portion of the building.
§ 159-58 CHARTER § 159-61
C:913
E. A safe and adequate heating system and the provision of heat as
required in § 159-117 of this chapter.
F. Egress facilities meeting the minimal standards required within the
provisions of Chapter 125, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 159-61 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-61
C:914
Part 2
Duties And Responsibilities Of Owners And Operators
ARTICLE VIII
General Maintenance and Appearance
§ 159-62. Maintenance of exterior of premises.
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of
all nuisances and of any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises and free of insanitary conditions, and
any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or
operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises
free of hazards, which include but are not limited to the following:
A. Refuse. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of brush, weeds,
broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash,
refuse and debris. The exterior of all premises shall also be kept free of
all abandoned, unroadworthy or unregistered vehicles. [Amended
4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004]
B. Natural growth. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of all
dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage
constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be
kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions. All brush, hedges
and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within
20 feet of highways shall be cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet.
In addition, the exterior of all premises shall be maintained free from
weeds in excess of 10 inches (254 mm) in height, and all noxious weeds
shall be prohibited therefrom. For purposes of this section, "weeds"
means grasses, annual plants and vegetation, provided that this
definition shall not include trees, shrubs or cultivated flowers and
gardens. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004]
C. Overhangings. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of loose
and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow which by
reason of location above ground level constitute a danger of falling on
persons in the vicinity thereof. Natural growth of any type of plant life
which encroaches upon an adjoining property can be cut or pruned by
the owner of the adjoining property or by such owner's agent or
representative to the extent that such growth encroaches upon the
adjoining property. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004]
D. Ground surface hazards or insanitary conditions. The exterior of all
premises shall be kept free of holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, icy conditions, uncleared snow and excretion of pets and
other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking
areas and other parts of the premises which are accessible to and used
by persons on the premises. All such holes and excavations shall be
§ 159-62 CHARTER § 159-62
C:915
filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions
removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or insanitary conditions
with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. Without notice, the
Public Officer may require the immediate removal of accumulated snow
or ice from paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas
where such snow or ice remains uncleared more than four hours of
daylight after the termination of snowfall on commercial properties and
eight hours of daylight after the termination of the snowfall or other
precipitation on residential properties.
Removal and placement of snow or ice. The owner or occupant, or any
employee or contractor of such owner or occupant engaged to remove
snow or ice, shall not shovel, blow or plow or otherwise place snow
or ice in the street within the City or on another property owner's
property. If snow or ice is placed in the street within the City and/or on
another property owner's property, the party responsible for placement
of snow or ice shall remove the snow or ice, and said party may be
deemed in violation of this section. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No.
9-2004; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
E. Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains shall
be provided and maintained in accordance with Chapter 226, Sewers
and Sewage Disposal, of this Code to eliminate any such recurrent or
excessive accumulation of stormwater.
F. Sources of infestation. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of
sources of infestation.
G. Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound,
free from defects and damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads
safely.
H. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and all
flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally
sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all
times the functions for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas
vents or other draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft
to develop the rated output of the connected equipment and shall be
structurally safe, durable, smoketight and capable of withstanding the
action of flue gases.
I. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes. Exterior
porches, landings, balconies, stairs of three risers or more, and fire
escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed
and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be
kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects.
[Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004]
§ 159-62 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-63
C:916
§ 159-63. Securing vacant lots and untenanted buildings. [Added
9-25-1972 by Ord. No. 37A-1972; amended 10-14-2014 by Ord. No.
24-2014]
Vacant lots or lots containing untenanted buildings shall be kept free of
brush, weeds, broken glass, tree stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash, refuse, debris and abandoned vehicles. The owner or
operator of said lot shall erect and maintain around the perimeter of said
lot a chain-link, picket or stockade fence of a height no less than 42 inches
nor more than 54 inches, or a barricade with steel beams of a height of
approximately 36 inches extending approximately 48 inches below ground.
The fence or barrier shall not be equipped with or contain barbed wire,
spikes or any similar device. For all vacant properties, it shall also be the
duty of the owner or operator to close all windows, doors and any other
openings with plywood or by other suitable means so that access into the
building is prevented.
§ 159-64. Residential areas: appearance of exterior of premises and
structures.
The exterior of the premises, the exterior of dwelling structures and the
condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the
appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of
maintenance in keeping with the residential standards of the neighborhood
or such higher standards as may be adopted as part of a plan of urban
renewal by the City and such that the appearance of the premises and
structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property
owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration of the
neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values,
including the following:
A. Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be
stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or other
public areas, equipment and materials relating to commercial or
industrial uses unless permitted under Chapter 51, Land Use, for the
premises.
B. Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and
bushes shall be kept trimmed and from becoming overgrown and
unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same constitute
a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property and impairing the
good residential character of the neighborhood.
C. Signs. All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair, and printed
matter, pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be completely
maintained or, when no longer in use, completely removed.
D. Reconstruction of walls and sidings. All reconstruction of walls and
sidings shall be of standard quality and appearance commensurate with
the residential character of the properties in the same block and on
§ 159-63 CHARTER § 159-64
C:917
§ 159-65. Nonresidential areas: appearance of exterior of premises
and structures.
The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures shall
be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings
thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards
of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be adopted as part
of a plan of urban renewal by the City and such that the appearance of the
premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining
property owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration
and downgrading of the neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of
property values, including the following:
both sides of the street on which the premises front, such that the
materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance under
prevailing appraisal practices and standards will depreciate the values
of neighboring and adjoining premises.
E. General maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, shall be maintained in good repair and all
surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed where necessary
for purposes of preservation and appearance. The same shall be
maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or
brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the end that the property
itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and
adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting
influences.
F. Front yard parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle, or permit or suffer the same to be done, in any front yard area
of premises occupied by a dwelling or hotel, except on driveways and
parking areas constructed and installed in compliance with this chapter
and other applicable City ordinances and not less than three feet from
the interior front sidewalk line adjacent to such premises.
A. Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and
bushes shall be kept trimmed and free from becoming overgrown and
unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same constitute
a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property.
B. Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view, permitted by reason of other regulations as a lawful
nonconforming use, shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which
have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has
excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith or put into a good state of repair. All nonoperative or
broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith.
§ 159-64 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-65
C:918
§ 159-66. Residential areas: exterior structural soundness and
general maintenance.
Every dwelling and accessory structure and every part thereof shall be kept
structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety, health or fire
hazards, including:
C. Windows. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and
free of marks or foreign substances, except when necessary in the
course of changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or inventory
shall be permitted in window display areas ordinarily exposed to public
view unless such areas are first screened from the public view by
drapes, venetian blinds or other permanent rendering of the windows
opaque to the public view. All screening of interiors shall be maintained
in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state of repair.
D. Storefronts. All storefronts shall be kept in good repair, painted, where
required, and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the
event that repairs to a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall
be made with the same or similar materials as used in the construction
of the storefront and in such a manner as to permanently repair the
damaged area or areas. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be
kept painted, where required, and in good repair.
E. Signs or advertisements. Except for "for rent" signs, any temporary sign
or other paper advertising material glued or otherwise attached to a
window or windows or otherwise exposed to public view shall be
removed at the expiration of the event or sale for which it is erected or
within 60 days after erection, whichever shall occur sooner. Except
during the course of repairs or alterations, the square footage of any
single window or single window display area which shall be devoted to
signs or other temporary advertising material attached to such window
or windows or otherwise exposed to public view shall be as stated in
§ 51-170D(3) of Chapter 51, Land Use, of the Code.220
F. Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not
constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event that such awnings
or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the
foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith. In the event that such awnings or marquees are
made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, such cloth or plastic where
exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition and shall
not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping,
tearing or other holes. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the
public domain.
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-65 CHARTER § 159-66
C:919
A. Exterior walls, sidings and roofs.
(1) Exterior walls, sidings and roofs shall be kept structurally sound, in
good repair and free from defects.
(2) The Public Officer may, upon determining that use or access to the
roof of any dwelling by the occupants thereof may result in danger
to life or limb by reason of the condition of the roof, lack of railings,
inadequate parapets, loose materials, condition of chimneys or
other circumstances which create hazards, direct the owner or
operator of the dwelling to lock or otherwise bar access to the roof
by occupants and others; provided, however, that the Public Officer
shall first obtain from the Fire Chief a determination that such
action will not block necessary fire escape routes for tenants or
access by the Fire Department in case of emergency to control fires
in the premises.
B. Painting and other protective coating. All exposed surfaces susceptible
to decay shall be kept at all times painted or otherwise provided with a
protective coating sufficient to prevent deterioration.
C. Weathertightness and watertightness. Every dwelling shall be so
maintained as to weathertight and watertight.
D. Exterior walls, roofs, etc. Exterior walls, roofs, windows, window
frames, doors, door frames, foundations and other parts of the
structure shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the
structure and to prevent excessive drafts. Damaged materials shall be
repaired or replaced promptly; places showing signs of rot, leakage,
deterioration or corrosion shall be restored and protected against
weathering and seepage.
E. Whenever the owner of any structure finds it necessary to replace
temporarily a window and to cover the space formerly occupied by the
same with plywood or other opaque material, and if the time required
for replacement of such window shall exceed seven days, then it shall
be the obligation of the owner to paint or have painted the plywood or
other opaque material with a durable paint of a color which shall blend
with or match the color of the walls surrounding such window. [Added
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 27-1980]
F. Whenever the owner of any structure eliminates permanently the use of
one or more windows of the structure, the owner shall not cover the
space formerly occupied by the window with plywood or other opaque
material, but instead shall fill said space by permanent construction so
that said space blends with the exterior walls adjacent thereto. [Added
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 27-1980]
G. For the purposes of Subsection F of this section, elimination of the use
of a window for a period exceeding 30 days shall be deemed to be
permanent elimination, unless substantial evidence to the contrary
shall be presented to and approved by the Construction Official of the
§ 159-66 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-66
C:920
§ 159-67. Nonresidential areas: exterior structural soundness and
general maintenance.
§ 159-68. Basements and cellars of residences.
Basements, cellar and crawl spaces of all residences are to be free of
moisture resulting from seepage, and cross-ventilation shall be required
where necessary to prevent accumulations of moisture and dampness.
§ 159-69. Freedom from infestation of residences.
All parts of the premises of residences shall be maintained so as to prevent
infestation.
§ 159-70. Screens for residences. [Amended 1-26-1976 by Ord. No.
4-1976]
City of East Orange. In the event that the Construction Official approves
the application of the owner for extended temporary elimination of the
windows, he shall be empowered to grant up to six thirty-day extensions
of time within which the requirements of Subsection F hereof need not
be met. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 27-1980]
H. The owner shall obtain a building permit from the Construction
Department for any construction performed in accordance with
Subsection F of this section. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
27-1980]
A. Painting, deterioration, etc. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, signs and storefronts, shall be maintained
in good repair, and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or
whitewashed where necessary for purposes of preservation and
appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other
condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the
end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards
eliminated and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected
from blighting influences.
B. All reconstruction of walls and sidings shall be of standard quality and
appearance commensurate with the character of the properties in the
same block and on both sides of the street on which the premises front,
such that the materials used will not be of a kind that by their
appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and standards will
depreciate the values of neighboring and adjoining premises.
A. Properly fitting screens in good repair shall be supplied by the owner
for each exterior door and window of each dwelling unit and shall be
installed from May 1 to October 1 of each year.
§ 159-66 CHARTER § 159-70
C:921
§ 159-71. Sanitation and safety of dwellings.
All parts of any dwelling shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free
of nuisance and free from health, safety and fire hazards.
§ 159-72. Freedom of residences from accumulations and
obstructions.221
No accumulation or obstruction from garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be
permitted on common stairways, areaways, balconies, porches, hallways,
basements or cellars of residences; except that garbage stored in proper
containers may be set out for removal pursuant to § 159-86.
§ 159-73. Floors, interior walls and ceilings generally.
Floors, interior walls and ceilings of every structure shall be structurally
sound and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 159-74. Structural soundness of floors.
Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound when capable of safely
bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at all times in a condition so
as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other hazards.
§ 159-75. Bathroom, kitchen, washroom and water closet
compartment floors.
B. Screens must be removable and operable and shall have a mesh of not
less than No. 16. They shall be of a noncollapsible type, constructed of
rustproof material and be installed in such a manner as to discourage
operation or removal by infants by containing therein lock devices to be
approved by the City officer. With the exception of screen inserts which
are an integrated component of combination storm windows, all
screens must cover both upper and lower sash. Screens shall not be
required in rooms deemed by the Public Officer, pursuant to
regulations, to be located sufficiently high to be free of mosquitoes, flies
and other undesirable insects or otherwise protected from serving as a
means of access for infestation. In establishments subject to licensing
and in all buildings where janitor services are required pursuant to
§ 159-86, screens shall be installed and maintained by the owner or
operator on all doors and windows from May 1 to October 1 of each
year.
A. Residential. Bathroom, water closet compartment and kitchen floors
shall be surfaced with water-resistant material and shall be kept at all
times in a dry, clean and sanitary condition, and shower room floors
shall be kept clean and sanitary.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-70 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-75
C:922
§ 159-76. Residential basement and cellar floors.
Floors of basements and cellars of residences shall be paved with stone or
concrete not less than four inches thick and shall be maintained at all times
in a condition so as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other
hazards.
§ 159-77. Supporting structural members.
Supporting structural members are to be kept structurally sound, free of
deterioration and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
§ 159-78. Condition of walls, ceilings and other interior surfaces.
[Amended 11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 68-1975; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015; 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
Walls, ceilings, bathtubs and all other interior surfaces, including but not
necessarily limited to window frames and sills, doors, door frames and sills,
moldings and baseboards, shall be considered to be in good repair when
clean, free from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and similar conditions. All of
the above areas shall be provided with paint, paper, ceiling material or other
protective covering so that they shall be kept clean, free of visible foreign
matter, sanitary and well maintained at all times.
§ 159-79. Stairs and railings of residences.
Interior stairs of every structure used for human habitation shall be
structurally sound and free from defects. Handrailings or banisters shall
be provided for all stairs, balconies, fire escapes and stairwells, and the
handrails or banisters shall be securely attached, maintained free from
defects and shall be of sufficient height to guard against accidents and to be
appropriate for use by persons of normal height utilizing the stairway. Stairs
shall be adequately lighted in all places, with control switches operable
from each story to permit safe use at night for persons ascending or
descending, except in establishments subject to licensing or where
janitorial service is provided and artificial lighting for hallways and common
areaways is supplied in accordance with state law from a master control
switch.
B. Nonresidential. Washroom and water closet compartment floors shall
be surfaced with water-resistant material and shall be kept in a dry,
clean and sanitary condition at all times.
A. If, and when necessary to accomplish the foregoing or any part thereof,
such interior surface shall be spackled, painted, papered or otherwise
provided with a protective coating appropriate for the surface material,
and this shall be done once every three years unless it is clearly
unnecessary. Painting or other provision of a protective coating shall be
the responsibility of the occupant and not the owner when required
more frequently than once every three years as a result of acts or
omissions of the occupant, family members or guests.
§ 159-75 CHARTER § 159-80
C:923
§ 159-80. Garbage and refuse containers for dwelling units.
Each dwelling unit containing cooking facilities shall be provided with
a watertight noncombustible container with a tight-fitting lid for the
temporary storage of rubbish, garbage and other refuse.
§ 159-81. Garbage and refuse containers at exterior of residences.
[Amended 11-16-1984 by Ord. No. 49-1984]
The owner of a residential dwelling shall supply, at the exterior of the
premises, receptacles provided with covers constructed to prevent spillage
or leakage of contents in a number sufficient to contain the refuse
accumulated, pending collection. Where the owner of a residence chooses
to employ the use of a refuse container (mechanical pickup) to contain the
refuse accumulated pending collection, the location of such container on
the exterior of the residence shall be in an area which shall not create a
nuisance, shall not be placed closer than five feet to any property line or
building and shall be screened from public view as required by the Director.
The container shall be equipped with covers and maintained in a sanitary
condition. The container shall be serviceable in a manner which would not
require the vehicle to cross any curb on any street except where such curb
has been lowered in compliance with applicable provisions of § 238-1 and
other City ordinances.
§ 159-82. Responsibility for removal of garbage and recyclables.
[Amended 12-14-1970 by Ord. No. 64A-1970; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015]
A. Notwithstanding anything contained herein, the provisions of Chapter
156, Solid Waste, shall be complied with where applicable and prevail
over any provisions contained within this chapter.
B. Residential, having janitor. The owner or operator shall have the duty
and responsibility of removing garbage wherever a janitor is required
for the premises in accordance with § 159-86.
C. Nonresidential. The owner and operator shall have the duty and
responsibility of removing garbage from nonresidential premises out to
the curbline after 5:00 p.m. the night before collection and, where
applicable, returning empty containers to the refuse storage area
within two hours after collection.
D. Residential, having no janitor. Where no janitor is required, the owner
and operator of a building shall have the responsibility of setting
containers out to the curbline after 6:00 p.m. the night before collection
and to return the empty containers to the refuse storage area within
two hours following collection at any residential source with four or
more dwelling units and seven hours at any residential source with four
or fewer dwelling units. For the purpose of this section, it shall be
assumed that occupants have control of their dwelling units and of their
§ 159-80 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-82
C:924
§ 159-83. Accumulation and storage of garbage in dwellings.
Storage bins, rooms and areas of dwellings shall not be used for
accumulated garbage or refuse; provided, however, that enclosed spaces or
rooms in the interior of dwellings which are used exclusively as garbage
collection points, equipped with garbage containers complying with
§ 159-80, from which room or space containers are removed by the janitor
at least once daily, shall not be prohibited. Flammable or combustible
liquids or other materials may not be stored on the premises unless they are
of a type approved for storage by the regulations of the Fire Department,
and then only in such quantities and in such fireproof storage containers as
may be prescribed by the regulations.
§ 159-84. Accumulation and storage of garbage in nonresidential
buildings.
Storage bins, rooms and areas of nonresidential buildings shall not be used
for accumulated garbage or refuse. Flammable or combustible liquids or
other materials may not be stored on the premises unless they are of a type
approved for storage by the regulations of the Fire Department, and then
only in such quantities and in such fireproof storage containers as may be
prescribed by the regulations.
§ 159-85. Storage areas in dwellings.
In dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, storage areas or
storage bins shall be of fireproof construction and contain fireproof walls
and partitions of at least two hours' rating and, in addition thereto, shall
have self-closing fireproof doors; provided, however, that storage in existing
framework, wood frame bins or nonfireproof storage areas shall be
permitted. The storage of combustible materials, containers for the same
and means of storage shall be in compliance with regulations promulgated
by the Public Officer with the approval of the Fire Chief, designed to
minimize the existence of fire hazards in dwellings. Excessive
accumulations of combustible materials are prohibited, and responsibility
for removal thereof shall be with the owner and operator of the premises as
well as the occupant to whom the materials may belong. Where sewerage
areas or storage bins are available to more than one tenant, the area shall
be numbered or otherwise identified and a list of the names of the tenants
utilizing such area shall be kept at all times available for examination by
the Public Officer in the office of the person in charge of the premises.
The provisions governing § 159-86 shall be supplemented by regulations
to be prepared jointly by the Public Officer and Fire Chief as well as
appropriate enforcement procedures which will include notification to the
superintendents and tenants of apartment buildings which may be affected
thereby.
required garbage receptacles and are therefore operators as defined in
§ 159-1.
§ 159-82 CHARTER § 159-86
C:925
§ 159-86. Superintendents in dwellings. [Amended 10-14-1968 by
Ord. No. 53-1968; 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. 42-1983]
A. In every dwelling containing four or more dwellings or rooming units,
or combination thereof, the owner shall provide and designate a
superintendent who shall be licensed by and registered, by building,
with the Department of Property Maintenance. The licensing and
registration requirement shall become effective January 1, 1984. Each
license and registration shall be renewed annually. The license fee shall
be prescribed in Chapter 170 of this Code and shall be payable to the
Director of the Department of Property Maintenance as supervising
officer. The nonrefundable license fee shall be paid prior to the written
examination required by Subsection B. Whenever a licensed
superintendent is no longer associated with and/or responsible for a
dwelling, the owner of the dwelling has 45 days to replace the licensed
superintendent with another licensed superintendent as prescribed by
this Code. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
B. In any premises containing 25 or more dwelling units, rooming units or
combination thereof, the superintendent shall be a full-time employee
and shall reside on the premises. Where more than one building on
adjoining premises or premises in close proximity to each other are in
common ownership or under common management or maintenance
supervision, the requirements contained in this subsection shall apply
separately to each building; provided, however, that if premises are
commonly owned or managed and are within 200 feet of each other as
measured from door to door along public streets between the two, and
if the manager or owner thereof can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Public Officer or his authorized representative that operation of
both premises and all essential services and facilities as required under
this chapter or other ordinances can be provided for both of such
premises by a single resident superintendent, janitor, caretaker or
housekeeper who shall reside in one of such premises, the Public
Officer may, in his discretion, allow one such person to act for both of
such premises, which shall not constitute more than two in number.
C. The owner or operator of premises required to have a licensed
superintendent by Subsection A shall register the name, address and
telephone number of the licensed superintendent and shall indicate the
premises to which he is assigned as well as the duties which the
superintendent is normally required to perform. This information shall
be posted at all times in a conspicuous place in a common area on the
premises and shall have been made available to all tenants. The name,
address and telephone number of an alternative individual who shall be
responsible for the superintendent's duties in his absence is also
subject to the above requirements. No fee is required for registration.
D. The Director of Property Maintenance and Code Enforcement, as Public
Officer, shall establish reasonable rules and regulations to effectuate
the purpose of this chapter. The Public Officer shall provide for a
written examination reasonably related to the functions of a
§ 159-86 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-86
C:926
§ 159-87. Suspension of services or facilities. [Amended 9-10-1973
by Ord. No. 50-1973; 7-14-1980 by Ord. No. 19-1980]
superintendent for each applicant for a license who has not held a
superintendent license issued by the City of East Orange within the
past two calendar years. The purpose of the written examination shall
be to determine the qualifications, competence and sense of
responsibility of the applicant. Any applicant failing to pass the written
examination may request an additional examination. which shall be
given within 15 days of the request. No fee shall be required for
any subsequent examinations within one calendar year of the initial
application. All applicants for a superintendent license must be able to
read, write and speak English.
E. The superintendent shall have sufficient knowledge, competence and
responsibility and shall have authority from the owner or operator to
attend to or arrange for continual operation of all essential services and
facilities required under this chapter. The superintendent shall, at all
times, maintain the premises in compliance with this chapter and shall
be regularly available on the premises to perform his duties. The
superintendent shall provide adequate and proper janitorial service at
all times for the purpose of keeping the premises in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall have removed daily, on a regular schedule, at a
reasonable time, all garbage, litter, debris and other household refuse
from the premises and place the same out for collection.
F. Where repeated violations arising under this chapter are found on a
particular premises, and by reason of the same the Public Officer finds
reason to doubt the qualifications, competence or sense of
responsibility of the superintendent, the Public Officer shall provide
notice of the same to the owner, operator and superintendent and hold
a hearing to determine if the license of the superintendent shall be
suspended or revoked, and the Public Officer shall order the owner or
operator to provide a licensed replacement.
G. Any individual duly licensed and registered as a superintendent or who
holds himself out as such or engages in activities which reasonably
would lead one to believe he is the superintendent is chargeable for
failure to maintain the standards set out in this section and subject to
the general penalties prescribed by this Code.222 The failure of any
superintendent to comply with the provisions of this chapter, even in
disobedience of instructions, shall not relieve the owner or operator
from the duties and responsibilities imposed by this chapter, and the
owner or operator is subject to the general penalties prescribed by this
Code.
A. No owner, operator or occupant of a residence shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility which is required to be supplied by the
provisions of this chapter or by any provisions of the Code of the City of
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty, of this Code.
§ 159-86 CHARTER § 159-87
C:927
East Orange, or which is required under the terms of an executed
lease or rental agreement, to be removed from or discontinued for an
occupied dwelling unit or rooming unit, except for necessary repairs,
alterations or emergency or for such other reason as may be permitted
pursuant to those sections of this chapter or other ordinances of the
City applicable to such service, facility, equipment or utility. This
section shall specifically include the causing of the shutting off of
City water service or electrical service caused by the nonpayment
of legitimately due and owing water or electric bills. [Amended
4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004]
B. As used in this section, the term "owner" shall include any corporation,
corporate officer or agent thereof while acting within the scope of his
employment or otherwise on behalf of the corporation in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:2-7.
§ 159-87 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-87
C:928
ARTICLE IX
Basic Facilities for Residences
§ 159-88. Basic facilities for dwelling units.
Every dwelling unit shall have a bathroom containing a toilet, washbasin,
bathtub or shower, shall be equipped with private kitchen facilities and shall
comply with such other requirements as are set forth elsewhere in this
chapter. Where there are more than eight occupants, the unit shall have two
bathrooms.
§ 159-89. Bathrooms in independent rooming units.
Bathrooms containing all facilities required under § 159-104 shall be
provided for occupants of independent rooming units in accordance with
§ 159-108.
§ 159-90. Cooking facilities in independent rooming units
restricted.
No cooking facilities shall be permitted in independent rooming units
except incidental cooking where there are minimum sanitary facilities as
required under § 159-93.
§ 159-91. Registration of incidental cooking units.
All incidental cooking units in independent rooming units shall, prior to
installation (if installed after the effective date of this chapter) or prior to
being used (if installed before December 2, 1963), be registered with the
Public Officer on forms showing the location of each unit, the nature of
the cooking facilities and such other information as the Public Officer may
require. Where located as part of an establishment subject to licensing, then
the registration shall not be required.
§ 159-92. Incidental cooking in room of single-family dwelling.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter,
incidental cooking shall be permitted in one room of a single-family
dwelling, provided that the owner thereof conforms to the registration
requirements under § 159-91 and complies with § 159-93; provided, further,
that if, after inspection, the Public Officer shall determine that by reason
of the remoteness of the location of the room or any limitations as to
accessibility to the existing means of egress, additional means of egress are
necessary for the safety of the occupants of the premises, then the owner
shall provide such additional means of egress or remove the incidental
cooking facilities; and provided, further, that the room shall comply with the
occupancy requirements of §§ 159-142 and 159-143.
§ 159-88 CHARTER § 159-93
C:929
§ 159-93. Cooking facilities: minimum requirements.
On and after January 1, 1962, no cooking, including incidental cooking,
shall be permitted in any independent rooming unit or dwelling unit unless
there be minimum sanitary facilities, except as provided in § 159-182. Such
facilities shall include:
§ 159-94. Community kitchens.
Cooking facilities serving more than one dwelling unit or independent
rooming unit, or combination thereof, shall not be permitted, except nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the operation of
establishments subject to licensing.
§ 159-95. Second means of egress generally.
There shall be a second means of egress for all dwelling units (except in
single-family dwellings) located in basements or above the first-story level
of any structure.
§ 159-96. Second means of egress for basement dwelling units.
There shall be a second means of egress for all basement dwelling units,
which shall be either a second door, self-closing and fireproof, located
independently of and remote from the primary means of egress and leading
directly to adjacent outside ground area, or a window, easy to open, no more
than four feet above the floor, with an opening of no less than 2 1/2 feet in
width and three feet in height. No screens, storm windows or other barriers
shall be placed or installed proximate to such means of egress which shall
impede its use in case of emergency.
A. Kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material and drainboard of
appropriate materials, such sink to be connected to the hot and cold
water lines.
B. A waterproof washable container for garbage disposal equipped with a
lid or cover to prevent infestation.
C. Appropriate facilities for storage of food and either gas or electric
refrigeration.
D. Means of ventilation sufficient to remove cooking odors to exterior of
premises.
E. Flooring in compliance with § 159-75.
F. An operative stove containing at least four burners and an oven, except
that in an efficiency apartment as defined in § 159-134 an operative
stove containing at least two burners and an oven shall be sufficient.
[Added 2-22-1982 by Ord. No. 5-1982]
§ 159-93 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-97
C:930
§ 159-97. Second means of egress for independent rooming units.
Independent rooming units shall, except in single-family dwellings, have a
door opening directly into a common hallway or areaway. Any independent
rooming unit located in the basement or at ground level of a dwelling shall
be provided with a second means of egress with the same requirements as
provided in § 159-96. Where there is an independent rooming unit located
above the first story, a common hallway or areaway shall have two means
of egress remote from each other and conforming to the requirements of
Chapter 125, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 159-98. Fire exit facilities.
§ 159-99. Door as part of means of egress.
Any door in the path of egress shall be at least 30 inches in width with a
minimum height of four feet, shall open in the direction of exit travel and
shall be accessible and free from obstructions from common hallways or
areaways.
§ 159-100. Location and number of exits.
Where two or more exits are required, each exit shall be as remote as
practicable from the other exit or exits. All the exits shall be of such number
and so located that the distance of travel from the door of each rooming unit
or dwelling unit on each floor shall not exceed 50 feet, except in buildings
of fireproof construction or buildings equipped with automatic sprinkler
systems throughout, in which buildings the maximum distance of travel
from the door of any unit to the nearest exit shall not exceed 100 feet,
provided that two of the exits shall be at least 50 feet apart.
§ 159-101. Locks, buzzers and intercom systems.
A. Every building and every story above the first therein shall have at least
two means of exit remote from each other; one of these shall open to a
street or fireproof passage leading to a street and one may open to a
yard or other space deemed safe by the Public Officer and of sufficient
area to accommodate all persons in the building, and access to every
such exit shall be provided by a self-closing fireproof door at floor level.
For exits from common areas such as hallways, the fire escape should
be stair type and be continuous to the ground.
B. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: onefamily,
two-family and three-family dwellings, lodging houses, rooming
houses, boardinghomes and buildings or stories containing only
independent dwelling units or dwelling units with a second means of
egress directly to the outside.223
223. Editor's Note: As to lodging houses, boardinghouses, nursing homes and child-care
centers, see Part 4 of this chapter.
§ 159-97 CHARTER § 159-101
C:931
A. Every building containing four or more dwelling units shall be provided
with:
(1) Self-locking doors at every entranceway providing access to each
dwelling unit from any hallway or other common area.
(2) Self-locking and self-closing doors at every entranceway providing
access to each building from the exterior thereof, except as
hereinafter provided.
B. Except in wood-frame detached buildings, every building containing
four or more dwelling units shall be provided with either:
(1) A self-closing and self-locking main entranceway door to the
exterior thereof, which shall be opened only by a key from the
outside and by an electrical control system operable from each
dwelling unit; or
(2) A peephole in the front door of each dwelling unit; or
(3) A doorman at the main entranceway door to the exterior thereof.
C. All locks, self-locking and self-closing doors and electrical control
systems, such as buzzers, bells or intercom systems, shall be
maintained in good and operable condition at all times.
D. All entrance doors to multiple-dwelling units shall be equipped with a
medium-duty deadlatching lockset (Series 160, FF-H-106a, minimum,
with a minimum 11/16 inch by 1/2 inch with 1/2 minimum throw
latchbolt with automatic deadlocking plunger) or with a deadbolt lock
separate from the latch set. [Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
E. In all multiple-dwelling-unit buildings, each dwelling unit's doors shall
be self-closing. [Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
F. In all multiple-dwelling-unit buildings, each dwelling unit's entrance
doors shall be equipped with a chain door lock so as to permit partial
opening of the door and a viewing device installed to enable a person on
the inside of the entrance door to view a person immediately outside.
[Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
G. In all one-family and multiple-dwelling-unit buildings, deadbolt and key
locks are not permitted on bathroom or bedroom doors. Privacy locks
only shall be permitted on bathroom and bedroom doors in all onefamily
and multiple-dwelling-unit buildings. [Added 2-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 3-2018]
§ 159-101 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-101
C:932
ARTICLE X
Water and Plumbing Facilities for Dwellings
§ 159-102. Connection to water system required.
Every facility using running water for domestic purposes within any
building shall be connected to the public water supply system of the City.
The water system shall be maintained in good and operable condition at
all times so that sufficient and positive pressure shall be available at all
installed hot and cold water faucets.
§ 159-103. Hot and cold water. [Amended 5-27-1968 by Ord. No.
31-1968]
Every kitchen sink, bathroom sink and basin, tub or shower as required
under this chapter shall be connected to both the hot and cold water
lines. There shall be sufficient and adequate equipment maintained in good
working condition to supply water at a minimum temperature of 120º F. at
all times to each hot water outlet.
§ 159-104. Required bathroom facilities.
Every bathroom required under this chapter shall be provided with a flush
toilet connected to the cold water line and a shower or tub and a washbasin
connected to running water as set forth in § 159-103. Bathrooms shall also
be provided with adequate light and ventilation as more particularly set
forth in § 159-124.
§ 159-105. Maintenance of plumbing facilities.
Every facility required under §§ 159-102, 159-103 and 159-104 shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition, free of defect and in operating condition
at all times. Where the facility or plumbing fixtures shall be clogged,
overflow or otherwise necessitate repairs, such repairs shall be performed
forthwith.
§ 159-106. Connections to sanitary sewers.
All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to the sanitary sewer through lines
which are free of leaks, corrosion or deterioration and provide unobstructed
passage from the plumbing facilities within the dwelling to the sanitary
sewer.
§ 159-107. Bathroom requirements for dwelling units.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a bathroom which shall be located entirely
within that unit and which shall be completely enclosed, containing the
facilities as set forth in § 159-89 in a room which affords privacy to the
occupants thereof.
§ 159-102 CHARTER § 159-108
C:933
§ 159-108. Bathroom requirements for independent rooming units.
There shall be a bathroom meeting the same requirements as set forth
in § 159-107, which shall be directly accessible to a common hallway or
areaway which is either on the same floor as or one floor above or below
all rooming units it is designed to serve, and which hallway is directly
accessible to the occupants of all such rooming units without passing
through any other dwelling unit or rooming unit. The number of bathrooms
required for persons who do or may occupy the rooming units shall be as
follows:
Number of Bathrooms Occupants to Be Accommodated
1 1 to 8
2 9 to 16
3 17 to 24
4 25 to 30
§ 159-108 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-108
C:934
ARTICLE XI
Heating Facilities in Dwellings
§ 159-109. Minimum heating capacity required. [Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
Every dwelling unit shall contain heating facilities of sufficient capacity to
maintain a minimum inside temperature of 70° F. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments, measurable 36 inches above
the floor, at the center of any such room or compartment when the outside
temperature is 0° F. Where the facilities are found to be of inadequate
size or capacity to accomplish the foregoing, then the owner or operator
shall, at the direction of the Public Officer, either increase the capacity of
the heating system or close off habitable space so that the standard as
established in this section shall be met, provided that such space can be
removed as habitable space without creating a violation of the standards
established by this chapter.
§ 159-110. Central heating requirements.
Central heating shall be required in all lodging houses, boardinghouses and
nursing homes as of December 2, 1963, and in all other types of dwellings
on and after January 1, 1965.
§ 159-111. Exception to central heating requirements.
Prior to January 1, 1965, all dwelling units and rooming units not having
central heating shall be permitted to be heated in the interim by space
heaters on a fireproof base permanently affixed on the floor and connected
by breaching to a stack complying with Chapter 125, Constructions Codes,
Uniform.
§ 159-112. Permit required for use of nonconforming heating
facilities.
No other mode of heating not specified in § 159-110 or 159-111 shall be
permitted unless application for approval thereof is made to the Public
Officer and a permit is issued therefor under a finding that the facility is so
designed and installed that it does not constitute a hazard to the safety of
the occupants of the building.
§ 159-113. Sidearm gas water heaters.
On and after October 1, 1962, no new or used sidearm gas water heaters
shall be installed. Existing sidearm gas water heaters shall only be
permitted where they are installed in separate, enclosed and ventilated
spaces which are not part of the normal living area of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
§ 159-109 CHARTER § 159-114
C:935
§ 159-114. Installation and maintenance. [Amended 4-22-1968 by
Ord. No. 27-1968; 9-8-1975 by Ord. No. 54-1975; 9-28-1981 by Ord.
No. 24-1981]
Heating equipment shall be installed and maintained in a manner which
will avoid dangerous concentration of fumes and gases. Heating equipment
shall not be forced to operate beyond the safe capacity for which it is
designed. Where necessary, exposed heating risers, heating ducts and hotwater
lines shall be covered with an insulating material or guard to prevent
injury to workmen, residents or visitors, or where it is necessary to maintain
adequate heat or temperature of the water to other portions of the
premises. The heating facilities and all parts thereof shall be kept in good
operating condition, free of defects, corrosion and deterioration at all times.
§ 159-115. Fuel storage.
Fuel for operation of the heating equipment shall be stored outside the
premises, unless stored in the interior pursuant to regulations of the Fire
Department as to storage of flammable materials set forth under § 159-85.
§ 159-116. Conversions during winter prohibited.
No heating units shall be converted in any dwelling or part thereof between
October l and May 1 where there are occupants other than the owner or
operator dependent of heat from the unit, without written consent of all
such occupants, but nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing
emergency alterations or repairs.
§ 159-117. Heat and air conditioning required to be maintained.
[Amended 5-27-1968 by Ord. No. 31-1968; 11-10-1969 by Ord. No.
39A-1969; 9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 27-1984]
A. It shall be the duty of every person, individual or corporation, or other
business entity, who shall have contracted, expressly or impliedly, by
lease or otherwise, to heat or to furnish heat for any building or portion
thereof where one or more persons reside or are employed, to heat or
furnish heat for every occupied room in such building or portions
thereof so that a minimum temperature of 70° F., without regard to
outside temperatures, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.,
and at least 70° F., between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., from
October 1 each year to May 15 of the next succeeding year, both days
being inclusive; and from May 16 to September 30 in each year, both
dates being inclusive, where the outside temperature shall fall below
55° F., then the owner, lessor, manager, operator or agent shall
maintain a minimum temperature of 70° F., between the hours of 6:00
a.m., and 11:00 p.m. and at least 70° F., between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., provided that the requirements of this section shall
not apply to the following: [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015;
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 5-2019]
§ 159-114 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-117
C:936
§ 159-118. (Reserved)225
§ 159-119. Exemption where heat or air conditioning furnished by
occupant. [Amended 9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 27-1984]
Any owner or operator who has an express contractual arrangement with
an occupant under which the occupant undertakes to supply his own heat
and/or air conditioning through facilities under the occupant's exclusive
control shall be excepted from the requirements to supply heat and/or air
conditioning, as the case may be, under this chapter.
§ 159-120. Duty to maintain equipment. [Amended 9-10-1984 by
Ord. No. 27-1984]
Notwithstanding a contract by the occupant to supply his/her own heat and/
or air conditioning as provided by this chapter, where the heating unit, air
conditioner(s) and/or air-conditioning system is installed by or owned by
the owner or operator, then the duty to maintain the same in operable and
functioning condition as provided in this chapter shall remain the duty of
the owner or operator.
(1) Buildings or portions thereof used and occupied for trades,
businesses or occupations where high or low temperatures are
essential.
(2) Those sections of a commercial or retail trades building adjacent to
entrance or exit doors where it is shown that the heat reduction is
caused by persons entering and exiting the building.
B. For the purpose of this section, wherever a building is heated by means
of a furnace, boiler or apparatus under control of the owner, the agent
or lessor of such building, such owner, agent or lessor, in the absence of
a contract or agreement to the contrary, shall be deemed to have
contracted, undertaken or bound himself or herself to furnish heat in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
C. It shall be the duty of every person, individual or corporate, or other
business entity, who shall have contracted expressly or impliedly, by
lease or otherwise, to supply air conditioning for any building used for
residential or commercial purposes, to maintain the air conditioner(s)
or air-conditioning system continuously operable and maintaining the
indoor temperature at or below 70º F., beginning on May 16 each year
to September 30 of the same year, both days being inclusive.224
224. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, containing violations and penalties, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015.
225. Editor's Note: Former § 159-118, Term defined, as amended, was repealed 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 7-2015.
§ 159-117 CHARTER § 159-121
C:937
§ 159-121. Presumption that owner supplies heat. [Amended
5-27-1968 by Ord. No. 31-1968]
The presence of heating outlets, radiators, risers or returns in any building
or portion thereof subject to this article shall constitute a presumption that
the owner is to supply heat as required under this chapter, and in the
absence of clear and convincing proof to the contrary, this presumption
shall control.
§ 159-122. Occupant supplying heat as owner. [Amended 5-27-1968
by Ord. No. 31-1968]
As set forth in § 159-119, occupants who undertake to supply heat to
buildings or portions thereof other than their own shall be responsible as
owners under this chapter to the occupants of such buildings or portions
thereof.
§ 159-121 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-122
C:938
ARTICLE XII
Ventilation Facilities
§ 159-123. Windows in residences.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate window or skylight area
available to unobstructed light shall not be less than 10% of the floor
area of such room or 12 square feet, whichever is greater. The window or
skylight shall either open to 45% of the required area or be supplied with
a mechanical ventilation system of sufficient capacity provided with proper
openings for incoming or outgoing air to assure comparable ventilation.
Openings for ventilation shall include windows, skylights, louvers, monitors
or other openings, provided that all such openings are easily operable by
the occupants.
§ 159-124. Bathrooms and water closet compartments.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be adequately
ventilated with openable area as described in § 159-123, totaling 1 1/2
square feet, or by comparable mechanical ventilation.
§ 159-123 CHARTER § 159-124
C:939

ARTICLE XIII
Lighting and Electrical Fixtures
§ 159-125. General electrical service. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 10-2004]
§ 159-126. Outlets in habitable rooms.
Every habitable room shall be equipped with permanently installed
electrical outlets sufficient to provide lighting and power and to permit the
installation of or the use of electric lights sufficient to meet the reasonable
lighting requirements for normal use of the room and other electrical
equipment normally expected to be used in such room.
§ 159-127. Lighting in bathrooms, washrooms and water closet
compartments.
§ 159-128. Lighting in hallways, stairways of residential and
nonresidential units; exterior lighting.
A. Electrical power through safely insulated conduits conforming to the
National Electrical Code, Chapter 125, Construction Codes, Uniform,
shall be supplied to the following:
(1) Residential units. All dwelling units and rooming units used or
available for human habitation.
(2) Nonresidential units, generally. Nonresidential buildings regularly
utilized for business, industrial, commercial or institutional work
and activities.
(3) Garages. Garages designed for use by four or more motor vehicles.
B. In all multifamily dwellings, a distinct and separate electric meter shall
be installed for gauging electricity usage in common areas and in areas
exterior of the premises.
C. There shall be a distinct and separate electric meter for each dwelling
unit in multifamily dwellings. [Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
A. Residential. Every bathroom and water closet compartment in
residences shall be provided with permanently installed artificial
lighting fixtures with a switch and wall plate so located and maintained
that there is no danger of short-circuiting from water from other
bathroom facilities or from splashing of water.
B. Nonresidential. Every washroom and water closet compartment in
nonresidential buildings shall be provided with permanently installed
artificial lighting fixtures with a switch and wall plate so located and
maintained that there is no danger of short-circuiting from water from
other washroom facilities or from splashing of water.
§ 159-125 CHARTER § 159-128
C:941
§ 159-129. Loose or exposed wiring; use of outlets. [Amended
4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004]
Except as stated elsewhere in this chapter, all wiring or cables shall be
properly affixed or attached to the structure. Insulation shall be provided
for all wiring and cables and kept in good repair. No loose cords or loose
extension lines in excess of eight feet in length shall be permitted, and no
ceiling or wall fixtures shall be used for supplying power to equipment other
than that for which they are designed.
§ 159-130. Light bulb requirements for residences.
All required lighting fixtures in residences shall be supplied at all times
with functioning light bulbs of sufficient wattage to supply the lumen
requirements of this chapter.
§ 159-131. Fuses and protective devices.
A. Residential units. Lighting of hallways, stairways, landings and other
spaces used by occupants in common as a normal means of passage in
residences shall be sufficient to provide at least five footcandles (five
lumens) measured in the darkest portion. Light switches for stairs and
hallways shall be readily accessible to occupants using the same and so
located as to comply with § 159-79. Every cellar, basement, work space
and other part of the structure used occasionally and incidentally by the
occupants shall be provided with artificial lighting available at all times
so that there shall be at least three footcandles (three lumens)
measured in the darkest portion trafficked by occupants.
B. Garages and nonresidential units. All garages and nonresidential
buildings required to have electric service under § 159-125B shall also
be provided with artificial lighting installations and fixtures conforming
to the requirements contained in Subsection A of this section. All such
fixtures shall be operable from a switch located near the point of
ingress to the interior of the space lighted. All portions of the premises
which are regularly utilized for work and activities shall be illuminated
by at least five footcandles (five lumens) measured in the darkest
portions thereof, and all other portions regularly traversed by
occupants of the premises shall be illuminated by at least three
footcandles (three lumens) measured in the darkest portions thereof.
C. Exterior lighting for residential and mixed occupancy. The exterior
steps, entrances and exits of all buildings containing five or more
dwelling units shall be illuminated by at least five footcandles (five
lumens) of light. The outside parking areas, driveways and walkways
(other than public sidewalks) adjacent to such buildings shall be
illuminated by at least three footcandles (three lumens) in the darkest
portion thereof. All exterior lighting required by this subsection shall be
shaded to prevent direct reflection of light into dwelling units. [Added
5-27-1968 by Ord. No. 31-1968]
§ 159-128 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-131
C:942
§ 159-132. Overloading of circuits prohibited.
Overloading of circuits is prohibited. Where the Public Officer finds, after
notice and hearing, that by reason of the appliances and fixtures there is
continuing overloading of an electrical line creating a hazard, the owner
shall be required to install a line of sufficient capacity to absorb the load
to which the line is subjected or otherwise eliminate the conditions causing
the overload. For purposes of this section, the Public Officer may consider
the peak seasonal load to which the line is subjected.
A. Residential. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted
conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes, and no fuse shall be
installed therein in excess of the stated maximum, except that owners
shall not be responsible for violations in fuse installations without their
knowledge where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is
located within a dwelling unit or rooming unit in the exclusive
possession of occupants other than the owner.
B. Nonresidential. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be
posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes, and no fuse
shall be installed therein in excess of the stated maximum, except that
owners shall not be responsible for violations in fuse installations
without their knowledge where the correct maximum is stated and the
fuse box is located within any part of the premises which is in the
exclusive possession of occupants other than the owner.
§ 159-131 CHARTER § 159-132
C:943

ARTICLE XIV
Occupancy Standards for Residences
§ 159-133. Dwelling units: net floor area.
§ 159-134. Efficiency apartments: net floor area. [Amended
4-22-1968 by Ord. No. 27-1968]
Efficiency apartments constructed or under construction as of April 1,
1960, shall be permitted to have a minimum net floor area either 25% less
than that required under § 159-133 or 33 1/3% less than that so required,
provided that occupancy thereof is limited to one person only. To comply
with this section, apartment units must be designed in conformity with
modern standards of use of space to accommodate kitchen facilities, living
and sleeping facilities and function so that all available habitable space is
efficiently utilized.
§ 159-135. Sleeping rooms: net floor area.
Except as required under § 159-136, every room utilized for sleeping
purposes shall have a minimum net floor area of 70 square feet for the initial
occupant and 50 square feet of additional net floor area for each additional
occupant; except that children under one year of age shall not be counted
as occupants for the purposes of this section.
§ 159-136. Additional floor area requirements under certain
conditions.
Rooms utilized for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum net floor area of
90 square feet for the first occupant and 70 square feet for each additional
occupant in:
A. Dwelling units in buildings containing no more than two dwelling units
and such other buildings containing three or more dwelling units,
conforming to the open space requirements contained in Chapter 51,
Land Use, applicable to such buildings, shall have the following
occupancy standards: minimum net floor area shall be 150 square feet
for the initial occupant, 250 square feet for two occupants, 350 square
feet for three occupants and 100 square feet for each occupant
thereafter, except that, for the purpose of this section, children under
one year of age shall not be counted as occupants.
B. Multiple dwellings not otherwise covered under Subsection A above
shall have the following occupancy standards: minimum net floor area
shall be 150 square feet for initial occupant, 150 square feet for second
occupant and 100 square feet for each additional occupant, except that,
for the purpose of this section, children under one year of age shall not
be counted as occupants.
A. Rooms utilized for sleeping purposes in which there are cooking
facilities.
§ 159-133 CHARTER § 159-136
C:945
§ 159-137. Use of certain rooms or areas for sleeping prohibited.
Effective April 1, 1968, no cellar, kitchen, foyer, vestibule or living area used
in common by residents of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be used
for sleeping purposes, except that a living room area may be used by no
more than one person either where the total occupancy does not exceed two
persons or in dwelling units having an excess of 500 square feet of net floor
area; provided, however, that all other occupancy standards as prescribed
herein are satisfied. This section shall not apply to single-family dwellings.
§ 159-138. Use of basements for human habitation restricted.
Basements may be utilized for human habitation, provided that:
§ 159-139. (Reserved)226
§ 159-140. (Reserved)227
§ 159-141. Occupancy limitations: students excepted.228
The Public Officer is authorized to permit, on an annual basis, a dwelling
unit in a building containing six or more dwelling units to be occupied by
college or university students pursuant to written leasing arrangements
between the college or university where such students are enrolled as fulltime
students and the owner or operator of the building containing such
dwelling unit, provided that:
B. Rooms rented or available for rent in establishments subject to
licensing.
A. There is sufficient light and ventilation as more particularly required by
§§ 159-123 to 159-132, and natural light and ventilation are not
restricted by reason of walls or other obstructions located within six
feet of any window required pursuant to this section.
B. There is a second means of egress conforming to the requirements of
§ 159-96.
C. All furnaces or other heating facilities are so located, insulated and
separated from living areas by fireproof partitions or walls necessary
pursuant to regulations of the Fire Chief so that the same do not
constitute an undue hazard to the safety and health of the occupants.
D. The dwelling units and all walls and floors thereof are free of visible
moisture and seepage at all times.
226. Editor's Note: Former § 159-139, Single-family dwellings: occupancy, limitations, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
227. Editor's Note: Former § 159-140, Dwelling units: occupancy limitations, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-136 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-141
C:946
§ 159-142. Occupancy of independent rooming units limited.
Independent rooming units shall be rented for occupancy or occupied by
adults and emancipated minors only.
§ 159-143. Occupancy of one-room dwelling or rooming units
limited.
Occupancy of dwelling units or rooming units having only one habitable
room shall be limited to two persons.
§ 159-144. Occupancy standards to be cumulative.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as permitting occupancy
in violation of any other occupancy standard, all occupancy standards being
cumulative and not in the alternative.
§ 159-145. Posting of maximum occupancy and management
certificate. [Amended 9-14-1970 by Ord. No. 43-1970; 12-14-1970
by Ord. No. 64A-1970]
A. A copy of the written leasing arrangements is filed with the Public
Officer.
B. An appropriate official of such college or university submits a written
agreement that he will cause adequate safeguards to be provided to
ensure that such dwelling unit is properly maintained.
C. In all other respects the occupancy of such dwelling unit is in full
compliance with this chapter.
A. The owner, operator or occupant of any multiple-family dwelling within
the City shall permanently display within each dwelling unit in the
vicinity of the main entranceway a certificate which shall set forth
occupancy information in conformity with the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) Such certificate shall read as follows:
"This dwelling unit (# ) may be occupied by a maximum of
_____ persons. Those who may legally occupy within this total are
the responsible head of family, spouse, the parents and children,
including adopted children, of said head of family and spouse, plus
no more than two other persons, provided that in no case may the
total number of persons exceed the maximum occupancy figure
shown above."229
(2) The certificate shall also list the name and telephone number of the
owner, managing agent and superintendent, where one is required.
Where, however, both owner and managing agent exist, one
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-141 CHARTER § 159-145
C:947
§ 159-146. Mail service. [Amended 12-14-1970 by Ord. No.
64A-1970]
The owner shall provide and maintain for all occupants mail receptacles
which conform to all federal postal laws and regulations. In dwellings of
two or more units, identification by name and unit number shall be placed
upon each mail receptacle. Where locks are provided, they must be kept
in working order. Nothing herein shall be construed as a requirement to
provide these facilities for transient guests or within hotels or licensed
premises, provided that there is a responsible person on the premises
designated by the owner and known to postal authorities who shall, on
behalf of the owner, receive mail for guests and distribute or make same
available for pickup.
telephone number shall suffice. In any event, the name and address
of owner must appear, and if corporate-owned, the name of the
registered agent as well as the corporate name must be shown.
B. Owners shall further be required to maintain a record which lists
separately each dwelling unit by number and location, its legal
maximum occupancy, the names and relationships of its occupants and
the birth dates of all minors. Where it is required that a superintendent
be on the premises, he shall also have a copy of this record.
C. If upon expiration of the first complete month following proper
installation of the required occupancy and management certificate any
dwelling unit is found to be overcrowded or illegally occupied, the
occupant of such unit shall be liable as "operator" under the provisions
of this chapter and shall be subject to all penalties therefor.
D. Removal of the required certificate or altering its provisions without
written notice to and acknowledgment by the Public Officer shall be a
violation of this chapter.
§ 159-145 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-146
C:948
Part 3
Duties And Responsibilities Of Occupants
ARTICLE XV
General Regulations
§ 159-147. Residences: compliance required, report of
nonconformance.
Occupants of residences shall not, after notice as required under § 159-25,
occupy or continue to occupy premises which are substandard by reason of
the failure of the dwelling unit or rooming unit occupied by them or of the
dwelling or premises to conform to and comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Upon discovery by the occupant of any condition on premises
occupied by the occupant which constitutes a violation of this chapter,
the occupant shall report the same to the Public Officer responsible for
enforcement of this chapter as more particularly set forth in § 159-157.
§ 159-148. Nonresidential premises: reports of violation.
Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition on the premises which
constitutes a violation of this chapter, the occupant shall report the same to
the Public Officer responsible for enforcement of this chapter.
§ 159-149. Sanitation requirements.
All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant or operator shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain
from performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises
unclean or insanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
performing any duty required under this chapter or maintaining the
premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 159-150. Garbage and refuse disposal for residences.
Occupants of residences shall place all garbage in the receptacles provided
for garbage disposal and shall, where janitor service is not supplied, place
for disposal all garbage and other refuse in garbage cans located in the
exterior of the premises in an area designated and set forth for the same.
Where janitorial service for the removal of garbage and other refuse to the
exterior of the premises is provided by the owner or operator, then the
occupant shall dispose of garbage and other refuse in containers provided
therefor by the owner or operator in designated and enclosed areas in the
interior of the premises. Garbage and other refuse shall not be thrown
out of windows or down dumbwaiters, nor shall garbage and refuse be set
out on stairways or fire escapes or in common hallways. All fire escapes,
stairways and common areaways and common hallways shall be kept free
of accumulations of personal belongings. All dumbwaiters shall be operable
at all times where in existence and used as a regular part of the garbage
disposal system.
§ 159-147 CHARTER § 159-151
C:949
§ 159-151. Infestation elimination.
§ 159-152. Malicious damage.
Every occupant or operator shall be responsible for willfully or maliciously
causing damage to any part of the premises.
§ 159-153. Improper use of heating or cooking equipment in
residences.
No occupant shall cause excessive discoloration of the sidewalls or ceilings
of any part of the premises of a dwelling by improper use of heating or
cooking equipment.
§ 159-154. Supplying heat to other occupants.
Where any occupant of a dwelling undertakes by contract or as a condition
of his letting to supply his own heat through a furnace or boiler which
also heats a dwelling unit or rooming unit occupied by other persons, such
occupant shall be responsible for supplying heat in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 159-117 to 159-122.
§ 159-155. Installation and maintenance of heating equipment in
residences.
Where any occupant of a dwelling undertakes to install heating equipment,
the same shall conform to the requirements of §§ 159-109 to 159-122. The
occupant shall thereafter be responsible for maintaining such equipment
installed by him in good repair and operating condition during all times that
the heating equipment shall remain under his control.
§ 159-156. Use and maintenance of plumbing.
Every occupant or operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him
in a clean and sanitary condition and he shall not deposit any material in
any fixture or sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to
the fixture or sewer system.
A. Residential. Every occupant of a single-family dwelling shall be
responsible for the elimination of infestation in the dwelling and on the
premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit in a
dwelling other than a single-family dwelling shall be responsible for
eliminating all conditions causing infestation which are caused by the
occupant and also those conditions which are subject to and under his
exclusive control.
B. Nonresidential. Every operator shall be responsible for the elimination
of infestation in and on the premises subject to his control.
§ 159-151 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-157
C:950
§ 159-157. Notice of defects to owner.
Where the owner or operator would not otherwise know of a defect of any
facility, utility or equipment required to be furnished under this chapter,
and the same is defective or inoperable, each occupant or operator affected
thereby shall, upon learning of the defect, provide notice to the owner,
operator or other person in charge of the premises. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to provide a defense to any owner or operator violating
this chapter.
§ 159-158. Occupancy in violation of standards.
No occupant shall occupy or permit the occupancy of any rooming unit
or dwelling unit in violation of the occupancy standards established in
§§ 159-133 to 159-144.
§ 159-159. Cooking in dwelling or rooming units.
No occupant shall cook in any dwelling unit or independent rooming unit
except where all the required sanitary facilities are installed as required
under § 159-93.
§ 159-160. Bathroom facilities required for residential occupancy.
No occupant shall occupy or continue to occupy a dwelling unit or rooming
unit that does not have provision for bathroom facilities as required under
§§ 159-88 and 159-89.
§ 159-161. Violations by minors.
Any adult member of the family shall be responsible and liable for any
violation of this article caused by minors under his or her care or custody
occupying the same dwelling unit, if the violations were created or
permitted to continue with the knowledge or acquiescence or consent of
such adult member.
§ 159-157 CHARTER § 159-161
C:951

Part 4
Lodging Houses, Boardinghouses, Nursing Homes And Child-Care
Centers
ARTICLE XVI
Licenses
§ 159-162. License required. [Amended 5-22-1972 by Ord. No.
2-1972; 7-17-1972 by Ord. No. 25-1972; 4-23-1973 by Ord. No.
17-1973]
No person shall manage, conduct or operate the business of keeping a
lodging house, boardinghouse, nursing home, child-care center or drug
center, referred to in this Part 4 as "establishments subject to licensing,"
without first securing a license therefor within the time and manner
provided, nor shall any owner permit on premises owned by him the
operation of such an establishment without a license.
§ 159-163. Applications for licenses.
The application for a license required by this article shall be made in
quadruplicate to the City Clerk on forms prescribed by the Public Officer,
which forms shall require information concerning occupancy standards,
including the number of rooms to be used for sleeping; the maximum
number of persons which each room in the establishment itself can
accommodate; the location of all such rooms; types and location of
bathrooms, exits and other facilities; names and addresses of all persons
who will actually be in charge of the management or conduct of the
establishment; whether such establishment is equipped to accommodate
persons who are disabled or persons who require special care; and such
further data as may be required for the enforcement of this chapter. All
applications shall be accompanied by the required fees. Where the applicant
seeks a license for an establishment based on a claim that the same
constitutes a lawful nonconforming use, the applicant shall state in the
application the name and address of the owner and operator of the
premises; the date when the use, by reason of the zone change or variance,
first became nonconforming; and the number of rooms and number of
roomers as of that date. The application shall be signed by the owner
as well as the operator and shall contain a certification of the truth of
the information contained therein by both owner and operator. Any false
information shall constitute a violation of this chapter and, in addition,
grounds for revocation of any license approved pursuant thereto. Any false
information rendered knowingly and intentionally may, upon complaint of
the Public Officer, subject the party rendering it to criminal prosecution.
§ 159-164. Inspection; prerequisites to issuance; issuance.
Upon filing of an application for a license pursuant to this Part 4, the City
Clerk shall transmit one copy to the Public Officer, one copy to the Fire
Chief and one copy to the Health Officer. The original shall be kept on file at
§ 159-162 CHARTER § 159-164
C:953
all times in the City Clerk's office. Inspection of the premises for compliance
with this chapter, this Code and any other ordinances of the City or laws
of the state shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations of the
Public Officer. Upon completion of inspections, if the Public Officer shall
determine and certify to the City Clerk that the premises are in compliance,
then the license shall issue forthwith; provided, however, that if action of
the Board of Adjustment is required under the Zoning Ordinance, no license
shall issue except in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 51, Land
Use.
§ 159-165. Right of refusal.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 159-164, the Public Officer may refuse
to certify an application for a license pursuant to this Part 4 where the
operator or any person who shall be in active management of the premises
shall be unfit to perform the duties thereof by reason of a record of
convictions of a crime or offense involving moral turpitude, gambling or
prostitution, alcoholism, illegal possession or use of drugs or narcotics, or
shall be a known carrier of a communicable disease or otherwise physically
or mentally unfit or unsuited by similar or equivalent circumstances for
active management of the premises.
§ 159-166. Hearing on decision of Public Officer.230
If the Public Officer shall determine that the applicant for a license pursuant
to this Part 4 has failed to meet the requirements of this chapter, the
requirements of the Board of Health or of this Code or any other ordinance
of the City or laws of the state, or that the applicant is unqualified pursuant
to § 159-165, or upon any suspension, revocation or failure to renew a
license, the Public Officer shall send a written notice to the applicant,
setting forth his reasons therefor. The applicant may thereupon correct
any violation and apply for reinspection upon the payment of $50 as a
reinspection fee or submit a written request for a hearing to the Public
Officer, in which request the applicant shall state the facts on which he
will base his contention that the Public Officer's determination was in
error. The Public Officer shall, within 30 days from the receipt thereof,
provide upon a minimum of five days' notice to the applicant a hearing and
render a decision thereon within 10 days thereafter. Where the violation
is of a regulation of the Board of Health, the hearing shall be before the
Health Officer. The Public Officer (or, where applicable, the Health Officer)
may in such decision affirm or reverse a previous determination or modify
his determination and agree to approve the application or terminate the
suspension or revocation upon compliance with specified conditions.
§ 159-167. Fees.
The fee for licenses issued pursuant to this Part 4 shall be due and payable
as of June 1 of each year. Where licenses are issued after December 1, the
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-164 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-167
C:954
licensee shall pay 1/2 of the license fee. The license fees shall be as provided
in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees.
§ 159-168. Refunds not permitted.
The applicant for a license pursuant to this Part 4 shall not be entitled to
any refunds of any fees by reason of the rejection of the application, the
suspension or revocation of any license or the transfer of ownership or
operation of premises prior to the termination of the license period.
§ 159-169. Terms and renewal.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the term of a license issued
pursuant to this article shall be for one year, from June 1 to May 31 of the
next succeeding year, and such license is renewable annually.
§ 159-170. Modifications or changes in premises.
Any license issued pursuant to this Part 4 shall cover only the number
of occupants and that part of the premises described in the application
therefor. Any increase in rooming units or in the number of roomers to be
accommodated or of the part of the premises utilized as a lodging house,
or other structural changes affecting the data contained in the application
or change in the person or persons actually in charge of operating or
maintaining the premises, shall require the submission and filing of an
amended application containing the additional information as required by
the Public Officer.
§ 159-171. Transferability.
The license issued pursuant to this Part 4 shall be nontransferable, and no
person other than the licensee shall operate or be permitted by the owner to
operate the licensed premises. Where there is to be a change of ownership
or operation, application shall be made for a new license.
§ 159-172. Posting and display.
Any licensee pursuant to this Part 4 shall display the license in the vestibule,
front hallway or other prominent and public place at or near the front
entrance of the building during the entire period for which the license is
issued.
§ 159-173. Effect of licensing on other laws.
The issuance of a license pursuant to this Part 4 shall constitute a
certification that the premises as of the date of issuance complies with this
chapter, but shall not be construed to constitute a certification that the
premises complies with any other part of this Code or any other ordinance
of the City nor any state law, nor shall it relieve any other official or public
agency from enforcing any applicable ordinance or law.
§ 159-167 CHARTER § 159-174
C:955
§ 159-174. Suspension and revocation; violations and penalties.
Upon determining that the premises is in violation of this chapter,
regulations of the Board of Health, this Code or any other ordinances of the
City or the laws of the state at any time after a license under this chapter is
issued, the Public Officer shall require correction of such violation within 10
days by notice in writing to the owner and operator. Upon failure to correct
the violation within the time prescribed, the owner and operator shall be
liable for the penalties for violations of this chapter prescribed in §§ 159-41
to 159-43. In addition thereto, the Public Officer may suspend temporarily
or conditionally refuse to renew the license issued for the premises for
failure to correct the violations, provided that, if the owner or operator
requests a hearing, no such suspension shall be effective until after a
hearing and determination pursuant to § 159-166, which determination
shall state reasonable terms and conditions upon which the suspension shall
terminate or renewal shall be granted. Where there has been a violation or
conviction within one year from the date of service of notice of violation and
the violation shall be repeated or remain unabated, resulting in a second
notice of violation or conviction thereon in the Municipal Court, the Public
Officer may thereafter permanently revoke the license or refuse renewal
thereof without conditions or terms. Where the provision which has been
violated is within the province of the Board of Health, the Health Officer
shall be substituted for the Public Officer under this section.
§ 159-174 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-174
C:956
ARTICLE XVII
Standards and Requirements
§ 159-175. Registration of occupants.
All establishments subject to licensing under this Part 4 shall keep a register
in which there shall be set forth in ink the name and last permanent address
and signature of each occupant, the number of the room to be occupied by
each occupant and the name and address of any person or persons to be
notified in case of emergency. Such register shall be available at all times
to the authorized representative of the Public Officer, Police Chief and Fire
Chief. Registration in a false name is prohibited. Beside each registration a
notation shall be made to indicate which occupant is a disabled person or
person requiring special care.
§ 159-176. Occupancy limitations: Class A lodging and
boardinghouses.
Occupancy by disabled persons or persons requiring special care in lodging
houses and boardinghouses (Class A) is prohibited.
§ 159-177. Occupancy limitations: Class B boardinghouses.
Occupancy by persons requiring special care is allowed, but occupancy by
disabled persons is prohibited, in boardinghouses (Class B).
§ 159-178. Right to ascertain physical or mental limitations of
occupants.
Where the Public Officer or the Health Officer has reason to believe that
an occupant of an establishment subject to licensing under this Part 4
either requires special care or is disabled, such Officer may require that
the person produce within 48 hours a physician's certificate attesting to the
mental or physical condition of such person as it relates to the category
in which the occupant is classified, and if the official shall determine that
the person requires special care and is thereby prohibited from residing
in a lodging house or boardinghouse (Class A) or is disabled and thereby
prohibited from residing in any lodging house or boardinghouse, then the
person shall vacate the premises and relocate in a suitable and appropriate
establishment no later than five days after the issuance of an order directed
to the owner or operator and the occupant therefor, and if the condition
of the person or circumstances under which he or she resides requires
immediate attention, the order shall so specify, and a period of less than five
days may be prescribed therefor.
§ 159-179. Occupancy by unemancipated minor prohibited.
The occupancy by an unemancipated minor of any rooming unit in an
establishment subject to licensing under this Part 4 is prohibited, and the
operator and occupant of the premises in which such occupancy occurs
shall be liable under this section.
§ 159-175 CHARTER § 159-180
C:957
§ 159-180. Overcrowding.
Occupancy in excess of the maximum occupancy permitted under
§§ 159-133 to 159-144 or the occupancy data set forth in the application
under § 159-163 is prohibited.
§ 159-181. Heating.
There shall be central heating in all establishments subject to licensing
under this Part 4 which shall supply adequate heat as required under
§ 159-109 to all occupied rooming units and to all bathrooms.
§ 159-182. Cooking and cooking facilities.
§ 159-183. Service of food.
Where food is served in any establishment subject to licensing under this
Part 4, the license therefor and the maintenance of the establishment
pursuant to the license shall be subject to the regulations and requirements
of Chapter 292, Sanitary Standards, Article X, and shall be supervised by
the Health Officer, as well as this chapter. The Public Officer is authorized
to enforce any violation determined by the Health Officer to be a violation
of this chapter, after a notice and hearing in accordance with the provisions
of § 159-25.
A. Incidental cooking in boardinghouses is prohibited. Incidental cooking
in lodging houses shall be permitted within individual rooming units,
provided:
(1) All the sanitary facilities required under § 159-93B, C, D and E are
contained in each such rooming unit.
(2) A sink meeting the requirements of § 159-93A either is contained
within the rooming unit or is available and accessible to the
occupants of the rooming unit in a common areaway, hall or room
on the same floor as the rooming unit.
(3) The superficial floor area of the rooming unit complies with the
requirements of § 159-136A where applicable.
B. Community cooking is prohibited except for cooking performed by the
owner or operator or his employees for occupants in boardinghouses
and nursing homes.
§ 159-180 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-183
C:958
ARTICLE XVIII
Sanitary Conditions and General Maintenance
§ 159-184. Bathrooms and water closets.
Bathroom and water closet facilities shall be provided for occupants of
establishments subject to licensing under this Part 4 pursuant to § 159-108,
except as provided for boardinghouses (Class B) in § 159-198 and for
nursing homes in § 159-199. All bathrooms shall be provided with inside
locks.
§ 159-185. Bedding, linen and towels; laundry facilities.
Every operator of an establishment subject to licensing under this Part 4
shall provide for all occupants bedding, mattresses, mattress covers, bed
linens, blankets, pillows, towels and soap. All such items shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition at all times. Fresh, clean bed linens and towels
shall be supplied for each new occupant at the commencement of the term
of occupancy, and fresh, clean bed linens and towels shall be supplied at
least once a week. Unless laundry service is provided for all occupants, a
laundry tub or washing machine shall be accessible to and available for use
by all occupants.
§ 159-186. Furniture and furnishings.
All furniture and furnishings in establishments subject to licensing under
this Part 4 shall be maintained in safe and sound condition and in good
repair, and upholstery and coverings shall be kept clean and free of rips and
tears. Windows shall be provided with blinds where necessary, draw drapes,
curtains or shades to provide occupants with privacy.
§ 159-187. Supervision of premises.
There shall be present and in charge of every establishment subject to
licensing under this Part 4 a person who is mentally and physically
competent to maintain the same in safe and sanitary condition, who shall
keep the exterior of the premises and all common interior areas, including
but not limited to the landings, stairways, hallways and bathrooms, clean,
free from garbage and other refuse, and free of infestation, and who shall
attend to the daily removal of garbage as required under § 159-86.
§ 159-184 CHARTER § 159-187
C:959

ARTICLE XIX
Safety and Fire Prevention
§ 159-188. Fire alarm system.
Every establishment subject to licensing under this Part 4 shall be provided
with a fire alarm system or device approved by the Underwriters'
Laboratory, Inc., or by such other laboratories qualified and equipped for
the testing of fire protection equipment or materials as approved by the
Public Officer and the Fire Chief. The system or device required under this
section shall be maintained in good working order at all times. The alarm
shall be provided with a heat-operated device which will automatically
set off the fire alarm system and shall be operated by electrical or by
self-contained automatic means. Alarm-sounding devices provided shall be
distinctive in pitch and shall be of such quality and so distributed on every
floor that they shall be effectively heard in case of fire in every room above
the usual sound level. Periodic testing shall be required in accordance with
regulations of the Public Officer approved by the Fire Chief.
§ 159-189. Exit signs.
Every licensed establishment under this Part 4 shall have exit signs posted
in common hallways visible from the door of every rooming unit, which
signs shall indicate the direction of and location of the nearest means of
egress. All such signs shall be of a size and color and be illuminated in
accordance with the regulations of the Public Officer, which regulations are
to be approved by the Fire Chief.
§ 159-190. Stairway doors to be self-closing.
Wherever there are doors or framework for doors in establishments subject
to licensing under this Part 4 which would close off sections of the stairway
from common hallways, areaways or other parts of the stairway, such doors
shall be equipped with self-closing devices or such framework shall be
equipped with self-closing devices.
§ 159-191. Storage of combustible materials and furnishings.
Storage of combustible materials and temporarily used or unused
household furnishings, bedding, mattresses and similar articles in
establishments subject to licensing under this Part 4 shall only be permitted
in enclosed fireproof compartments. Storage areas shall, as of December
2, 1963, comply with § 159-76, notwithstanding the date set forth in this
section.
§ 159-192. Disposal of combustible materials.
In all establishments subject to licensing under this Part 4, combustible
materials shall be disposed of in self-closing metal cans which can be
provided where needed on the premises for that purpose.
§ 159-188 CHARTER § 159-193
C:961
§ 159-193. Night-lights in hallways.
In establishments subject to licensing under this Part 4, nightlights shall
be provided in all common areaways leading to bathrooms as well as in
hallways in compliance with § 159-128.
§ 159-193 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-193
C:962
ARTICLE XX
Special Requirements for Boardinghouses (Class B)
§ 159-194. Responsible person to be on duty.
There shall be on duty at boardinghouses at all hours of the day and night at
least one responsible person capable of performing the duties of evacuation
for each 20 persons or fraction thereof housed therein.
§ 159-195. Evacuation instructions and procedure.
The operator of a boardinghouse (Class B), pursuant to regulations and
supervision of the Fire Chief, shall be responsible for instructions to all
occupants and employees as to procedure to be followed for firesafety and
for orderly emergency evacuation.
§ 159-196. Emergency exits.
In addition to the requirements of §§ 159-95 to 159-100, exit stairways
utilized as fire escapes on the exterior of the building of a boardinghouse
(Class B) shall extend all the way to the ground, and drop ladders for any
part thereof shall be prohibited. Access to outside exit stairways shall be
through doors leading to balconies, and window exits shall be prohibited. All
such exit doors shall be equipped with panic locks or similar devices readily
opened from the inside and shall open in the direction of exit travel.
§ 159-197. Fire extinguishers.
Portable fire extinguishers of adequate type and size as prescribed by
regulations shall be provided and hung in a conspicuous location in each
hallway or common areaway in boardinghouses (Class B), and where the
length of same exceeds 50 feet, there shall be a fire extinguisher for each
50 feet or fraction thereof, located at least 50 feet apart. There shall be fire
extinguishers provided in the kitchen and also in the basement or cellar,
which shall be located within 25 feet of any furnace or heating apparatus
therein. All fire extinguishers shall be inspected annually and shall further
be subject to a test every five years for hydrostatic pressure to determine
the capability of the extinguisher to withstand with safety the pressure
generated during operation.
§ 159-198. Bathrooms and water closets.
Bathroom and water closet facilities in boardinghouses (Class B) shall
be provided on each floor having sleeping rooms, in addition to the
requirements of § 159-89.
§ 159-194 CHARTER § 159-198
C:963

ARTICLE XXI
Special Requirements for Nursing Homes
§ 159-199. Compliance with applicable requirements.
Nursing homes shall comply with all the special requirements applicable to
boardinghouses (Class B) as set out in Article XX.
§ 159-200. Compliance with state law.
All nursing homes shall comply with state law, and any violation of such laws
or regulations thereunder shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 159-201. Fireproof construction.
All nursing homes shall be of fireproof construction.
§ 159-199 CHARTER § 159-201
C:965

Part 5
[Added 2-22-198F2enBcyesOrd. No. 2-1982]
ARTICLE XXII
Fence Restrictions
§ 159-202. General provisions.
A. Between residential premises and any street line, no fence exceeding
seven feet in height shall be placed or maintained within seven feet of
the street line. All such fences exceeding seven feet in height shall be
placed or maintained at least as many feet from such street line as the
height of the fence.
B. No fence exceeding 15 feet in height shall be placed or maintained in
the City of East Orange.
C. Barbed wire shall be permitted as a part of fences adjacent to
nonresidential premises.
§ 159-202 CHARTER § 159-202
C:967

Part 6
[Added 12E-2le3v-1at9o8r5 RBeyguOlradt.i oNnos. 31-1985]
ARTICLE XXIII
Elevators
§ 159-203. Inspections. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
All elevators within the City of East Orange shall be inspected by the
designee of the Director of the Department of Property Maintenance and
Code Enforcement in accordance with the New Jersey Statutes and the New
Jersey Administrative Code.
§ 159-204. Fees. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
The following fee schedule for elevator inspections, payable to the City of
East Orange, is hereby established:
Inspection Fee
Final-acceptance inspections and tests $250
Semiannual inspections $125
Annual inspections and tests $150
Reinspection $65
3-year inspections and tests $75
5-year inspections and tests $250
§ 159-205. Elevator car enclosures. [Added 10-10-1989 by Ord. No.
23-1989]
A. All operating and electrical parts and accessory equipment for elevator
devices shall be maintained in good working order and free of hazards.
A. Horizontally sliding doors shall be provided at each elevator car
entrance. The use of collapsible-type gates to guard the entrance to
elevator cars is expressly prohibited, except as otherwise provided in
this section.
B. The use of control systems capable of receiving floor calls prior to the
establishment of the car gate and hoistway door contacts or capable of
the retaining of more than one floor call subsequent to the
establishment of the car gate and hoistway door contacts, when used in
conjunction with collapsible-type car entrance gates, shall be
prohibited.
C. Collapsible-type gates in presently existing structures shall be removed
and replaced with horizontally sliding doors within six months of the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 159-203 CHARTER § 159-205
C:969
D. Elevators within incorporate collapsible-type gates and which do not
conform to the distance allowed from car gate to hoistway door
provided by the code of the American National Standard Institute
A17.1, Rule 204.4, Section 204.4e, entitled "Location" shall be removed
from service immediately, whereupon they shall be made conformant
and returned to service, pending gate replacement.
E. Elevators which incorporate the following systems — accept calls
(inserted by the pressing of car or hall buttons requesting elevator
response) placed without the hoistway door and car gate being closed;
or retain more than one call placed subsequent to the closing of the
hoistway door and gate; and which utilize a collapsing gate to guard the
car entrance — shall be removed from service immediately and have
their control systems altered to conform to this section and returned to
service, pending gate replacement.
§ 159-205 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-205
C:970
Part 7
[Added 12-8-2008 By OArbda.n Ndoo.n 2e3d- 2P0ro0p8e; rAtymended 10-14-2014 By
Ord. No. 27-2014; 2-23-2015 By Ord. No. 7-2015]
ARTICLE XXIV
Abandoned Property Designation Program
§ 159-206. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any property that is determined to be
abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) as
follows:
CITY — The City of East Orange.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Any person or entity holding a
note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any part thereof.
NUISANCE — Any property that is determined by the Public Officer to be a
nuisance if any one of the following applies:
Property must not have been legally occupied for six months and must
meet any one of the following criteria:
Property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment of
the Public Officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that
six-month period.
(1)
Construction was initiated and discontinued prior to completion,
leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no construction
has taken place for at least six months as of the date of
determination that the building is abandoned.
(2)
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent as of the date of determination.
(3)
The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the Public
Officer as defined in this section.
(4)
A.
Exceptions to abandoned property.
A property on which an entity other than the municipality holds
a tax sale certificate is not deemed to be abandoned if the owner
of the certificate 1) continues to pay all municipal taxes and liens
when due; and 2) initiates foreclosure proceedings within six
months after the property is eligible for foreclosure.
(1)
A property used on a seasonal basis is deemed to be abandoned
only if it meets any two of the criteria listed in Subsection A(1)
through (4) above.
(2)
B.
§ 159-206 CHARTER § 159-206
C:971
OWNER — The holder or holders of title to an abandoned property.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Director of Property Maintenance and Code
Enforcement or any designees of the Director of Property Maintenance and
Code Enforcement.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — An entity organized or authorized
to do business under the New Jersey statutes which shall have as one of its
purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential
buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the restoration of abandoned
property, the revitalization and improvement of urban neighborhoods, or
similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified by virtue of its staff,
professional consultants, financial resources, and prior activities set forth in
P.L. 2003, c. 10 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) to carry out the rehabilitation of
vacant buildings in urban areas.
§ 159-207. Designation and power of Public Officer.
The Public Officer is hereby directed to identify abandoned properties
within the municipality, place said properties on an abandoned property list,
established as provided in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55),
as amended, and provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are
required to effectuate an abandoned property list as provided by law.
§ 159-208. Abandoned property report.
The Public Officer shall provide a report to the Mayor, City Administrator
and governing body every six months with respect to the number and
location of properties on the abandoned property list, the status of those
properties, and any actions taken by the municipality or by any qualified
rehabilitation entity, designated pursuant to the authority granted the
The property is found to be unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3.
A.
The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the risk
of fire to the property and adjacent properties.
B.
The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to secure the property; or the municipality has
secured the property in order to prevent such hazards after the owner
has failed to do so.
C.
The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut vegetation
or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds have created
potential health and safety hazards and the owner has failed to take
reasonable and necessary measures to remove the hazards; or
D.
The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects, including the economic welfare of, the residents of
the area in close proximity to the property, and the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the conditions.
E.
§ 159-206 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-208
C:972
Public Officer, with respect to any property on the list or any other
abandoned property within the City of East Orange.
§ 159-209. Establishment of and updates to abandoned property
list.
The Public Officer shall establish the abandoned property list or any
additions thereto by publication in the official newspaper of the City of
East Orange, which publication shall constitute public notice and, within 10
days after publication, shall send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of record of every property
included on the list. The published and mailed notices shall identify
property determined to be abandoned setting forth the owner of record, if
known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The Public Officer,
in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send out a notice by regular
mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization, or property tax processing
organization that receives a duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to
Subdivision d of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64. When the owner of record is not known
for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but
instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as provided in
Section 5 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7). The mailed notice shall
indicate the factual basis for the Public Officer's finding that the property is
abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c. 62
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-54) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder,
specifying the information relied upon in making such finding. In all cases a
copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by the Public Officer
in the office of the Essex County Clerk or Register of Deeds and Mortgages.
This filing shall have the same force and effect as a notice of lis pendens
under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be indexed by the name of the
property owner as defendant and the name of the City as plaintiff, as though
an action had been commenced by the City against the owner.
§ 159-210. Appeals of abandoned property list inclusion.
A. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his or her
property on the abandoned property list by appealing that
determination to the Public Officer within 30 days of the owner's
receipt of the certified notice or 40 days from the date upon which the
notice was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the Public
Officer shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice was
published or posted, whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a
property on the abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the
Public Officer shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of
receipt of a request for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice
pursuant to § 159-209, the Public Officer shall schedule a hearing for
redetermination of the matter. Any property included on the list shall be
presumed to be abandoned property unless the owner, through the
submission of an affidavit or certification by the property owner
averring that the property is not abandoned and stating the reasons for
§ 159-208 CHARTER § 159-210
C:973
§ 159-211. Sale of tax lien.
such averment, can demonstrate that the property was erroneously
included on the list. The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied
by supporting documentation, such as but not limited to photographs,
repair invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for
appeal shall be that the property in question is not abandoned property
as that term is defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-54). The Public Officer shall decide any timely filed appeal within
10 days of the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify the property
owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.
B. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the Public Officer pursuant to § 159-210A by instituting, in
accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a summary proceeding in
the Superior Court, Law Division, sitting in Essex County, which action
shall be tried de novo. Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of
the date of the notice of decision mailed by the Public Officer pursuant
to Subsection A of this section. The sole ground for appeal shall be that
the property in question is not abandoned property as that term is
defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-54). The failure
to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis shall constitute a
jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse determination, except that,
for good cause shown, the Court may extend the deadline for instituting
the action.
C. The Public Officer shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined not to be abandoned
on appeal.
D. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the City of East
Orange shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect to
properties on the abandoned property list, at such time as any one
property has been placed on the list in accordance with the provisions
of this section, upon the expiration of the period for appeal with respect
to the property or upon the denial of an appeal brought by the property
owner.
A. Notwithstanding N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or the provisions of any other law to
the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned property list
and the property taxes or other municipal liens due on the property are
delinquent six or more quarters as of the date of expiration of the right
to appeal inclusion on the list, or, if an appeal has been filed, as of the
date that all opportunities for appeal of inclusion on the list have been
exhausted, then the tax lien on the property may be sold in accordance
with the procedures in the "tax sale law," N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., on or
after the 90th day following the expiration of that time of appeal or final
determination on an appeal, as appropriate. The City of East Orange
may, at its option, require that the sale of the tax sale certificate or any
subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax sale certificate held by the
§ 159-210 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-211
C:974
City be subject to the express condition that the purchaser or assignee
shall be obliged to perform and conclude any rehabilitation or repairs
necessary to remove the property from the abandoned property list
pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and to
post a bond in favor of the municipality to guarantee the rehabilitation
or repair of the property. The Public Officer may waive a requirement
to post a bond imposed by a municipality for any purchaser, assignee
or transferee of a tax sale certificate that provides documentation
acceptable to the Public Officer that the purchaser, assignee or
transferee is a qualified rehabilitation entity as defined in Section
3 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-80). The cost of rehabilitation
and repairs and the cost of the bond shall be added to the amount
required to be paid by the owner for redemption of the property. The
purchaser, assignee or transferee of the tax sale certificate who is
required to rehabilitate and repair the property shall be required to file
the appropriate affidavits with the Tax Collector, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-62, representing the amounts of moneys expended periodically
toward the rehabilitation or repair of the property. A purchaser,
assignee or transferee shall be entitled to interest on the amounts
expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at the delinquent rate of interest
for delinquencies in excess of $1,500 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67 of the
City of East Orange in effect for the time period when the amounts were
expended. The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or transferee,
under the auspices and with the authority of the City of East Orange,
shall be permitted to enter in and upon the property for the purposes
of appraising the costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all
other acts required to guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation
or repair of the property. No rehabilitation or repair work shall be
commenced, however, until proof of adequate liability insurance and an
indemnification agreement holding the City of East Orange harmless is
filed with the Public Officer. If the tax sale certificate is not purchased
at the initial auction of the tax sale certificate and the municipality
purchases the certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, then the City of
East Orange is authorized and empowered to convey and transfer to the
New Jersey Redevelopment Authority or any of its subsidiaries, without
receiving compensation therefor, all of its right, title and interest in that
certificate; however, any portion of the amount paid to the Tax Collector
to redeem the tax sale certificate that represents tax or other municipal
lien delinquencies and subsequent municipal liens, including interest,
shall be returned by the Tax Collector to the City of East Orange.
B. Remediation.
(1) If the City of East Orange or the New Jersey Redevelopment
Authority or its subsidiaries acquires the tax sale certificate for a
property on the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days'
written notice to the property owner and any mortgagee as of the
date of the filing of the lis pendens notice under Subdivision d of
Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), that entity shall be
permitted to enter upon the property and remediate any conditions
§ 159-211 CHARTER § 159-211
C:975
§ 159-212. Removal of property from list; remediation.
that caused the property to be included on the abandoned property
list. No remediation shall be commenced, however, if within that
ten-day period the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the City
of East Orange or the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority or its
subsidiary, as appropriate, in writing that the owner or mortgagee
has elected to perform the remediation itself. When the owner
or mortgagee elects to perform the remediation itself, it shall be
required to post bond in favor of the City of East Orange or the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority or its subsidiaries, as appropriate,
in order to ensure performance. The amount and conditions of the
bond shall be determined by the Public Officer.
(2) The cost of remediation incurred by the City of East Orange or the
New Jersey Redevelopment Authority or its subsidiaries pursuant
to this subsection, as so certified by the entity incurring the cost
upon completion of the remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the
property first in time and right to any other lien, whether the other
lien was filed prior to, or after the filing of any lien by the
municipality or the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority, except
for municipal taxes, liens and assessments and any lien imposed
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, P.L. 1976, c.
141 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.), together with any interest
thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and recorded as a
lien by the entity incurring the cost with the County Clerk or
Register of Deeds and Mortgages, as appropriate, in the county in
which the property is located.
C. Property maintained as abandoned property.
(1) Failure of an owner or lienholder to remove a property from the
abandoned property list within the period of time for appeal of
inclusion of the property on the list pursuant to Subdivision e of
Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), shall be prima
facie evidence of the intent of the owner to continue to maintain the
property as abandoned property.
(2) The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to
Subsection C(1) of this section shall be a public purpose and public
use for which the power of eminent domain may be exercised.
A. An owner may remove a property from the list of abandoned properties
prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes and municipal
liens due, including interest and penalties, and:
(1) By posting a certified check, money order, or a bond equal to the
cost of remediating all conditions because of which the property
has been determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of
P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and posting a certified check,
§ 159-211 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-212
C:976
§ 159-213. Acquisition of tax sale certificate; action to foreclose;
right of redemption.
money order, or a bond to cover the cost of any environmental
cleanup required on the property, evidenced by a certification by
a licensed engineer retained by the owner and reviewed and
approved by the Public Officer stating that the certified check,
money order, or bond adequately covers the cost of the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Public Officer that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the Public Officer
finds that the owner is actively engaged in remediating the
conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-55), as evidenced by significant rehabilitation activity on the
property, the Public Officer may grant an extension of time of not
more than 120 days for the owner to complete all work, during
which time no further proceedings will be taken against the owner
or the property.
B. If the owner has posted a certified check, money order, or a bond in
order to have a property removed from the abandoned property list and
the conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned have not been fully remediated within one year of the date
of posting a certified check, money order or bond, or, in the case of a
property which requires a remediation of any known, suspected or
threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has failed to enter into
a memorandum of agreement with the Department of Environmental
Protection or an administrative consent order, as the case may be, or if
an agreement or order is in effect but the owner has failed to perform
the remediation in conformance with the agreement or order, then the
cash or bond shall be forfeited to the municipality, which shall use the a
certified check, money order, or bond and any interest which has
accrued thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the
property or performing the environmental remediation. Any funds
remaining after the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or
cleaned up shall be returned to the owner.
A. When a person other than the City of East Orange or the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority or its subsidiaries acquires a tax sale
certificate for a property on the abandoned property list at tax sale, the
purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the right of redemption
at any time after the expiration of six months following the date of the
sale of the tax sale certificate.
B. Notwithstanding Section 6 of P.L. 1948, c. 96 (N.J.S.A. 54:5-104.34),
when the City of East Orange is the purchaser at tax sale of any
property on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, or
when the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority or any of its
subsidiaries acquires the tax sale certificate pursuant to Subdivision a
§ 159-212 CHARTER § 159-213
C:977
§ 159-214. Grounds for reopening judgment.
Once a final judgment barring the right of redemption with respect to
a property on the list of abandoned properties has been recorded, no
court shall reopen such judgment at any time except on the grounds of
lack of jurisdiction or fraud in the conduct of the action; in any such
proceeding, the provisions of P.L. 1996, C. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-20 et seq.),
shall be construed liberally in favor of the purchaser, assignee or transferee
of the tax sale certificate.
§ 159-215. Property deemed not abandoned; certification of
abandonment.
of Section 37 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56), an action to
foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in accordance with
the provisions of Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
(1) Posts a certified check, money order, or a bond equal to the cost of
remediating the conditions because of which the property was
determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c.
62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as determined by the Court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the Court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 36
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) have been remedied in full.
A. If an entity other than the City of East Orange has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate on a property that has
not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that property shall
not be placed on the abandoned property list pursuant to Section 36 of
P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) if 1) the owner of the certificate has
continued to pay all City of East Orange taxes and liens on the property
in the tax year when due; and 2) the owner of the certificate takes
action to initiate foreclosure proceedings within six months after the
property is eligible for foreclosure pursuant to either Subdivision a or
Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, as appropriate, and diligently pursues
foreclosure proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
B. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two of the additional criteria
set forth in Section 4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81).
C. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provision of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
§ 159-213 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-215
C:978
§ 159-216. Transfer of possession and control of abandoned
property.
§ 159-217. Filing of complaint: required information.
D. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the
Tax Collector shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a
certification that the property fulfills the definition of abandoned
according to the criteria set forth in Sections 4 and 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and N.J.S.A. 55:19-82).
A. A summary action or otherwise to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the City of East Orange
may be brought by the City of East Orange in the Superior Court in
Essex County. If the Court shall find that the property is abandoned
pursuant to Section 4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81) and the
owner or party in interest has failed to submit and initiate a
rehabilitation plan, then the Court may authorize the City of East
Orange to take possession and control of the property and develop a
rehabilitation plan.
B. The City of East Orange, granted possession and control, may
commence and maintain those further proceedings for the
conservation, protection or disposal of the property or any part thereof
that are required to rehabilitate the property, necessary to recoup the
cost and expenses of rehabilitation and for the sale of the property;
provided, however, that the Court shall not direct the sale of the
property if the owner applies to the Court for reinstatement of control
of the property as provided in Section 15 of P.L. 2001 c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-92).
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit plans for
rehabilitation to the City of East Orange, obtain appropriate
construction permits for rehabilitation or, in the alternative, submit
formal applications for funding the cost of rehabilitation to local, state
or federal agencies providing such funding within that six-month period
shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the owner has failed to take
any action to further the rehabilitation of the property.
A. A complaint filed pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-84) shall include:
(1) Documentation that the property is on the municipal abandoned
property list or a certification by the public officer that the property
is abandoned; and
(2) A statement by an individual holding appropriate professional
qualifications that there are sound reasons that the building should
be rehabilitated rather than demolished based upon the physical,
§ 159-215 CHARTER § 159-217
C:979
§ 159-218. Filing of complaint; notice requirements; entry upon
property by City.
§ 159-219. Plan for rehabilitation and reuse.
aesthetic or historical character of the building or the relationship
of the building to other buildings and lands within its immediate
vicinity.
A. Within 10 days of filing a complaint pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), the plaintiff shall file a notice of lis pendens
with the County of Essex Recording Officer.
B. At least 30 days before filing the complaint, the City of East Orange
shall serve a notice of intention to take possession of an abandoned
building. The notice shall inform the owner and interested parties that
the property has not been legally occupied for six months and of those
criteria that led to a determination of abandonment pursuant to Section
4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81). The notice shall provide that
unless the owner or a party in interest prepares and submits a
rehabilitation plan to the appropriate City of East Orange official, the
City will seek to gain possession of the building to rehabilitate the
property, and the associated costs shall be a lien against the property,
which may be satisfied by the sale of the property, unless the owner
applies to the Court for reinstatement of control of the property as
provided in Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92). After the
complaint is filed, the complaint shall be served on the parties in
interest in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of Court.
C. After serving the notice of intent pursuant to Subsection B of this
section, the City of East Orange or its designee may enter upon that
property after written notice to the owner by certified mail, return
receipt requested, in order to secure, stabilize or repair the property, or
in order to inspect the property for purposes of preparing the plan to be
submitted to the Court pursuant to Section 12 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-89).
A. Any owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to Section 7
of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-84) by submitting a plan for the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property which is the subject of the
complaint and by posting a bond equal to 125% of the amount
determined by the Public Officer or the Court to be the projected cost of
rehabilitation. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a
complaint shall be submitted within 60 days after the complaint has
been filed, unless the Court provides the owner with an extension of
time for good cause shown.
B. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall include, but
not be limited to:
§ 159-217 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-219
C:980
§ 159-220. Mortgage holder or lienholder to be designated in
possession of property.
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
C. The Court shall approve any plan that, in the judgment of the Court, is
realistic and likely to result in the expeditious rehabilitation and reuse
of the property, which is the subject of the complaint. If the Court
approves the owner's plan, then it may appoint the Public Officer to act
as monitor of the owner's compliance. If the owner fails to carry out any
step in the approved plan, then the City may apply to the Court to have
the owner's bond forfeited, possession of the building transferred to the
City to complete the rehabilitation plan and authorization to use the
bond proceeds for rehabilitation of the property. The owner shall
provide quarterly reports to the City on its activities and progress
toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. The owner shall
provide those reports to the Court on its activities that the Court
determines are necessary.
D. The Court may reject a plan and bond if it finds that the plan does not
represent a realistic and expeditious means of ensuring the
rehabilitation of the property or that the owner or his representatives
or agents, or both, lack the qualifications, background or other criteria
necessary to ensure that the plan will be carried out successfully.
A. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-84), the
mortgage holder or lienholder may seek to be designated in possession
of the property by submitting a plan and posting a bond meeting the
same conditions as set forth in Section 10 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-87). The plan shall be submitted within 60 days after the Court
has rejected the owner's plan, unless the Court provides the mortgage
holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause shown. If
the Court approves any such mortgage holder or lienholder's plan, it
shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation and reuse and may appoint the
§ 159-219 CHARTER § 159-220
C:981
§ 159-221. City to be designated in possession of property.
Public Officer to act as monitor of the party's compliance. The mortgage
holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide quarterly reports
to the Court and the City on its activities and progress toward
rehabilitation and reuse of the property. If the mortgage holder or lien
holder fails to carry out any material step in the approved plan, then the
Public Officer shall notify the Court, which may order the bond forfeit,
grant the City possession of the property, and authorize the City to use
the proceeds of the bond for rehabilitation of the property.
B. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property pursuant to Subsection A of this section, including Court costs
and reasonable attorney's fees, may be added to the unpaid balance due
that mortgage holder or lienholder, with the interest calculated at the
same rate set forth in the note or security agreement; or, in the case of a
tax lienholder, at the statutory interest rate for subsequent liens.
A. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of Section 11
of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-88), then the City shall submit a plan
to the Court which conforms with the provisions of Subdivision b of
Section 10 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-87). The plan shall
designate the entity which shall implement the plan, which may be the
City or that entity designated in accordance with the provisions of
Section 13 P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-90).
B. The Court shall grant the City possession of the property if it finds that:
(1) The proposed rehabilitation and reuse of the property is
appropriate and beneficial;
(2) The City is qualified to undertake the rehabilitation and reuse of
the property; and
(3) The plan submitted by the City represents a realistic and timely
plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
C. The City shall take all steps necessary and appropriate to further the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with the plan
submitted to the Court. In making its findings pursuant to this
subsection, the Court may consult with qualified parties, including the
Department of Community Affairs, and, upon request by a party in
interest, may hold a hearing on the plan.
D. Where either a redevelopment plan pursuant to P.L. 1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq.), or a neighborhood revitalization plan pursuant to
P.L. 2001, c. 415 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-490 et seq.) has been adopted or
approved by the Department of Community Affairs, as appropriate,
encompassing the property which is the subject of a complaint, the
Court shall make a further finding that the proposed rehabilitation and
§ 159-220 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-221
C:982
§ 159-222. Designation of qualified rehabilitation entity.
§ 159-223. City deemed possessor of property; borrowing of funds;
reporting and filing requirements.
reuse of the property are not inconsistent with any provision of either
plan.
A. The City may exercise its rights under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.), directly, or may designate a qualified rehabilitation
entity to act as its designee for the purpose of exercising the City's
rights where that designation will further the rehabilitation and reuse
of the property consistent with the City's plans and objectives. This
designation shall be made by resolution of the Council of the City of
East Orange. The City Council may delegate this authority to the Public
Officer.
B. Regardless of whether the City exercises its rights directly or
designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant to this section,
while in possession of a property pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.), the City shall maintain, safeguard, and maintain
insurance on the property. Notwithstanding the City's possession of the
property, nothing in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall be
deemed to relieve the owner of the property of any civil or criminal
liability or any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the
owner.
A. If the City has been granted possession of a property pursuant to
Section 12 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-89), the City shall be
deemed to have an ownership interest in the property for the purpose of
filing plans with public agencies and boards, seeking and obtaining
construction permits and other approvals, and submitting applications
for financing or other assistance to public or private entities. For the
purposes of any state program of grants or loans, including but not
limited to programs of the Department of Community Affairs and the
New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, possession of a
property under this subsection shall be considered legal control of the
property. Notwithstanding the granting of possession to the City,
nothing in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall be deemed
to relieve the owner of the property of any obligation the owner or any
other person may have for the payment of taxes or other City liens and
charges, or mortgages or liens to any party, whether those taxes,
charges or liens are incurred before or after the granting of possession.
The granting of possession shall not suspend any obligation the owner
may have as of the date of the granting of possession for payment of any
operating or maintenance expense associated with the property,
whether or not billed at the time of the granting of possession.
B. The Court may approve the borrowing of funds by the City to
rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security interest with
§ 159-221 CHARTER § 159-223
C:983
§ 159-224. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession by
owner.
priority over all other liens or mortgages other than municipal liens.
Prior to granting this lien priority, the Court shall find that 1) the City
sought to obtain the necessary financing from the senior lienholder,
which declined to provide such financing on reasonable terms; 2) the
City sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the senior
lienholder, which refused to provide such subordination; and 3) lien
priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to provide
financing on reasonable terms.
C. Where the City has been granted possession by the Court in the name of
the City, the City may seek the approval of the Court to assign its rights
to another entity, which approval shall be granted by the Court when it
finds that: 1) the entity to which the City's rights will be assigned is a
qualified rehabilitation entity; and 2) the assignment will further the
purposes of this section.
D. Where the City has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to act on
its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide quarterly
reports to the City on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation
and reuse of the property. The City or qualified rehabilitation entity, as
the case may be, shall provide such reports to the Court as the Court
determines to be necessary. If the Court finds that the City or its
designee have failed to take diligent action toward rehabilitation of the
property within one year from the grant of possession, then the Court
may request the City to designate another qualified rehabilitation entity
to exercise its rights, or if the City fails to do so, may terminate the
order of possession and return the property to its owner.
E. The City shall file a notice of completion with the Court, and shall also
serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage holder or lienholder, at
such time as the City has determined that no more than six months
remain to the anticipated date on which rehabilitation will be complete.
This notice shall include an affidavit of the public officer attesting that
rehabilitation can realistically be anticipated to be complete within that
time period, and a statement setting forth such actions as it plans to
undertake to ensure that reuse of the property takes place consistent
with the plan.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the grant of
possession, but no later than 30 days after the City has filed a notice of
completion with the Court or, in the event the notice of completion is
filed within less than one year of the grant of possession, within 30 days
after the City has filed notice.
B. The Court may allow additional time for good cause if that additional
time does not materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place
undue hardship on the City, or affect any of the terms or conditions
§ 159-223 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-224
C:984
§ 159-225. Obligations of owner prior to grant of petition.
§ 159-226. Granting of title to City; authority to sell.
If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and possession
of the property within 30 days after the entity in possession has filed a
under which the City has applied for or received financing for the
rehabilitation of the property.
C. Any petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and possession of
the property filed pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-92) shall:
(1) Include a plan for completion of the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property consistent with the plan previously approved by the
Court;
(2) Provide legally binding assurances that the owner will comply with
all conditions of any grant or loan secured by the City or repay
those grants or loans in full, at the discretion of the maker of the
loan or grant; and
(3) Be accompanied by payment equal to the sum of 1) all City liens
outstanding on the property; 2) all costs incurred by the City in
bringing action with respect to the property; 3) any costs incurred
by the City not covered by grants or loans to be assumed or repaid
pursuant to this section; and 4) any costs remaining to complete
rehabilitation and reuse of the property, as determined by the
public officer, which payment shall be placed in escrow with the
Clerk of the Court pending disposition of the petition.
A. Prior to the granting of a petition on the part of the owner by the Court
pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92), the
owner may be required to post a bond or other security in an amount
determined by the Court, after consultation with the Public Officer, as
likely to ensure that the owner will continue to maintain the property in
sound condition. That bond or other security shall be made available to
the City to make any repair on the property in the event of a Code
violation which is not corrected in timely fashion by the owner. The
bond or other security may be forfeited in full in the event that the
owner fails to comply with any requirement imposed as a condition of
the reinstatement petition filed pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c.
210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92).
B. The owner may seek approval of the Court to be relieved of this
requirement after five years, which shall be granted if the court finds
that the owner has maintained the property in good repair during that
period, that no material violations affecting the health and safety of the
tenants have occurred during that period, and that the owner has
remedied other violations in a timely and expeditious fashion.
§ 159-224 CHARTER § 159-226
C:985
notice of completion or in any event within two years after the initial grant
of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that may be set
by the Court in granting a reinstatement petition filed pursuant to Section
15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92), upon petition from the entity in
possession, the Court may grant the City title or authorize the City to sell
the property, subject to the provisions of Section 19 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-96).
§ 159-227. Procedure of City to gain title to property; authorization
to sell; proceeds.
§ 159-228. Distribution of proceeds.
A. Where the City seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase the
property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall approve,
and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court
may authorize the City to sell the building free and clear of liens, claims
and encumbrances, in which event all such liens, claims and
encumbrances shall be transferred to the proceeds of sale with the
same priority as existed prior to resale in accordance with the
provisions of this section except that municipal liens shall be paid at
settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the property shall be
distributed as set forth in Section 20 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-97).
B. The City may seek approval of the Court to sell the property to a third
party when the Court finds that such conveyance will further the
effective and timely rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
C. Upon approval by the Court, the City shall sell the property on such
terms and at such price as the court shall approve, and may place the
proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying court costs in the order
of priority set forth in Section 20 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-97).
A. The proceeds paid pursuant to Subdivision c of Section 19 of P.L. 2003,
c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-96) shall be distributed in the following order of
priority:
(1) The costs and expenses of sale;
(2) Other governmental liens;
(3) Repayment of principal and interest on any borrowing or
indebtedness incurred by the City and granted priority lien status
pursuant to Subdivision a of Section 21 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-98);
(4) A reasonable development fee to the City consistent with the
standards for development fees established for rehabilitation
programs by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency;
§ 159-226 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-228
C:986
§ 159-229. Authority of Public Officer to place lien on property;
remedies.
§ 159-230. Court's denial of rights and remedies to lienholders and
mortgage holders.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.), a court may in its discretion deny a lienholder or
mortgage holder of any or all rights or remedies afforded lienholders and
mortgage holders under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), if the
Court finds that the owner of a property subject to any of the provisions of
P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) owns or controls more than a
fifty-percent interest in, or effective control of, the lienholder or mortgage
holder or that the familial or business relationship between the lienholder
or mortgage holder and the owner precludes a separate interest on the part
of the lienholder or mortgage holder.
§ 159-231. Recourse of City against individuals or corporations.
(5) Other valid liens and security interests, in accordance with their
priority; and
(6) The owner.
A. The Public Officer, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien on
the property to cover any costs of the City in connection with a
proceeding under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), incurred
prior to the grant by the Court of an order of possession under P.L.
2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a City lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9 with the rights
and status of a City lien pursuant thereto.
B. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
Section 24 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-101), the remedies
available under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall be
available to the City with respect to any abandoned property, whether
or not the City has established an abandoned property list as provided
in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and whether or not
the property has been included on any such list.
A. With respect to any lien placed against any real property pursuant to
the provisions of Section 1 or Section 3 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5) or Section 1 of P.L. 1989, c. 91 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3a) or any receiver's lien pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 295 (N.J.S.A.
2.A:42-114 et seq.), the City shall have recourse with respect to the lien
against any asset of the owner of the property if an individual, against
any asset of any partner if a partnership, and against any asset of any
owner of a ten-percent interest or greater if the owner is any other
business organization or entity recognized pursuant to law.
§ 159-228 CHARTER § 159-231
C:987
§ 159-232. Properties eligible for tax sales; notice.
B. The Public Officer, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien on
the property to cover any costs of the City in connection with a
proceeding under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), incurred
prior to the grant by the Court of an order of possession under P.L.
2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a City lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9 with the rights
and status of a City lien pursuant thereto.
C. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
Section 24 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-101), the remedies
available under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall be
available to the City with respect to any abandoned property, whether
or not the City has established an abandoned property list as provided
in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and whether or not
the property has been included on any such list.
A. The City may hold special tax sales with respect to those properties
eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which are also on an
abandoned property list established by the City pursuant to Section 36
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). If the City elects to hold a special
tax sale, it shall conduct that sale subject to following provisions:
(1) The City shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on properties at
the sale, which may include, but shall not be limited to:
documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with the City's plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and such other criteria as the City may
determine are necessary to ensure that the properties to be sold
will be rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner consistent
with the public interest;
(2) The City may establish minimum bid requirements for a special tax
sale that may be less than the full amount of the taxes, interest and
penalties due, the amount of such minimum bid to be at the sole
discretion of the City, in order to ensure that the properties to be
sold will be rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner
consistent with the public interest;
(3) The City may combine properties into bid packages, and require
that bidders place a single bid on each package, and reject any and
all bids on individual properties that have been included in bid
packages;
(4) The City may sell properties subject to provisions that, if the
purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that has been set forth
as a condition of sale pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section or
§ 159-231 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-232
C:988
§ 159-233. Eminent domain proceedings; establishment of fair
market value.
misrepresents any material qualification that has been established
as a condition of eligibility to bid pursuant thereto, then the
properties and any interest thereto acquired by the purchaser shall
revert to the City, and any amount paid by the purchaser to the City
at the special tax sale shall be forfeited to the City;
(5) In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any
property or bid package in a special tax sale, the City may
designate the unsuccessful but qualified bidder whose bid was
closest to the successful bid as an eligible purchaser;
(6) In the event that the purchaser of that property or bid package fails
to meet any of the conditions of sale established by the City
pursuant to this section, and the purchaser's interest in the
property or properties reverts to the City, the City may
subsequently designate the entity previously designated as an
eligible purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or
properties, and assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the
basis of that entity's bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms
and conditions of the special tax sale.
(7) The City shall provide notice of a special tax sale pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms of sale
established by the City pursuant to Subsection A(2), (3), or (4) of
this section. Nothing shall prohibit the City from holding a special
tax sale on the same day as a standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. With respect to any eminent domain proceeding carried out under
Section 37 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56), the fair market value
of the property shall be established on the basis of an analysis which
determines independently:
(1) The cost to rehabilitate and reuse the property for such purpose as
is appropriate under existing planning and zoning regulations
governing its reuse or to demolish the existing property and
construct a new building on the site, including all costs ancillary to
rehabilitation such as, but not limited to, marketing and legal costs;
(2) The realistic market value of the reused property after
rehabilitation or new construction, taking into account the market
conditions particular to the neighborhood or subarea of the City in
which the property is located; and
(3) The extent to which the cost exceeds or does not exceed the market
value after rehabilitation, or demolition and new construction, and
the extent to which any "as is" value of the property prior to
rehabilitation can be added to the cost of rehabilitation or
demolition and new construction without the resulting combined
§ 159-232 CHARTER § 159-233
C:989
§ 159-234. Removal of property from abandoned property list.
If a property which an entity other than the City has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate is placed on the abandoned
property list, the property shall be removed from the list if the owner of the
certificate pays all the City's taxes and liens due on the property within 30
days after the property is placed on the list; provided, however, that if the
owner of the certificate fails to initiate foreclosure proceedings within six
months after the property was first placed on the list, the property shall be
restored to the abandoned property list.
§ 159-235. Request to place property on abandoned property list.
cost exceeding the market value as separately determined. If the
appraisal finds that the cost of rehabilitation or demolition and new
construction, as appropriate, exceeds the realistic market value
after rehabilitation or demolition and new construction, there shall
be a rebuttable presumption in all proceedings under this
subsection that the fair market value of the abandoned property is
zero, and that no compensation is due the owner.
A. Any interested party may submit in writing a request to the Public
Officer that a property be included on the abandoned property list
prepared pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55),
specifying the street address and block and lot number of the property
to be included, and the grounds for its inclusion. Within 30 days of
receipt of any such request, the Public Officer shall provide a written
response to the party, either indicating that the property will be added
to the list of abandoned properties or, if not, the reasons for not adding
the property to the list. For the purposes of this subsection, "interested
party" shall include any resident of the City, any owner or operator of a
business within the City or any organization representing the interests
of residents or engaged in furthering the revitalization and
improvement of the neighborhood in which the property is located.
B. Any interested party may participate in any redetermination hearing
held by the Public Officer pursuant to Subdivision e of Section 36 of P.L.
1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). Upon written request by any interested
party, the public officer shall provide the party with at least 20 days'
notice of any such hearing. The party shall provide the public officer
with notice at least 10 days before the hearing of its intention to
participate, and the nature of the testimony or other information that it
proposes to submit at the hearing.
§ 159-233 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-235
C:990
ARTICLE XXV
Maintenance of Vacant Properties, Registration Requirements and
Fees
§ 159-236. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Shall include the titleholder, any agent of the titleholder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, § 17), and
P.L. 2014, c. 35, or any other entity determined by the City of East Orange
to have authority to act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation; provided, however, that any property that contains all
building systems in working order and is being actively marketed by its
owner for sale or rental shall not be deemed vacant. Residential properties
that meet the aforementioned criteria and are subject to a summons and
complaint in an action for foreclosure shall be deemed vacant property in
accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35. Property determined to be "abandoned
property" in accordance with the meaning of such term in the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall also be deemed
to be vacant property for the purposes of this section.
§ 159-237. General requirements.
A. Effective November 1, 2014, the owner of any vacant property as
defined herein shall within 60 days after the building becomes vacant
property or within 30 days after assuming ownership of the vacant
property, whichever is later, file a registration statement for each such
vacant property with the Public Officer on forms provided by the Public
Officer for such purposes. The registration shall remain valid for one
year from the date of registration. The owner shall be required to renew
the registration annually as long as the building remains vacant
property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed in § 159-239 of this chapter for each vacant property
registered.
B. Any owner of any building that meets the definition of vacant property
prior to November 1, 2014, shall file a registration statement for that
property on or before November 30, 2014. The registration statement
shall include the information required under § 159-238 of this chapter,
as well as any additional information that the Public Officer may
reasonably require.
§ 159-236 CHARTER § 159-237
C:991
§ 159-238. Registration statement requirements; property
inspection.
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement,
the owner of any vacant property shall provide access to the City to conduct
an exterior and interior inspection of the building to determine compliance
with the municipal code, following reasonable notice, during the period
covered by the initial registration or any subsequent renewal.
C. The owner shall notify the Public Officer within 30 days of any change
in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Public Officer for such purpose.
D. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administration enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of the building.
A. The registration statement shall include the name, street address, email
address and telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age
or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process, in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding, on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code. This person must maintain an office in the state of New
Jersey. The statement shall also include the name, street address, e-mail
address and telephone number of the person responsible for
maintaining and securing the property, if different. Additionally, the
registration statement shall include the names, mailing addresses and
telephone numbers of any creditor owners. [Amended 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 34-2016]
B. In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, the requirements of § 159-238A
shall also apply to in-state and out-of-state creditors who have filed a
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose a property that is
vacant or becomes vacant. Out-of-state creditors shall be required to
appoint an in-state representative or agent who shall be listed on the
registration statement. Out-of-state creditors shall include the full name
and contact information of the in-state representative or agent on the
registration statement. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
C. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements of
this article as to location of residence or office may designate himself or
herself as agent.
D. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceedings or administrative enforcement proceedings brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
§ 159-237 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-238
C:992
§ 159-239. Fee schedule.
The initial registration fee for each building shall be $500. The fee for the
first renewal is $1,500, and the fee for the second renewal is $3,000. The
fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is $5,000.
§ 159-240. Requirements for owners of vacant property.
The owner of any building that has become vacant property, and any person
maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant, shall, within 30 days:
§ 159-241. Administration.
The Mayor and/or his designee may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this article.
§ 159-242. Notice requirements for creditors.
In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, if the Public Officer determines that
violations of Article XXV have occurred on vacant residential property for
which a summons and complaint in an action for foreclosure has been filed
by an owner who is a creditor, the Public Officer shall issue a notice to the
creditor to correct the violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or
within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an imminent
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies
the Public Officer of a change of the authorized agent or until the
owner files a new annual registration statement. The designation of an
authorized agent in no way releases the owner from any requirement of
Article XXV.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in § 159-63 and other applicable provisions of the code of the City of
East Orange; and
B. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to § 159-238 of
this chapter), and the person responsible for day-to-day supervision and
management of the building, if such person is different from the owner
holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed
in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or
sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than 18 inches by
24 inches; and
C. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete.
§ 159-238 CHARTER § 159-242
C:993
threat to public health and safety. The notice shall include a description of
the conditions that gave rise to the violation.
§ 159-243. Violations and penalties.
A. Other than out-of-state creditor owners, any owner who is not in full
compliance with Article XXV or who otherwise violates any provision of
Article XXV or of the rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000, for
each offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this chapter shall
be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on the property. For
purposes of this subsection, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of § 159-240 of this
chapter, or such other matters as may be established by the rules and
regulations of the Mayor or designee of the Mayor shall be deemed to
be violations of this article.
B. In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, if an out-of-state creditor owner
that is subject to Article XXV is found by the City's Municipal Court or
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
requirement to appoint an in-state representative or agent, such
creditor owner shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the
violation. However, any fines imposed on a creditor for the failure to
appoint an in-state representative or agent shall commence on the day
after the ten-day period set forth in Subdivision a(1) of Section 17 of P.L.
2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51), for providing notice to the Municipal
Clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage has been served.
C. In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, if an out-of-state creditor owner
that is subject to Article XXV is found by the City's Municipal Court or
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or upkeep
violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this article, such creditor
owner shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation.
Any fines imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days
following receipt of the notice, except if the violation presents an
imminent risk to public health and safety, in which case any fines shall
commence 11 days following receipt of the notice. [Amended
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
D. In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, no less than 20% of any money
collected from out-of-state creditor owners under this article shall be
utilized by the City for Municipal Code enforcement purposes.
§ 159-242 EAST ORANGE CODE § 159-243.1
C:994
§ 159-243.1. Funds and fees collected. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 34-2016]
Any funds collected as vacant and abandoned property registration fees in
excess of the funds necessary to operate and enforce the provisions of this
article would be for vacant and abandoned property purposes such as the
securing, rehabilitation, foreclosure or demolition of vacant and abandoned
properties within the City of East Orange at the discretion of the governing
body.
§ 159-243.1 CHARTER § 159-243.1
C:995

Part 8
[Added 3-14S-e2n0i1o6r BHyouOsridn.g No. 4-2016]
ARTICLE XXVI
Senior Care Communities
§ 159-244. Definition of "senior care communities."
"Senior care communities," as used in this article, means a development of
residential living units exclusively for persons who are at least 55 years of
age or older, which provides accommodations for independent living.
§ 159-245. Compliance with state law.
All senior care communities shall comply with state law, and any violation
of such laws or regulations thereunder shall constitute a violation of this
article.
§ 159-246. Housing security guards. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 3-2018; 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 22-2019]
Senior care communities shall be required to have and maintain a
registration/log-in book for all nonresidents and have present on the
premises an unarmed and/or armed security guard for 24 hours each day
of the week. The unarmed and/or armed security guard shall be at the
front entrance of the building, and the security guard must have access
to building management and/or the owner in case of emergencies, all
electronic surveillance equipment, and the registration/log-in book for the
premises. As used in this section, a "security guard" shall mean an armed or
unarmed person that is a registered licensed security officer in accordance
with the requirements of the N.J. Security Officer Registration Act, N.J.S.A.
45:19A-1 et seq.
§ 159-247. Penalty.
Any violations of this article shall be subject to the penalties outlined in
§ 159-44 of the East Orange Municipal Code.
§ 159-244 CHARTER § 159-247
C:997
Chapter 161
IDENTIFICATION CARD PROGRAM
§ 161-1. Establishment and administration.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTERING DEPARTMENT — The City of East Orange's Licensing
Bureau.
APPLICANT — Any person who shall apply for a City identification card to
the administering department.
CARE ADDRESS — The address of any hospital, shelter or any entity in
the City of East Orange serving homeless individuals or victims of domestic
abuse. Said care address may be used in place of a City address on an
applicant's identification card once the entity or organization provides a
care address letter.
CARE ADDRESS LETTER — A letter, dated within 15 days of its submission
to the City by the applicant, from a care address entity as defined herein,
stating that the applicant has received services from the entity in the past
15 days and may use entity's address for mailing purposes. This letter must
be notarized by the care address facility. The applicant's identification card
shall read "care of" the care address entity and provide said care address.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — An identification card issued by the City of East
Orange that shall display the cardholder's photograph, name, date of birth,
gender, city address or care address, signature, date of issuance and date
of expiration.
RESIDENT — Any person who can establish that they are a resident of the
City of East Orange in accordance with § 161-4 of this chapter.
§ 161-3. Issuance of City identification card; display; term; fee.
A. Identification cards shall be issued by the City to individuals who can
provide sufficient proof of their identity and residency in accordance
with the terms of this chapter.
B. The administering department, as set forth herein, shall be responsible
for the implementation of this program, including the adoption of all
rules and procedures to be followed.
A. The City of East Orange identification card shall be available to all
residents of the City regardless of their race, creed, sexual orientation,
citizen status or economic status.
§ 159-247 EAST ORANGE CODE § 161-3
C:998
§ 161-4. Proof of residency and identity.
B. The identification card shall display, at a minimum, the applicant's full
name, photograph, address, date of birth, signature, date of card
issuance and expiration date.
C. The administering department shall establish, through policy and
procedures, guidelines to protect the addresses of victims of domestic
violence or alternate requirements for applicants who lack a permanent
address.
D. The identification card shall be designated in a manner to deter fraud,
which may include barcodes, serial numbers, watermarks, the Borough
Seal or other security measures.
E. The fee for the issuance of a City identification card shall be $15 per
family or $10 for adults, senior citizens, veterans or the disabled.
A. Proof of identity. The administering department shall establish the
criteria for determining the necessary documents and value/weight to
give said documents for purposes of establishing identity and residency.
However, at a minimum, the applicant must produce more than one of
the following documents in order to establish identity:
(1) A United States or foreign passport;
(2) A state-issued driver's license;
(3) A state-issued identification card;
(4) A United States permanent resident card;
(5) A consular identification card;
(6) A certified United States or foreign birth certificate;
(7) A social security card;
(8) A national identification card with photo, name, address, date of
birth and expiration date;
(9) A foreign driver's license;
(10) A current government visa;
(11) A United States Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN)
authorization letter;
(12) An electronic benefit transfer card (EBT); or
(13) Any other documentation that the administering department
deems acceptable.
§ 161-3 CHARTER § 161-4
C:999
§ 161-5. Validity of identification card.
All City departments shall accept the identification card issued pursuant
to this chapter as evidence of residency for the purpose of allowing the
holder therein to access City services and benefits unless such acceptance
is prohibited by federal or state law or unless the department or authority
has reason to suspect fraud by the purported cardholder.
§ 161-6. Confidentiality.
The records relating to the application and issuance of City identification
cards shall be maintained in accordance with law. The administering
department shall not retain original or copies of documents provided by
an applicant to prove identity or residency when applying for a City
identification card. The City shall make its best efforts to protect the
confidentiality of all City identification card applicants to the maximum
extent permissible by law unless given express permission by the applicant.
§ 161-7. Disclaimer.
The City of East Orange is providing the personal identification cards for
the purpose of allowing City residents to access City services and facilities.
The City will not assume any liability arising from: 1) the accuracy of
the information provided by the applicant or 2) against any acts, criminal
or otherwise, committed by the individual(s) while possessing or using
the identification card. The City does not waive any of its protections as
afforded under federal, state or local laws, including, but not limited to, the
B. Proof of residency. In order to establish residency, the applicant must
present one or more of the following items showing both their name and
residential address located within the City:
(1) A utility bill;
(2) A local property tax statement or mortgage payment receipt;
(3) A bank account statement;
(4) Proof that the applicant has a minor child enrolled in a City school;
(5) An employment pay stub;
(6) A jury summons or court order issued by state or federal court;
(7) A federal or state income tax or refund statement;
(8) An insurance bill;
(9) A care address letter confirming residency; or
(10) Any other document the administering department determines is
acceptable.
§ 161-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 161-7
C:1000
immunities under the New Jersey Tort Claims Act N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq., by
processing or issuing a City of East Orange identification card.
§ 161-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 162
INSURANCE
A. Altering or intentionally damaging the City identification card, using
another person's identification card, or allowing a cardholder's
identification card to be used by another person will result in
confiscation of the card and shall be deemed in violation of N.J.S.A.
2C:28-7. Submission of false statements and/or documents to obtain a
City identification card is a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:21-4 and is
punishable by law. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter is subject to the statutory penalties outlined herein as well as
the penalties provided in the Code of the City of East Orange as
outlined therein.
§ 161-7 CHARTER § 161-8
C:1001

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 2-13-1979 as Ord. No. 7-1979]
§ 162-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
COMMISSIONER — The State Commissioner of Insurance.
LIEN — Any lien, including liens for taxes, special assessments, municipal
charges, demolition and clearance costs, arising by operation of law against
property in favor of the City.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Tax Collector of the City of East Orange, the
Director of the Department of Property Maintenance or such other
department head or public officer charged by law with the collection of
assessments and municipal charges against real property.231
REAL PROPERTY — Property upon which there is erected any residential,
commercial or industrial building or structure.
SPECIAL LIEN — A lien upon fire insurance proceeds created pursuant to
this article and N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.232
§ 162-2. Conditions for payment.233
No insurance company shall pay a claimant any claim in excess of $2,500
for fire damages on any real property located within the City of East Orange
pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the effective
date of this article until such time as all taxes and assessments and all other
municipal liens or charges due and payable, including cost of demolition,
appearing on the official certificate of search, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8,
shall have been paid either by the owner of such real property or by the
insurance company. Except as otherwise herein set forth, the claim of the
municipality shall constitute a special lien against the proceeds of the fire
insurance policy and shall, as to such proceeds, be prior to all other liens
and claims except the claim of a mortgagee of record named in such policy.
§ 162-3. Construal.
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed or construed to alter or
impair the right of the City to acquire or enforce any lien against property
under any other law of this state but shall be in addition to any other power
provided by law to acquire or enforce such right.
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 162-1 CHARTER § 162-4
C:1003
§ 162-4. Payments of liens by insurance companies.234
Any insurance company writing fire insurance policies in the City of East
Orange is authorized and required, prior to the payment of any claims for
fire damages in excess of $2,500 to any claimant within the City of East
Orange, to pay to the municipality the amount of the liens appearing on
the official certificate of search and such other recorded liens or related
charges as may be certified to the insurance company by the Public Officer,
including the cost of demolition appearing on the official certificate of
search or receipt of a certificate of estimated cost or that no such costs
will be assessed, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-11; provided, however, that,
if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of the
lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings, at
which time such moneys, together with interest accruing thereon, shall be
disbursed in accordance with the final order or judgment of the Court.
§ 162-5. Certificate of search to be maintained and updated.
The Public Officer shall maintain and update a certificate of search, which
certificate will be available upon request by any insurance company.
§ 162-6. Agreement with owner to pay liens in installments.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the City Council of the
City of East Orange may at any time enter into an agreement with the owner
of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments
or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for
the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to
Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes if the governing
body of the municipality is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to
be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. An insurance
company receiving a certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the
City Council of the City of East Orange is authorized to make full payment
on the claim to the insured person.
§ 162-7. Filing of ordinance.
The City Clerk of the City of East Orange is hereby authorized and directed
to file a certified copy of this article with the State Commissioner of
Insurance immediately upon its passage.
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 162-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 162-7
C:1004
Chapter 165
LAUNDROMATS AND DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS,
COIN-OPERATED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 94.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 165-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING — The cleaning of textiles, fabrics,
garments or other articles by the use of any solvent other than water in a
dry-cleaning unit designed to be used by the general public. For the purpose
of this definition, the term "used by the general public" shall be deemed to
refer to the insertion of such textiles, fabrics, garments or other articles into
a dry-cleaning unit or the removal of the same from such unit by a person
other than any employee of a dry-cleaning establishment or person owning
and operating such establishment.
CUSTOMER AREA — That portion of the establishment to which the general
public is permitted access.
LAUNDROMAT — Sometimes commonly known as "launderette,"
"automatic laundry" or "self-operating laundry." A place of business
containing automatic washing and drying machines, conducted for the
purpose of laundering, washing and drying wearing apparel, household
linens and other washable household fabrics, which items are brought
to such place by the customer to be laundered and dried in automatic
machines, coin-operated or otherwise, and wherein a majority or all of the
manual operations are performed by the customer or under his control.
MAINTENANCE AREA — That portion of the establishment to which the
customer is not permitted access and which is used for general
maintenance and storage purposes.
PREMISES — Any place, whether self-service or otherwise, maintained for
use of and by the general public for the dry cleaning of clothing, apparel
or other fabrics or household articles by or in automatic or coin-operated
machines.
SOLVENT — Any cleaning fluid which is free of additives to mask the
odor, classified by the National Board of Fire Underwriters or American
Insurance Association as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures, and not
more toxic than the generally accepted threshold limit value for
perchlorethylene as promulgated by the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
§ 162-7 CHARTER § 165-2
C:1005
§ 165-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or operate
a coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment or laundromat without first
obtaining a license therefor.
§ 165-3. Attendant required on premises; supervision.
All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall have an attendant on
the licensed premises at all times when the premises are open for business
or public use. No coin-operated dry-cleaning machine shall be used by
the general public except under the continuous, direct supervision of an
employee or the owner of a coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment who
has previously been examined and certified in writing by the Chief Building
Inspector as competent to handle such machines.
§ 165-4. Operating restrictions and requirements.
A. No licensee of a coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment shall permit
or allow such machines to be used by any person who is less than 16
years of age. A suitable sign indicating such age restriction shall be
prominently posted and maintained on the premises.
B. The public shall only be permitted access to that portion of coinoperated
or self-service dry-cleaning machines which is necessary for
the use of such machines. The remaining portion of each machine shall
be separated from the customer area by a partition in which there are
grills or similar ventilation devices. This partitioned-off area shall be
called the maintenance area. The access door to the maintenance area
shall be self-closing and locked to prevent access by the public.
C. No person other than the licensee, his representative or the City
inspector shall enter the maintenance area.
D. The maintenance area shall not be interconnected with that of heating
devices requiring air for combustion, such as gas dryers, water heaters
and comfort-heating devices.
E. Heating devices requiring air for combustion shall be installed in such
fashion as to obtain air for combustion from the outside atmosphere.
F. Ventilation of establishments shall be effected by the drawing of air
from the customer area through grills or other openings in the partition
by means of an exhaust fan or fans operating in the maintenance area.
Exhaust fans shall have a rated capacity of 400 cubic feet per minute
per machine for normal use and 1,000 cubic feet per minute per
machine for use in emergencies. The rated capacities of exhaust fans
shall appear on this equipment or its nameplate. If air is being
constantly exhausted as a built-in feature of the equipment, the rated
capacity of the fan can be reduced by this amount.
§ 165-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 165-4
C:1006
G. Each coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning machine shall be
equipped with an exhaust system that maintains a minimum of 100
cubic feet per minute velocity through the loading door whenever the
door is open. The ductwork connections to this system shall be sealed
(soldered or taped) and the discharge outlet extended to a minimum
height of five feet above the roofline and shall be located so that the
effluent may not reenter the premises.
H. A concrete dike or metal pan or similar facility shall be installed at the
location of each machine to collect and contain spillage. This facility
shall be constructed of a material impervious to the solvent used.
I. The floor covering in the customer area shall be made of a material
resistant to the solvents used in such machines.
J. All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall have two exits,
which shall be at least 25 feet apart from each other and shall lead
directly to the outside.
K. A respirator approved by the United States Bureau of Mines as
affording protection against organic solvent vapors shall be provided
for and used by maintenance personnel during correction of leakages,
cleaning of the system, removal of lint and muck bags and at all times
when the odor of solvent is noticeable.
L. The customer and maintenance areas shall be equipped with a fire
extinguisher approved for use against electrical or flammable liquid
fires as to type, size and quantity for such use by the National Board of
Fire Underwriters or American Insurance Association classification on
portable fire extinguishers for this occupancy.
M. A step-by-step, readily legible instruction list for operation of machines
shall be posted in a conspicuous location near the machine in the
customer area. These instructions shall include a list of items not to be
dry-cleaned in coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning machines,
such as those made in part or completely of plastic, rubber, leather,
paper, fur, angora or urethane.
N. Each establishment shall post in a conspicuous location, readily visible
from the outside of the premises, the telephone number or numbers to
be called in the event of an emergency.
O. Each machine shall be provided with an interlock system to prevent the
loading door from being opened during the normal cycle or in the event
of a power failure. This system may be either electrical or mechanical,
or both.
P. No machine shall be permitted to be operated in a coin-operated or selfservice
dry-cleaning establishment which in normal operation fails to
eliminate all vapors from the cleaned items upon completion of the drycleaning
cycle.
§ 165-4 CHARTER § 165-4
C:1007
Q. Immediate action shall be taken to eliminate solvent odor in the
customer area, and said area shall be immediately cleared of
customers. Failure to take such action shall be just cause for closing the
establishment. Vapors or odors from establishments shall be exhausted
in such manner as not to constitute air pollution, as defined by
statute.235
R. No person shall use spotting equipment containing flammable material
in a coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning establishment.
S. Each machine shall be inspected each day it is in operation and kept in
good repair by maintenance personnel. A record shall be kept in the
maintenance area of all inspections and repairs made. Any machine
which is out of order shall be so marked and shall not be used until
properly repaired.
T. Solvents shall be kept in closed airtight containers and handled in such
manner as to prevent the escape of odors and shall be stored in such a
manner as to conform to the National Board of Fire Underwriters or
American Insurance Association requirements for closed containers
inside of buildings. (Chapter 3, NBFU-Flammable Liquids.)
U. Each day or after the specified number of cycles recommended by the
manufacturer, dry-cleaning machines shall be serviced, including but
not limited to:
(1) Adding "charged" solvent to restore the main supply.
(2) Cleaning the button trap and the lint bag, trap or screen.
(3) Cleaning the tank sump and removing the sludge.
(4) Adding filter aids to dispersers.
(5) Resetting the cycle counter, if one is provided.
(6) Emptying the water from the separator.
V. All installations shall be equipped with a water-conserving device for
recirculating the water used in the dry-cleaning operation. No such
water shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the City.
W. Only the solvent as defined in § 165-1 and specified by the equipment
manufacturer, or its equivalent, shall be used.
X. Coin-operated dry-cleaning plants shall utilize only solvents classified
as nonflammable or as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and
uses.
Y. All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall prominently display
lighted indoor signs warning the general public of the danger of
235. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2C-2.
§ 165-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 165-4
C:1008
§ 165-5. Hours of operation. [Amended 7-8-1968 by Ord. No.
41-1968]
No coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment or laundromat shall operate or
be open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:30 a.m. nor
10:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight except on Sunday, when such hours shall be
12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight.
§ 165-6. Compliance with other regulations.
All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments and laundromats shall meet
the requirements of all established state and local laws, codes, ordinances
and regulations, including but not limited to air pollution, electrical wiring,
plumbing, fire prevention, waste disposal, sanitation, solvent storage, food
or beverage vending and hours of operation.
§ 165-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980236]
Any person, persons or firms violating any provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or 90 days of
community service.
Chapter 170
LICENSES AND FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and escrow deposits for land use — See
§§ 51-56 and 51-57.
Canvassers, solicitors and peddlers — See Ch.
118.
Housing agents — See Ch. 159.
Motor vehicle repair garages — See Ch. 175.
Open-air lots — See Ch. 186.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 195.
Taxi and limousine fees — See Ch. 249.
Mercantile permits — See Ch. 280.
Retail food-handling establishments — See
Ch. 288.
excessive solvent vapor inhalation and skin irritation from
unevaporated dry-cleaning solvent.
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-4 CHARTER § 165-7
C:1009

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 170-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings given herein:
BUSINESS — All kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises,
establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with
all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of
which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or
indirectly, on any premises in the City.
ISSUING OFFICER — The Tax Collector or such other person specifically
designated by any provision of this Code or other City ordinance to accept
applications, issue any license or renewals of licenses and collect the fees
therefor from persons applying for the same.
LICENSEE, APPLICANT or PERMITTEE — Such terms shall mean the same
thing and may be used interchangeably and shall include the agent of
the licensee, applicant or permittee.[Amended 9-27-1982 by Ord. No.
15-1982; 6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 23-1984]
LICENSE, BUSINESS — Any business license or permit issued by the
municipality as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord.
No. 14-2016]
LICENSE or PERMIT — Such terms shall mean the same thing and be
used interchangeably. For purposes of convenience only, the term "license"
shall generally designate official authorization of a continuing business or
activity or a person desiring to conduct the same, and the term "permit"
shall generally designate municipal authorization for an act or activity that
will be completed, thus terminating the operativeness of the permit.
LICENSE, REGULATORY — Any license having for its basic purpose the
regulation of the subject matter of licensing under a supervisory officer,
with a fee set for purposes of defraying the cost of administration, not for
revenue purposes.
LICENSE, REVENUE — Any license which shall have, in addition to any
regulatory functions, provisions for fees in excess of administrative costs
and thereby providing a source of revenue to the City.
PERSON — Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations, or
any officers, agent or employees of any kind or personal representatives
thereof in any capacity, acting either individually or with any other person
either under personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PREMISES — All lands, structures and fixtures of any lot, place or parcel
covered by any regulation or ordinance provision.
REGULATORY LICENSE — Any license having for one of its purposes the
regulation of the subject matter of licensing under a supervising officer,
§ 170-1 CHARTER § 170-1
C:1011
whether or not there be in conjunction therewith a fee set for revenue
purposes.
REPORTING OFFICER — Any City personnel who shall be responsible for
any part of the approval or enforcement procedure under any licensing law
or ordinance and who shall, for the purposes thereof, report to and work
under the supervision of the supervising officer.
REVENUE LICENSE — Any license which shall be for the exclusive purpose
of raising revenue as distinguished from regulation of the subject matter of
licensing.
SUBJECT MATTER OF LICENSING — Any person, equipment, device,
materials, premises, services or activities which are required by state law,
this Code or other City ordinances to be licensed or are the subject of any
provisions contained in any such law or ordinance.
SUPERVISING OFFICER — The person designated by ordinance or, in the
absence thereof, by the Mayor, in writing filed with the City Clerk, to be
responsible for approving any regulatory license or renewal thereof and
for enforcing provisions pertinent thereto.[Amended 10-14-1968 by Ord.
No. 55-1968]
WAGE THEFT — Having been found guilty, liable or responsible in any
judicial or administrative proceeding for unpaid wages in violation of the
New Jersey Wage and Hour Law (N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a et seq.), the New Jersey
State Wage Payment Law (N.J.S.A. 34:11-4.1 et seq.), N.J.S.A 2C:40A-2, the
Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., or any other federal or
state law related to the payment of wages or the collection of debt owed due
to unpaid wages.[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 14-2016]
§ 170-2. Scope and applicability.
§ 170-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, without first
obtaining a license where required by this Code or other City ordinance or
state law, to perform any of the following acts:
A. This chapter shall govern the issuance of all licenses by the City, except
where otherwise expressly provided by ordinance or expressly
exempted therefrom. It is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with the existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter. In the
event of a conflict between this chapter and a specific provision of any
other provision of this Code or other City ordinance, the specific
provision shall govern, but only to the extent that such conflict cannot
be reconciled.
B. Except as aforesaid, it is the purpose of this chapter to establish
uniform procedures for licensing in this City to be utilized in
conjunction with substantive regulations set forth in this chapter and
other chapters of this Code.
§ 170-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-3
C:1012
§ 170-4. Responsibilities of agents; appointment of agents for outof-
state licensees.237
The agent or other representative of any person engaged in any business,
activity or enterprise in the City subject to any licensing requirement shall
be personally responsible for the compliance of his principals with this
chapter and of the business with the provisions thereof. Prior to the
issuance of any license to a person not residing within the state, the
applicant shall appoint an agent within the state upon whom process may
be served and shall furnish the issuing officer with the agent's name and
post office address within this state. In the event of a change of agent or
a change of address of the agent, the licensee shall forthwith notify the
issuing officer. All such appointments of agents shall be accepted in writing
by the agent. In the event any licensee fails to notify the issuing officer
of a change in agent, or in the event the agent is terminated during the
term of the license, the license shall be suspended until a new or corrective
appointment is made.
§ 170-5. Licensees: general standards of conduct.
Every licensee under this chapter shall:
§ 170-6. Wage theft prevention.238 [Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No.
14-2016]
A. Sell any goods, facilities or services.
B. Solicit business or offer goods or services for sale or hire.
C. Acquire or use any vehicle or device in the City.
D. Engage in any activity or perform any act connected therewith.
E. Permit any premises owned or under his control or possession to be
used for any activity subject to licensing.
A. Permit inspection. Permit inspections of the subject matter of licensing
and examination of his books and records pertaining thereto.
B. Comply with governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
C. Operate properly. Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary
practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals
or welfare.
D. Cease business. Refrain from operating the licensed business on
premises after expiration of his license and during the period his license
is revoked or suspended.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
238. Editor's Note: Former § 170-6, Display of license and insignia, was repealed 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 7-2015.
§ 170-3 CHARTER § 170-6
C:1013
A. Grounds for denial of license renewal. Notwithstanding any provision to
the contrary, wage theft is understood to have such an effect on the
public morals and welfare that no license shall be issued or renewed to
an applicant, licensee, or business entity that has been found liable of a
wage theft violation which has not been cured by compliance with the
order or decision of the judicial, governmental, or administrative entity
determining the same, within 90 days of any judgment, inclusive of any
appeal.
B. Grounds for denial of license transfer. No license shall be transferred to
or from an applicant, licensee, or business entity that has been found in
violation which has not been cured by compliance with the order or
decision of the judicial, governmental, or administrative entity
determining the same.
C. Application for license and renewal; investigation of applicants and
licenses.
(1) At the time of its initial application and application for renewal of
its license, each applicant shall certify under penalty of perjury
whether applicant has been found guilty or liable of wage theft
during the prior 24 months; the dates, location, and nature of such
wage theft; efforts by the applicant to cure such wage theft
violation; and the ultimate disposition of any wage theft violations.
The City shall maintain copies of the applications and certifications
for the purpose of complying with this chapter.
(2) If the City is made aware of adjudications of wage theft against
applicants or existing licensees, whether at the time of an initial
application for a license, an application for renewal of its license, or
after the issuance of the license, the City department or division
responsible for issuing the subject license shall 1) obtain a copy of
any order or decision of the judicial, governmental, or
administrative entity finding that a wage theft violation has
occurred; 2) determine whether 90 days of any final judgment,
inclusive of any appeal, have elapsed; and 3) request that the
licensee or applicant provide documentation of is having cured the
wage theft violation or appealed from any final judgment. If the
City department or division determines that the licensee or
applicant has not cured the wage theft violation within 30 days of
the department or division's request for documentation, then its
license shall be suspended or application denied until the licensee
or applicant cures the wage theft violation and provides
documentation of its having cured same.
(3) Any information or reports of wage theft violations occurring in the
City of East Orange shall be routed by the Office of Constituent
Services to the appropriate City department or division responsible
for issuing the subject license.
§ 170-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-6
C:1014
§ 170-7. Effect of other regulations concerning licensing of
vehicles.
Any general or special license fees required for any kind of vehicles for
the privilege of being operated upon the public highways by any statute,
provision of this Code or other City ordinance shall not abrogate, limit or
affect any further requirements of this chapter or of other ordinances or
laws for additional and separate licenses, permits and insignia and fees for
such vehicles or other uses for and relating to the privilege of using the
same in the business so licensed.
D. False statements. If an applicant makes false statements, fails to report
information as required in § 170-4, Subsection C(1), or falsely certifies
whether it has been found guilty or liable of wage theft in accordance
with Subsection C(1) herein, the City may seek revocation of any
previously issued license or deny the application for a license or
renewal.
E. Annual review. Each year as a matter of due diligence, the Office of
Constituent Services shall submit and open public records request to
the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development Wage
and Hour Division requesting for each licensee a wage claim form filed
against the licensee during the prior 24 months, as well as any
accompanying case files, judgments or determinations. The Office of
Constituent Services shall 1) obtain a copy of any order or decision of
the judicial, governmental, or administrative entity finding that a wage
theft violation has occurred; and 2) determine whether 90 days of any
judgment, inclusive of any appeal, have elapsed. If so, the name of each
such licensee shall be forwarded to the appropriate City department or
division responsible for issuing its license for disposition in accordance
with § 170-4 herein.
§ 170-6 CHARTER § 170-7
C:1015

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 170-8. (Reserved)239
§ 170-9. Duties of issuing officer.
The issuing officer shall have the following duties:
§ 170-10. Duties of supervising officer.
The supervising officer, as designated by ordinance or as appointed by the
Mayor, shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
A. Receive applications for all licenses and refer the same to the
supervising officer for review and processing.
B. After receipt of all fees and charges, issue all licenses and renewals
thereof as directed by the supervising officer.
C. Secure, prior to the issuance of any license or renewal thereof, where
applicable, certification of the Tax Collector that municipal taxes
pertaining to the license have been paid.
D. Keep all records pertaining to licenses, licensees and all agents
appointed by any licensee.
E. Relay to the supervising officer information pertinent to the license,
licensee or applicant submitted to the issuing officer.
F. Aid the supervising officer in the preparation of application forms,
regulations governing license and application procedure and
instructions to licensees as to procedures for securing licenses, and
provide upon request such forms or instructions to persons seeking the
same, as well as any rules and regulations issued by the supervising
officer pertaining to such licenses.
A. Establish, with the aid of the issuing officer, the application forms for
issuance and renewals of all licenses, including, where desired, a
requirement that the application be executed under oath, and
procedures for processing which shall minimize duplication and
trafficking of documents and permit the supervising officer to review all
matters pertaining to the license prior to determining any action to be
taken thereon.
B. Review all applications referred to him by the issuing officer and make
such referrals and investigations and hold such hearings as may be
necessary to determine the suitability of the applicant in accordance
with the standards set forth in this chapter and that the subject matter
of the license complies with applicable state laws and City ordinances
239. Editor's Note: Former § 170-8, Designation of issuing officer, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-8 CHARTER § 170-10
C:1017
§ 170-11. Reporting officers.
The supervising officer shall arrange for and receive reports from other
City departments, agencies and personnel, to be designated as reporting
officers, with regard to other licensing provisions of this Code or any
other licensing ordinance, and he may further delegate, with the consent
of the respective department head, such other and further duties in the
investigation and enforcement of licenses as may be more appropriately
conducted by the personnel of some department other than that of the
supervising officer.
and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and issue such
directives as may be appropriate to the issuing officer concerning the
issuance of any license or renewal thereof.
C. Coordinate the efforts of all reporting officers and other personnel
concerned with and responsible for provisions governing the subject
matter of the license, and establish such procedures and initiate such
meetings as may be necessary from time to time to accomplish the
same.
D. Supervise the enforcement of this chapter, including the issuance of
notices of violations where required, holding of hearings and
determination of suspension or revocation of all licenses, and arrange
for inspection at such times and with such frequency as is necessary to
protect the public and assure compliance with all applicable laws and
ordinances.
E. Make such examinations of the books and records of any applicant or
licensee as shall be reasonably necessary to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions governing the subject matter of
licensing.
F. Promulgate in writing such rules and regulations concerning the
subject matter of any license needed to refine or detail further the
requirements of any provision of this Code or other City ordinance or
state law applicable thereto, provided that any such rules or regulations
affecting a department or agency not normally under the jurisdiction of
the supervising officer shall only be issued with the approval in writing
annexed thereto of the head of such department or agency or, if not
contrary to state law, by direction of the Mayor.
G. Submit to the Mayor and the City Council, as required and requested,
such reports on the operation of the licensing regulations as may be
desired from time to time.
H. In accordance with the duties herein set forth and after the conduct of
such hearings and appeals as may be relative to § 170-25, the
supervising officer shall, within 30 days, issue a directive relating to the
disposition or renewal of the license.
§ 170-10 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-12
C:1018
§ 170-12. Reports from Chief of Police.
A. The supervising officer may, prior to taking any action with reference to
a license, request a report from the Chief of Police, or the Chief of Police
may, on his own initiative, submit any report on an existing or
contemplated licensed operation, service or facility, which report shall
contain information as to whether:
(1) The conduct of the subject matter of licensing, or proposed conduct
thereof, would be injurious to public health, safety or morals.
(2) The facility creates or will create unreasonable interference with
traffic.
(3) The facility, by reason of the nature of its operation, attracts
undesirable persons and causes congregations, giving rise to
commission of criminal offenses, disorderly persons act offenses,
acts of juvenile delinquency or violations, on or about the premises
or activity licensed, of this Code and other City ordinances.
B. The Chief of Police shall thereupon report the same in writing, with the
grounds therefor and his recommendations, to the supervising officer.
Before denying any application or license renewal or suspending or
revoking any license pursuant to such report, the supervising officer
shall provide a copy of such report to the licensee or applicant for a
license and provide such person and the Chief of Police with notice and
opportunity for a hearing thereon pursuant to § 170-25 and make
findings thereon and take action in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this chapter.
§ 170-12 CHARTER § 170-12
C:1019

ARTICLE III
Procedure and Fees
§ 170-13. Review of application for license or renewal.
The supervising officer shall examine the qualifications of each applicant for
a license or renewal thereof to determine that such applicant or licensee
would conduct the licensed activity in a lawful manner and shall be guided
in making his determination by the following factors:
§ 170-14. Filing of application.
A. Existence of any convictions for any crimes, the reasons therefor and
the demeanor of the applicant subsequent thereto.
B. The license history of the applicant, whether such person, in previously
obtaining a license in this City or any other city, has had such license
rejected or suspended, the reasons therefor and the demeanor of the
applicant subsequent to such actions, the timeliness of past
applications for licenses, and the applicant's continued compliance with
all license requirements after having been granted any previous
licenses.
C. Such other facts relevant to the general personal history of the
applicant as may be necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility
of the applicant to conduct the licensed activity.
A. Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this
Code or any other ordinance of this City shall submit an application for
such license to the issuing officer, which application shall be a written
statement, with such copies as the supervising officer may require,
upon forms provided by the issuing officer.
B. New applicants for superintendents in dwellings (Chapter 159), motor
vehicle and/or auto body repair garage (Chapter 175), used car lots
(Chapter 186) and peddlers, hucksters and itinerant vendors (Chapter
118) shall require a criminal history record check pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-1.4. The applicant must submit to being fingerprinted in
accordance with applicable state and federal laws, rules and
regulations. The Director of Licensing is authorized to exchange
fingerprint data with and receive criminal history record information
from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and shall disseminate that
information to the Director of Licensing. All costs and expenses shall be
paid by the applicant. [Added 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015
C. New applicants for superintendents in dwellings (Chapter 159) shall
obtain the required criminal history record check pursuant to
Subsection B of this section, through any agency of their choosing that
provides said service, providing said agency has been previously
approved by the East Orange Police Department. [Added 12-19-2016
by Ord. No. 60-2016]
§ 170-13 CHARTER § 170-15
C:1021
§ 170-15. Contents of application.
All applications for licenses shall require the disclosure of all necessary
information for compliance with § 170-13 and any other information which
the supervising officer shall find necessary in the administration of this
chapter.
§ 170-16. Payment of fees.
Any fee in connection with any license shall be paid to the issuing officer at
the time of the filing of the application.
§ 170-17. Issuance of receipts.
In the event a license cannot be or is not issued at the time the application
therefor is made, the issuing officer shall issue a receipt to the applicant
for the money paid in advance, provided that such receipt shall not be
construed as the approval of the issuing officer for the issuance of a license
or entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain the activity subject
to licensing.
§ 170-18. Schedule of fees. [Amended 4-22-1968 by Ord. No.
28-1968; 9-22-1969 by Ord. No. 33-1969; 5-25-1970 by Ord. No.
30-1970; 11-9-1970 by Ord. No. 55-1970; 9-13-1971 by Ord. No.
37-1971; 6-12-1972 by Ord. No. 24-1972; 12-18-1972 by Ord. No.
53-1972; 12-12-1976 by Ord. No. 40-1976; 12-23-1976 by Ord. No.
59-1976; 5-7-1979 by Ord. No. 25-1979; 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980; 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 32-1980; 2-9-1981 by Ord. No.
6-1981; 9-14-1981 by Ord. No. 20-1981; 9-27-1982 by Ord. No.
15-1982; 4-11-1983 by Ord. No. 19-1983; 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
34-1983; 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. 42-1983; 3-5-1984 by Ord. No.
7-1984; 6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 23-1984; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986; 11-1-1993 by Ord. No. 8-1993; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999240]
A. No person shall carry on any business named in this section without
first having obtained a license therefor, the license fees for which are
listed as follows:
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
Ammunition and
explosives
$2 June 1 Fire Chief Ch. 146, Fire
Prevention
Amusement
promotions
$500
240. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-18
C:1022
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
Auctioneers $100 June 2 Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
Bazaars $100 1 day See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
Boardinghouses $150 Public
Officer
Ch. 159,
Housing
Standards;
Property
Maintenance
Bowling alleys,
per alley
$25 June 1 Chief of
Police
Building
contractors
$25 July 1 Chief
Building
Inspector
Annual
renewal
$10
Carnivals $1,000 See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
Car washes $30 1 day
Child-care centers $75 annual Ch. 159,
Housing
Standards;
Property
Maintenance
Circulars,
advertisements,
magazines,
periodicals,
newspapers,
sample
merchandise, etc.,
per person
$10 Daily Tax Collector Ch. 182,
Newspapers,
Advertisements
and Periodicals
Circuses: See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
First day $500
§ 170-18 CHARTER § 170-18
C:1023
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
Each additional
day
$150
Coin-operated
amusement
device
$100 June 1 Chief of
Police
Ch. 103,
Amusement
Devices
Coin-operated
dry-cleaning
establishments,
each machine
$30 May 1 Chief
Building
Inspector
Ch. 165,
Laundromats
and Dry-
Cleaning
Establishments,
Coin-Operated
Concerts $1,000 See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
Dance halls and
discotheques
$300 June 1 Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
Ch. 128, Dance
Halls and
Discotheques
Dance permits $60
Dispensing
machines (food
and milk)
$40 per
machine
Health
Officer
Dogs: February
1
Tax Collector Ch. 132, Dogs
and Other
Animals
License,
including
registration tag
and state fee
$7
Unspayed or
unneutered
$3
Tag, duplicate $1 Tax Collector Ch. 132, Dogs
and Other
Animals
Rabies tab $1
Impoundment,
for each day or
fraction thereof
that such dog is
impounded
$1 Tax Collector Ch. 132, Dogs
and Other
Animals
§ 170-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-18
C:1024
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
License fee for
potentially
dangerous dog
$700 annual Ch. 132, Dogs
and Other
Animals
Drug centers $75 annual Ch. 159,
Housing
Standards;
Property
Maintenance
Fairs $250 See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
Festivals $250 See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
Flammable
liquids, wholesale
$28 Fire Chief
Flea markets $100 See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
Food and cake
sales
$60
Forced sales $150 60 days Tax Collector Ch. 223, Sales,
Forced-Out-of-
Business
Garages and
service stations,
each pump
$30 May 1 Fire Chief Ch. 146, Fire
Prevention
Garage, yard and
porch sale
See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
Incinerator $25 August 1 Director of
Air Pollution
Control
Ch. 94, Air
Pollution
Kennels:
Less than 10
dogs
$10 February
1
Health
Officer
Ch. 132, Dogs
and Other
Animals
More than 10
dogs
$25 February
1
Health
Officer
Ch. 132, Dogs
and Other
Animals
§ 170-18 CHARTER § 170-18
C:1025
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
Laundromats -
washing and
drying machines,
each machine
$20 May 1 Chief
Building
Inspector
Ch. 165,
Laundromats
and Dry-
Cleaning
Establishments,
Coin-Operated
Lodging houses $150 June 1 Public
Officer
Ch. 159,
Housing
Standards;
Property
Maintenance
Milk sale and
delivery, each
vehicle
$30 July 1 Health
Officer
Ch. 292,
Sanitary
Standards
Motor vehicle
and/or auto body
repair garage
$335 May 1 to
April 30
Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
Ch. 175, Motor
Vehicle Repair
Garages
Nursing home $175 June 1 Public
Officer
Ch. 159,
Housing
Standards;
Property
Maintenance
Open-air parking
stations, per
space
$30 July 1 Director of
Public Works
Ch. 186, Open-
Air Lots,
Vehicle
Pawnbrokers $1,000 January 1 Police Chief Ch. 195,
Pawnbrokers
Peddlers,
hucksters,
itinerant vendors
$168 June 1 Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
Ch. 118,
Canvassers,
Solicitors and
Peddlers
Pet shops $30 February
1
Health
Officer
Ch. 132, Dogs
and Other
Animals
Poolrooms:
Per table $25 June 1 Police Chief
Per coinoperated
table
$50 June 1 Police Chief
§ 170-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-18
C:1026
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
Precious metals
and gems:
June 1 Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
Ch. 206,
Precious
Metals and
Gems
Initial fee $250
Renewal $30
Replacement of
lost or defaced
licenses, each
$25
Restaurants and
itinerant
restaurants:
50 or more
seats
$112 July 1 Health
Officer
Fewer than 50
seats
$56 July 1 Health
Officer
Additional
vehicles or
conveyances
granted
pursuant to
itinerant
restaurant
license
$168 July 1 Health
Officer
Retail food:
Bakery $56
Deli $56
Grocery $56
Confectionery
store
$56
Supermarkets:
Up to 5,000
square feet
$112
Over 5,000
square feet
$224
Revivals $112 See Ch. 188,
Outdoor
Activities
§ 170-18 CHARTER § 170-18
C:1027
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
Shelters $56 1 year
Superintendent $168 January 1
to
December
31
Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
§ 159-86,
Superintendents
in dwellings
Suspended street
decorations and
advertising:
Major $25 June 1 Director of
Public Works
Ch. 238,
Streets and
Sidewalks
Minor $10 June 1 Director of
Public Works
Ch. 238,
Streets and
Sidewalks
Swimming pools:
New and
renewal
$112 June 1 Health
Officer
Construction
permit
$28 June 1 Health
Officer
Alteration
permit
$17 June 1 Health
Officer
Fencing $2 Public
Officer
Ch. 246,
Swimming
Pools: Fencing
Theaters and
motion pictures,
per seat
$1 June 1 Fire Chief Ch. 252,
Theaters,
Movies and
Exhibitions
Tool and
implement
grinders
$81 June 1 Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
Towing:
Tow trucks, per
vehicle
$1,000
Tow drivers,
per driver
$500
Trade name $500
§ 170-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-18
C:1028
License Fee
Term or
Expiration
Date
Supervising
Officer Regulations
Transient
merchants
$250,
plus
$10,000
bond
June 1 Tax Collector Ch. 118,
Canvassers,
Solicitors and
Peddlers
Used car lots:
Under 10,000
square feet
$550 July 1 Chief
Building
Inspector
Ch. 186, Open-
Air Lots,
Vehicle
Over 10,000
square feet
$850 July 1 Chief
Building
Inspector
Ch. 186, Open-
Air Lots,
Vehicle
Vending machines $40 July 1 Director of
Inspection
and
Licensing
Vendor, itinerant: June 1; 2
days,
consecutively
Tax Collector Ch. 118,
Canvassers,
Solicitors and
Peddlers
Plant vendor $85
General peddler $168 1 year
Carnival and
special events
vendors (must
be bonded)
$112 1 year
Vendor of food
and ice cream:
Per vehicle $168 June 1 Health Officer
Video game $225
Video game
distributor
$550 1 year
B. Unless otherwise provided, the terms of the licenses set forth in the
above schedule and fees to be charged shall be on an annual basis.
C. Where the term of an existing license is extended by reason of an
ordinance amendment adopted during the term of such license, no
further fee or charge shall be made by the City until the termination of
the license upon the occurrence of the expiration date as extended.
§ 170-18 CHARTER § 170-18
C:1029
§ 170-19. Refunds and rebates.
§ 170-20. Contents of license.
Information required for each license issued shall be on a form prescribed
by the issuing officer and shall contain the following:
D. Where the term of the license has been reduced, there shall be credited
to the license upon renewal a pro rata share of the renewal for the part
of the term covered by the prior year's licensing fee. Where there is no
renewal upon request of the licensee, a refund shall be made by
prorating for the portion of the year covered by the original term of the
license but abridged by the new expiration date.
A. The issuing officer shall authorize a refund or rebate to the applicant of
the fees paid thereon if the application or renewal is denied, subject to
such deductions as may be required by regulation to cover the costs of
inspection and hearings pursuant to such application or renewal, and
shall also authorize a pro rata rebate of any license fee heretofore paid
where cessation or termination of the licensed operation is caused by
acquisition of any premises for public use or public purposes by any
public agency or private agency exercising powers of eminent domain,
provided that any refund or rebate shall be first applied against any
money due and owing to the City. Any rebate or refund permitted under
this section by reason of acquisition of property for public use or public
purposes shall be allowed for any license in effect on and after January
1, 1964, and further subject to offset by the City for any money due the
City for taxes on tangible personal property used in business by the
applicant.
B. The City Treasurer shall, upon certification by the issuing officer,
refund a license fee where any license fee was collected in error, or
rebate the balance of any fee as aforesaid if any license is denied.
C. Except as provided herein, there shall be no rebates or refunds of any
license fees paid hereunder.
A. The name of licensee and any other name under which such business is
to be conducted.
B. The name and address of each business so licensed.
C. The amount of the license fee.
D. The date of issuance and expiration of the license.
E. The name and address of the agent appointed pursuant to § 170-4.
F. Such other information as shall be prescribed by regulation.
§ 170-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-21
C:1030
§ 170-21. Renewal license procedure.
The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit an application
for such license to the issuing officer on forms provided by the issuing
officer. The application for a renewal license shall require the disclosure
of such information concerning the applicant's demeanor and conduct and
the operation of applicant's business during the preceding licensing period
and such other information as is reasonably necessary to the determination
by the supervising officer of the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license.
An inspection shall be conducted of the subject matter of licensing where
required by regulations or by direction of the supervising officer. The fee
for renewal of any license shall, unless otherwise provided by this Code or
other City ordinance, be the same as the original fee for such license.
§ 170-22. Transfer of license.
No license shall be transferable unless otherwise provided. No license
issued by the City shall be transferable as to persons or locations unless
otherwise expressly permitted by the provisions governing such license.
§ 170-23. Separate license required for branch establishments.
Unless otherwise provided by regulation, a license shall be required in
the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or location of
the business engaged in as if each such branch establishment or location
were a separate business, provided that warehouses and distributing plants
used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under this
chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch
establishments.
§ 170-21 CHARTER § 170-23
C:1031

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 170-24. Right to make inspections.
§ 170-25. Notice of refusal to issue or renew, revocation or
suspension.
If the supervising officer shall determine not to authorize the issuance or
renewal of a license or to authorize such issuance or renewal only on certain
terms and conditions, or shall seek to suspend, revoke or otherwise invoke
sanctions against a licensee for any violations hereunder, he shall, except
as provided in § 170-30, notify the licensee or the agent of a licensee of his
intention to enter an order or directive relating to the license or the subject
matter thereof. Such notice shall set forth the specific action contemplated,
the reasons therefor and such violations or failure to conform to existing
laws or ordinances on which the supervising officer intends to base his
action. Such notice shall provide that it shall become an order or directive
of the supervising officer unless a hearing is requested by the licensee or
his agent as set forth under § 170-27.
§ 170-26. Service of notices.
§ 170-27. Notices to become orders unless hearing requested.
A. The supervising officer and such persons in the City's employ as he
shall designate shall have the right to make such inspections of the
subject matter of licensing, including the property, vehicles, equipment,
facilities or books and records pertaining to the subject matter of
licensing, as may be necessary for purposes of issuance, renewal or
enforcement of any license under the provisions pertaining thereto.
Refusal to permit such inspection shall constitute grounds for invoking
sanction as set forth in § 170-25.
B. The supervising officer shall, by regulations established, provide such
necessary identification of persons authorized to make any of the
aforesaid inspections.
A. Notice as provided in this article may be served personally or by
prepaid telegram or by regular mail with postage prepaid, addressed to
the last known address of the licensee or his designated agent. Service
upon a licensee or his agent may also be obtained by service of any such
notice upon a member of the family of the licensee or agent over the
age of 14 at the address filed with City.
B. Date of service of such notice shall be determined, where service is by
mail, as the day following the day of mailing for notices to addresses
within the City, and as of the fourth day after the date of mailing for
notices to addresses outside the City. Where the day of service would
fall upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered,
then the day of service shall be the next regular delivery day.
§ 170-24 CHARTER § 170-27
C:1033
§ 170-28. Hearings.
§ 170-29. Time for securing compliance.
The supervising officer may provide the licensee or his agent with a
reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital
improvements on any real property are involved, and then not to exceed 90
days, to comply with any requirements or conditions relating to the subject
matter of the license and to eliminate any violations of any existing law or
ordinance.
§ 170-30. Summary abatement of violations or conditions in
emergencies.
Where any violation or condition existing with reference to the subject
matter of the license is of such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat
to the public safety or health, the supervising officer shall have the power
to:
A. If no hearing is requested as provided herein, the notice provided for in
this article shall become a directive of the supervising officer upon the
expiration of the time to file a notice of hearing.
B. The supervising officer, upon receipt of the request for hearing, shall
set a date no less than five nor more than 30 days from the date of
receipt of the request and shall so notify the licensee or his agent and
any other parties in interest of the date of hearing.
A. At any hearing provided hereunder, the supervising officer shall be
vested with all the powers provided by law to compel the attendance of
witnesses and parties in interest by issuance and service of subpoena,
to require by subpoena the production of books, records or other
documents at any such hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be
determined by him, and to enforce any such subpoena or secure any
order for the enforcement of any such subpoena as provided by law.
B. Failure of a licensee to produce books, records or other documents
under the licensee's control or available to the licensee, upon request of
the supervising officer at the time of hearing, shall be grounds for
denial of the license or renewal or for invoking the action against such
licensee.
C. Determination shall be made within 10 days from the completion of the
hearing. The supervising officer shall issue an order either
incorporating the determinations and directions contained in the
notice, modifying the same or withdrawing the notice.
A. Abate any violation and obtain compliance with the use of public
utilities and resources; and
B. Immediately suspend any license or the operation of the subject matter
of the license, or both, or suspend the license or operation, or both, on a
§ 170-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-30
C:1034
§ 170-31. Costs of abatement to become lien.
Where abatement of a violation or condition is required under this chapter,
the supervising officer shall cause to be certified to the licensee the cost
of equipment or facilities, and the licensee may request a hearing on the
reasonableness of the cost, as provided in this article. After such hearing, a
final determination shall be made as to the reasonable cost of abatement by
the supervising officer, and if confirmed by the City Council, such cost shall
be collected by the same procedure as other taxes.
§ 170-32. Appeal of orders and decisions to Mayor.
short notice, dependent upon the immediacy and urgency of the
matters in violation.
A. Except where otherwise expressly prohibited by law, any licensee
aggrieved by the final order or decision of a supervising officer shall
have the right, within 10 days after receipt of written notice of the
decision, to appeal such order or decision to the Mayor. The Mayor shall
thereupon fix a time and date for hearing and shall afford the licensee
an opportunity to show cause before him within 30 days from the filing
of the appeal why the order or decision of the supervising officer should
not be affirmed.
B. The Mayor shall provide notice of the date and time of the hearing to
other interested parties and the supervising officer. Within 10 days
after the appeal is heard, the Mayor shall issue such directive to the
supervising officer and the issuing officer as he shall determine is
appropriate, based on the matters elicited at the hearing, and shall
either affirm, modify or rescind the action taken thereupon by the
supervising officer. The findings and conclusions of the Mayor shall be
served upon the licensee in the same manner as service of other notices
under this chapter.
§ 170-30 CHARTER § 170-32
C:1035

ARTICLE V
Filming on Public Lands
[Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 21-2000]
§ 170-33. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this article, shall
have the following respective meanings, unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures either on film or videotape
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes,
intended for viewing on Internet, television, theaters or for institutional
uses. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to include the filming
of news stories within the City.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park, playground or any other public place within the City's
jurisdiction and control.
§ 170-34. Scope and applicability.
This article shall govern the issuance of licenses by the City for filming
on public lands and shall supplement the Code of the City of East Orange,
specifically Chapter 170. It is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with the existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those which may specifically be repealed by this article.
In the event of a conflict between this article and a specific provision of
any other provision of this chapter or other City ordinance, the specific
provision herein, as same pertains to filming on public lands, shall govern,
but only to the extent that such conflict cannot be reconciled.
§ 170-35. Permit required.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming on public lands
within the City without first having obtained a permit from the office of
the Licensing Division, which permit shall set forth the approved
location of such filming and the approved duration of such filming by
specific references to day or dates. Said permit must be readily
available for inspection by officials of the City at all times at the site of
the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the Licensing
Division during normal business hours. Applications for such permits
shall be in a form approved by the Licensing Division and be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by this article in
§ 170-37.
C. One permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor or indoor filming for
a period not to exceed five days, provided that the maximum number of
permits that may be authorized in any calendar year for premises
§ 170-33 CHARTER § 170-35
C:1037
§ 170-36. Issuance of permits.
located in a residential zone shall not exceed two without a waiver
pursuant to § 170-36.
D. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Licensing
Division may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with other provisions
of this article. No additional fee shall be paid for this permit.
A. No permits will be issued by the Licensing Division unless applied for at
least five days prior to the requested shooting date; provided, however,
that the Licensing Division may waive the five-day period if, in the
judgment of the City Administrator, the applicant has obtained all
related approvals and adjacent property owners or tenants do not need
to be notified.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the City with satisfactory proof of the following:
(1) Proof of insurance coverage, indicating the certificate holder, City
of East Orange, is added as an additional insured and/or loss payee,
as follows:
(a) For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of $500,000
and any occurrence in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000.
(b) For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate
amount of $500,000.
(2) An agreement, in writing, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the City, its members and agents,
from any and all liability, expenses, claim or damages resulting
from the use of public lands.
(3) The posting of a cash bond of $500 or a maintenance bond of
$1,000, running in favor of the City and protecting and insuring
that the location utilized will be left, after filming, in a satisfactory
condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment, and that due
observance of all ordinances, laws and regulations of the City will
be followed. Within 72 hours of the completion of the filming, the
City will return the bond if there has been no damage to public
lands or public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of security personnel satisfactory to the City
Administrator for the times indicated on the permit.
C. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Police
§ 170-35 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-36
C:1038
Department and the Fire Department, respectively, with respect
thereto.
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed
that objections may be filed with the Licensing Division, said objections
to form a part of the applicant's application and be considered in the
review of the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners
shall be submitted to the Licensing Division within two days of the
requested shooting date.
E. Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., or sunset, whichever is
earlier, provided that night scenes can be approved in the permit, and
hours can be extended upon application to the City Administrator.
F. The Licensing Division may refuse to issue a permit on the basis of
objective facts and after a review of the application and a report
thereon by the Police Department and Fire Department, respectively,
and by other City agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that
filming at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would
violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the
use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the
free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the
public's health, safety or welfare. Further, the City reserves the right to
require one or more on-site patrol officers in situations where the
proposed production may impede the proper flow of traffic; the cost of
said patrol officer(s) to be borne by the applicant as a cost of
production. Where existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by
the production, an on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required
if the production company does not have a licensed electrician on staff
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Licensing Division denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to § 170-36H
below may appeal to the City Administrator. A written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Licensing
Division. An appeal from the decision of the Licensing Division shall be
filed within 10 days of the decision of the Licensing Division. The City
Administrator or his designee shall set the matter down for a hearing
within 45 days of the day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The
decision of the City Administrator or his designee shall be in written
form, unless the decision of the Licensing Division is upheld.
§ 170-36 CHARTER § 170-36
C:1039
§ 170-37. Permit fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this article is
as follows.
§ 170-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day
or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
H. The City Administrator may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this article and may authorize filming
other than during the hours herein described, extend the duration of a
permit beyond five days, permit filming at a particular location in a
residential zone on more than two occasions during any one calendar
year, or waive any other limitation or requirement of this article
whenever he determines that strict compliance with such limitations
will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant and that such a
permit may be issued without endangering the public's health, safety
and welfare.
I. Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Police Department and
the Fire Department, respectively, before filming takes place and to the
New Jersey Film Commission. The applicant shall permit the Police
Department and the Fire Department, respectively, or other inspectors
of or employed by the City to inspect the site and the equipment to be
used. The applicant shall comply with all safety instructions issued by
all such inspectors or employees.
J. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this article, the
applicant shall reimburse the City for any lost revenue, such as parking
revenues, repairs to public lands or other revenues that the City was
prevented from earning because of filming.
A. Basic filming permit: $250 per permit application.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming: $500 per day.
C. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes: $25, but no daily rate required.
§ 170-36 EAST ORANGE CODE § 170-38
C:1040
Chapter 172
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 156.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Newspapers, advertisements and
periodicals — See Ch. 182.
§ 172-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented which is
used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized in this chapter and other City
ordinance regulating garbage and waste disposal.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; or
A.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms
of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a
collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident
to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection
with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good
order, provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to
authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under this
chapter or any other ordinance of this City; or
C.
§ 170-38 CHARTER § 172-1
C:1041
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Solid waste, garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this
section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or
tends to create blight.[Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 9-1994]
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department
of the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and
any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided
by general law. In addition thereto, the term "newspaper" shall mean and
include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less
than four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the City which is owned or used by the City and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, municipal
parking lots or other public ways and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned vehicles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse, debris and other discarded materials
from residential or commercial sources, excluding recyclable
material.[Added 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 9-1994]
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 172-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 172-1
C:1042
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway or public street.
§ 172-2. Deposits in public places; use of public receptacles.
[Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the City, except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection, provided that public
receptacles shall not be used by persons owning or occupying property in
the vicinity thereof for the deposit of litter arising from activities on such
premises. (See § 172-20 for violation and penalties hereof.)
§ 172-3. Placement in receptacles to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 172-4. Sweeping litter into streets; duty to keep sidewalks free
from litter. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter. (See § 172-20 for violation and penalties hereof.)
§ 172-5. Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free from litter.
§ 172-6. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private
property.
§ 172-7. Truckloads causing litter.
A. No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway.
B. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the City shall
keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter when
they shall have actual notice thereof or when such litter shall have been
present a sufficient length of time to constitute constructive notice.
(See § 172-20 for violation and penalties hereof.) [Amended
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
§ 172-1 CHARTER § 172-7
C:1043
§ 172-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City, except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
in this chapter.
§ 172-9. Litter in lakes and fountains.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City.
§ 172-10. Throwing or distributing commercial handbills.
§ 172-11. Placing handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle, provided that it shall not be unlawful
to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a
noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it.
§ 172-12. Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
A. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley
or other public place.
B. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the City, the
wheels, treads or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley
or other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign
matter of any kind.
A. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
City.
B. No person shall hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill
in any public place, provided that it shall not be unlawful on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the City for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 172-7 EAST ORANGE CODE § 172-13
C:1044
§ 172-13. Distribution of handbills on posted property.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on such premises, in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 172-14. Distributing handbills and newspapers at inhabited
private premises.
§ 172-15. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any
litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 172-16. Posting notices and posters where prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole, shade tree, bridge, traffic sign, police-fire call box, cinder-salt
box or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized
or required by law.
§ 172-17. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the City, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises, provided that in case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted as provided in this chapter, such person, unless
requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or
deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if
such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places; and except that mailboxes may not be so
used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall
be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon private property.
§ 172-13 CHARTER § 172-17
C:1045
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
§ 172-18. Owner to maintain premises free from litter.
§ 172-19. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 172-19.1. Disposal of leaves. [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of leaves by depositing them
in any catch basin or sewer or by leaving them along any curbline or gutter.
To the extent necessary in order to assemble and accumulate leaves, the
same may temporarily be placed in a gutter. In addition, no person shall
dispose of leaves by placing them or causing them to be placed (i.e., through
air blowers or other mechanical equipment) upon adjacent property. Leaves
may only be disposed of if containerized in a biodegradable bag, except
during the leaf disposal period as defined herein in Subsection B. For
purposes of this section, "adjacent property" shall not be deemed to refer to
the curbline or gutter of that portion of a public street that may be adjacent
to the property from which the leaves are being disposed.
A. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter when such person shall have actual
notice thereof or when such litter shall have been present a sufficient
length of time to constitute constructive notice.
B. This section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
A. Leaves placed in a biodegradable bag may be placed at the curbline or
in the gutter of that portion of the public street adjacent to the property
from which the leaves are being disposed of, but only during the leaf
disposal period of time and dates as defined in Subsection B. Leaves
shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet or catch
basin and may be in the street gutter only for a maximum period of
seven days before their actual collection.
B. The leaf disposal period shall be that period of scheduled time and
dates as shall be announced by the City's Business Administrator or
City Engineer by giving two weeks' advance notice prior to the period's
commencement, which notice shall be:
(1) Prominently posted in at least one public place reserved for such or
similar announcements;
(2) Published in at least one newspaper which is circulated within the
municipality; and
§ 172-17 EAST ORANGE CODE § 172-19.1
C:1046
§ 172-20. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980; amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 9-1994; 2-22-1999 by
Ord. No. 4-1999]
Chapter 173
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 173-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-14-1970 by Ord. No. 68-1970]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and includes the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and also
includes the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including any
street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. Such term shall also include the
front or the vicinity of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place
of business, and public grounds, areas and parks, as well as parking lots
or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the
(3) Filed with the Municipal Clerk.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except as
provided in § 172-20B, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
minimum fine of not less than $200 for the first offense and not more
than $2,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, and/or 90
days of community service. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015]
B. Payment through Violations Bureau. If you wish to plead guilty of
violating or refusing to comply with § 172-2, 172-4 or 172-5,
respectively, and give up your rights to have a lawyer and a trial, you
may pay a fine of $200 by bringing or mailing the summons together
with payment within 14 days of notice of violation to the Violations
Bureau located at:
Violations Bureau
Municipal Court - East Orange
221 Freeway Drive
East Orange, New Jersey 07018
§ 172-19.1 CHARTER § 173-1
C:1047
person charged with violating § 173-2 or 173-3 or, in the case of a minor, not
owned by or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 173-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited. [Amended 12-14-1970
by Ord. No. 68-1970]
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 173-3. Police officers to exercise discretion. [Amended 12-14-1970
by Ord. No. 68-1970]
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 173-2, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.
§ 173-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 175
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Open-air lots for vehicles — See Ch. 186.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place. This subsection shall include the making of unsolicited remarks
of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to whom or in whose hearing they are
made.
§ 173-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 173-4
C:1048
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 3-5-1984 by Section 1 of Ord. No. 7-1984]
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Inspection and Licensing.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A place or structure, including
gasoline service stations, used in the business of maintaining, servicing or
repairing motor vehicles.
PERSON — Natural persons, associations, partnerships, corporations and
every other type of organization or entity.
REPAIRS — Work performed upon any motor vehicle, including but not
limited to motors, ignition systems, transmissions, drive or electrical
systems, body or fender work.
§ 175-2. License required.
No person shall manage, conduct or operate or maintain a motor vehicle
repair garage in the City of East Orange without first obtaining a license
therefor as provided in this article.
§ 175-3. Applications for license; contents.
A. The application for a license for a motor vehicle repair garage shall be
made to the Director of the Department of Inspections and Licensing on
the forms provided.
B. The application shall accurately set forth:
(1) The name and home address of the applicant; if a firm or
partnership, the names and home addresses of the members of the
firm or partnership; if a corporation, the names and home
addresses of the president, secretary and registered agent of the
corporation.
(2) The business name and address at which the applicant proposes to
maintain or operate the motor vehicle repair garage.
(3) The name and address of the person who will manage the day-today
operations of the motor vehicle repair garage identified herein.
(4) Whether or not any person listed on the application has ever been
convicted of a crime, specifying the nature of the offense and the
date of the conviction.
§ 175-1 CHARTER § 175-3
C:1049
§ 175-4. Disqualification of application.
No license shall be issued to any person who shall have been convicted of a
crime relating adversely to the operation of a motor vehicle repair garage.
Any determination made by the Director under this section shall be made in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2.
§ 175-5. Issuance of license.
§ 175-6. Transferability.
Licenses issued under this article are not transferable. The business of the
motor vehicle repair garage shall be conducted only at the location specified
in the license.
§ 175-7. Record book. [Amended 12-3-1984 by Ord. No. 54-1984]
Upon receipt of a motor vehicle for engine removal or replacement, removal
for repair or replacement of transmission, rear differential or drive train,
body and fender repairs, repainting or any other repair, every operator of
a motor vehicle repair garage shall provide and keep a book in which shall
be entered a description of the motor vehicle, the vehicle identification
number, the date received, the name and residence of the person from or for
whom the vehicle was received and a signed authorization for the work to
be performed on the vehicle. Records shall also be kept of purchases of all
major motor vehicle component parts, motor transmission, any body parts,
parts for the interior (seats, dashboards). The book shall, at all reasonable
times, be open to:
(5) Other information concerning the applicant and personnel which
may be necessary in determining approval of the application and
issuance of the license.
A. All licenses issued under this article shall be for a term of one year,
commencing May 1 and expiring the following April 30.
B. The annual fee for the license issued under this article shall be as set
forth in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, payable when the application
is filed. In the event that the license is not granted, the annual fee, less
the sum of $50, shall be returned to the applicant. [Amended
12-3-1984 by Ord. No. 54-1984241]
C. Application for renewal of a license shall be made on a form provided by
the Director at least one month prior to the expiration of the current
license.
A. Any officer of the City of East Orange Police Department.
B. Any duly authorized law enforcement personnel of the City, county,
state or federal government.
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 175-7
C:1050
§ 175-8. Investigation of licensee's conduct.
The Director may, upon his own initiative or upon the filing of a written
verified complaint of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee.
§ 175-9. Suspension and revocation of license; hearing.
Upon notice to the licensee by the Director, a hearing shall be conducted
by the Director to determine whether any license issued under this article
may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this article or any other
applicable law, ordinance or regulation.
§ 175-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1984 by Ord. No.
54-1984*242]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
therefor, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000, by imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, and/or 90 days of community service. In addition, failure
to comply with this article may be cause for revocation of the motor vehicle
repair garage license upon notice and hearing to the licensee.
C. Any inspector from the Department of Inspections and Licensing.
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-7 CHARTER § 175-10
C:1051

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted 12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 41-1985]
§ 175-11. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle whose owner has terminated
the use and care of such motor vehicle and has left the same on open lands
and has either:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle designed to be propelled otherwise than
by muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks;
and, as used in this article, such term shall also include any parts of a motor
vehicle and any such vehicle, whether or not the same by reason of its
present condition, is still capable of self-propulsion.
§ 175-12. Abandonment or open storage prohibited.
No person shall abandon or permit the abandonment on public or private
property within the City of any motor vehicle owned by him or under
his control or in his possession at the time of abandonment or, except as
provided in this article, cause any abandoned vehicle or vehicle in a state of
substantial disrepair to be stored in the open.
§ 175-13. Permitting abandonment or open storage prohibited.
No person shall permit any abandoned motor vehicle to remain on any
property owned by him or in his possession or under his control or, except
as provided in this article, store or permit the storage of any abandoned
vehicle or vehicle in a state of substantial disrepair in the open.
§ 175-14. Notice to police; disposition of vehicles.243
Any person who owns or has control of any premises and finds a motor
vehicle left on his property without his knowledge, acquiescence or consent,
where the owner of such vehicle has failed or refused to remove the same
or the owner is unknown, shall promptly notify the Chief of Police of the
year, model and make of such vehicle and, if known or ascertainable, the
registration license, serial number and ownership thereof, with such further
and additional information as the Chief of Police may request to ascertain
Indicated by his words or actions an intent to leave the same and no
longer claim ownership thereof; or
A.
Has left the same, without making arrangements for the storage with
the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is located, for a
period of at least 30 days.
B.
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-11 CHARTER § 175-14
C:1053
whether or not the same has been abandoned. The Chief of Police shall
take such further and additional steps as may be necessary to determine
whether the same is an abandoned vehicle within the meaning of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-157 and, if the same is, shall proceed to take possession thereof
and thereafter dispose of the same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157, the
regulations of the Division of Motor Vehicles, and any other provisions of
law pertinent thereto.
§ 175-15. Responsibility for removal; failure to remove.
§ 175-16. Owner to give information and permit access.
Any person owning or having possession or control of premises on which
an abandoned motor vehicle shall be situate and who fails to remove such
motor vehicle in accordance with the request made by the Chief of Police or
Director of Inspection and Licensing or his duly authorized agent pursuant
to this Code or other City ordinances shall:
§ 175-17. Emergencies.
Where the existence of a motor vehicle on the public highways or
thoroughfares or on private property shall be an immediate hazard
A. Where any motor vehicle mentioned in the preceding section is in such
condition that it is no longer self-propelled, and by reason of the same is
not a motor vehicle within the jurisdiction of the Division of Motor
Vehicles, then the owner of the property or the person having
possession or control thereof on which the motor vehicle has been
abandoned shall remove and dispose of the same through a private
contractor by private means.
B. Where the owner of the property or person having possession or control
thereof, after 10 days' written notice, has failed to remove the motor
vehicle, then the Chief of Police shall be authorized to arrange for the
prompt removal, but such action by the Chief of Police shall not provide
a defense or excuse to an owner or person having possession or control
of such premises for failure to comply with this article. The owner and
person having possession or control of such property shall pay and be
jointly and severally liable for all costs, including reasonable overhead
charges, incurred by the City in effecting such removal. In the event
that payment is not made on demand, such costs shall, in accordance
with the provisions and procedures of § 159-43, become a lien on such
property.244
A. Furnish, by affidavit or otherwise, all information relating to such
vehicle required by any duly authorized agent of the City; and
B. Permit access to his property by any duly authorized agent of the City
for the purpose of examining or removing such vehicle.
244. Editor's Note: See Ch. 159, Housing Standards; Property Maintenance.
§ 175-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 175-17
C:1054
requiring prompt abatement to protect the public safety and shall thereby
constitute a nuisance, the Chief of Police may, on short notice or without
notice, if notice is infeasible, cause the same to be removed and held for
a period of at least 15 days. The Chief of Police shall thereupon notify the
owner of such vehicle, if known, by registered mail, of the location thereof
and of the right of the owner to secure return of possession of such motor
vehicle upon payment of the cost of removal and storage. Nothing herein
shall be construed to provide the owner with a defense against any violation
of this article.
§ 175-18. Outdoor storage of vehicles in disrepair. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 5-1986; 10-24-1988 by Ord. No. 26-1988]
No motor vehicle in such a state of disrepair that it is unsightly or incapable
of locomotion under its own power shall be kept in the open and exposed
to public view from the streets or adjoining property, provided that motor
vehicles in a temporary state of disrepair shall be permitted to remain for
a period not exceeding 10 days, provided that the same are not abandoned
vehicles, as defined in this article, except that those motor vehicles exposed
to public view shall not be unsightly. Nothing in this article shall prohibit
the storage of abandoned vehicles or vehicles in disrepair in junkyards
permitted under Chapter 51, Land Use, of this Code and laws pertaining
thereto or other designated tow-away areas approved by resolution of the
City Council.
§ 175-19. (Reserved)245
§ 175-20. Violations and penalties.246
In addition to all other penalties afforded by this article, any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction therefor, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000, by imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, and/or 90 days of community service.
245. Editor's Note: Former § 175-19, Violation of storage prohibitions, added 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 5-1986, was repealed 10-29-1988 by Ord. No. 26-1988.
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-17 CHARTER § 175-20
C:1055
Chapter 180
NARCOTIC DRUGS AND OTHER DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES
§ 175-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 175-20
C:1056
ARTICLE I
Sale of Dextromethorphan to Minors
[Adopted 4-10-2017 by Ord. No. 14-2017]
§ 180-1. Sale to minors prohibited.
No person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, shall sell
or offer to sell to a person under 18 years of age any product containing
dextromethorphan.
§ 180-2. Civil penalty.
A person who violates the provisions of this article, including an employee
of a retail establishment who under 18 years of age, shall be liable to a
civil penalty of not more than $250 for a first violation, not more than
$500 for a second violation, and not more than $1,000 for a third and
each subsequent violation. In the case of a retail establishment that is part
of a chain with two or more locations in the state, the violation shall be
assessed against the particular retail establishment and not the chain. The
civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of
1999," P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding
before the municipal court having jurisdiction. An official authorized by
statute or ordinance to enforce the state or local health codes or a law
enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality may
issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of § 180-1 of this article,
and may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of
this section consistent with the Rules of Court. A penalty recovered under
the provisions of this section shall be recovered by and in the name of the
state by the local health agency. The penalty shall be paid into the treasury
of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of
the municipality.
§ 180-3. Affirmative defense.
The establishment of all of the following shall constitute an affirmative
defense to any prosecution initiated pursuant to this article:
A. That the purchaser of the product falsely represented, by producing
either a driver's license or nondriver identification card issued by the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, a similar card issued pursuant
to the laws of another state or the federal government or Canada, or a
photographic identification card issued by a County Clerk, that the
purchaser was of legal age to make the purchase.
B. That the appearance of the purchase of the product was such that an
ordinary prudent person would believe the purchaser to be of legal age
to make the purchase.
C. That the sale of the product was made in good faith, relying upon the
production of the identification set forth above, the appearance of the
§ 180-1 CHARTER § 180-3
C:1057
§ 180-4. Valid prescriptions exempt.
This article shall not be construed so as to apply to prescription medications
containing dextromethorphan that are dispensed by a licensed pharmacist
pursuant to a valid prescription.
purchaser and in reasonable belief that the purchaser was of legal age
to make the purchase.
§ 180-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 180-4
C:1058
Chapter 182
NEWSPAPERS, ADVERTISEMENTS AND PERIODICALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 156.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Littering — Ch. 172.
§ 182-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of East Orange, a municipal corporation of the State of
New Jersey.[Added 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 29-1988]
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of a specified anatomical area of specified sexual activity
contained in or consisting of a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance or film which, by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality with
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or
activity.[Added 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 29-1988]
PUBLISHED MATERIAL or ARTICLE — Any newspaper, paper, periodical,
book, magazine, handbill, circular, card, pamphlet, sample merchandise or
advertising or promotional article.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
18 years of age and who is in the business of making sales of periodicals
or other publications at retail, containing pictures, drawings or
photographs.[Added 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 29-1988]
§ 182-2. License required; exceptions.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed or left on the premises,
either within or without any dwelling, any published material or article
without first obtaining a license to do so from the City Clerk, provided that
such license shall not be required when the person in actual occupation
of the house or premises to which any of the aforementioned published
material or article shall be distributed or placed has previously requested
or ordered the same; provided, further, that no license shall be required for
the distribution of religious or political literature or notices.
§ 182-3. Hours of distribution; Sunday distribution.
No distribution, whether pursuant to a license or otherwise permitted
hereunder, shall be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
§ 180-4 CHARTER § 182-3
C:1059
except for newspapers distributed pursuant to subscriptions, nor shall any
such distribution, except for newspapers upon subscription, be made on
Sunday.
§ 182-4. Display of obscene material. [Amended 11-14-1988 by Ord.
No. 29-1988]
It shall be unlawful for a retailer to display or permit to be displayed at his
business premises any obscene material at a height of less than five feet
or without a blinder or other covering placed or printed on the front of the
material displayed. The public display of obscene material shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the
display.
§ 182-5. Interfering with or annoying the public.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed on any street or public
place of the City any published material or article in such a manner as to
molest, interfere with or annoy the public in the use thereof.
§ 182-6. Littering the streets.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed any newspaper, paper,
periodical, book, magazine, handbill, circular, card or pamphlet in such a
manner as to litter any street or other public place or to interfere with the
lawful use thereof by the public.
§ 182-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980; 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 29-1988247]
Any person or persons convicted of violating any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days, and/or 90 days of community service.
Chapter 184
NOISE POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 184-1. Unnecessary noise unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, suffer, permit, allow or
cause to be made or continued, upon any premises or in any vehicle owned,
occupied or controlled by him or upon any public street, thoroughfare or
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 182-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 184-1
C:1060
parking lot or in any public park, playground, gathering place or means of
public transportation, any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise
which either annoys, injures, disturbs or endangers the comfort, health,
repose, peace or safety of others within the City or which are so harsh,
prolonged or unusual in their use, time and place as to annoy, disturb or
endanger the comfort, health, repose, peace or safety of others in the City.
Loud, disturbing, injurious, unnecessary and unlawful noises in violation of
this section include, but are not limited to, the following enumerated acts:
A. Noise-producing devices. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 6-1986;
11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 34-1988]
(1) The playing or permitting the playing of any radio, tape player,
compact disc player, phonograph, amplified musical instrument,
motor vehicle sound system or similar device:
(a) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across real
property boundaries or within a noise-sensitive zone.
(b) When played in any motor vehicle in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance outside the vehicle as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet.
(c) When played in any motor vehicle in such a manner as to
create a sound level of 65 decibels on the A-scale as read by the
slow response of a sound level meter when read at the curbline
of the adjoining street, at any time, or in such a manner as to
produce sound which is plainly audible to anyone other than
occupants of the motor vehicle. [Amended 4-24-1989 by
Ord. No. 6-1989]
(d) When played on any street or sidewalk, playground, school,
park or common area of any building in such manner so as to
create a noise disturbance.
(e) When played by any passenger on a common carrier in such a
manner as to be heard by any other passenger.
(f) When played in any residential neighborhood so as to produce
65 decibels on the A-scale as read by the slow response of a
sound level meter when measured at a distance of 25 feet or at
the next adjoining full property line between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., or when played between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any street, playground, school,
park or common area of any building in such a manner as to be
heard by anyone other than the operator of the device.
(2) For the purpose of this section, "noise disturbance" means any
sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or
animals or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
(3) The following acts are prohibited in the City of East Orange:
§ 184-1 CHARTER § 184-1
C:1061
(a) Possessing or carrying a boombox which is in operation on any
street, sidewalk, school, playground or public area.
(b) Installing or possessing or operating in any motor vehicle
garage in East Orange a radio, tape player or sound system
other than the original equipment in which:
[1] The number of speakers exceeds four.
[2] Any speaker exceeds 6 1/2 inches in width or height or
exceeds 100 watts in power output.
[3] Any speaker external to the passenger compartment.
(4) "Boombox" means any radio, tape player, compact disc player or
loudspeakers; combination of radio, tape player, compact disc
player and loudspeakers; or similar devices which are operated to
produce 65 decibels on the A-scale, as read by the slow response of
a sound level meter when measured at 25 feet or at the next
adjoining full property line, and which:
(a) Are designed to be operated while being transported or carried
by a single person;
(b) Are capable of being operated while carried or transported by
a single individual; or
(c) Contain speakers in excess of 6 1/2 inches in width or height or
exceed 100 watts in power output.
(5) This section shall not prohibit:
(a) Any parade or concert or concert practice, provided that the
Police Chief receives notice at least two days in advance.
(b) Any event sponsored or conducted by the City of East Orange,
the State of New Jersey or any of their governmental agencies.
(c) Any event conducted by any block association or civic
association, provided that the Police Chief receives notice at
least two days in advance.
(6) For the purpose of this chapter, "decibel" is defined as a unit for
measuring the volume of a sound equal to 20 times the logarithm to
the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to
the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons
per square meter).
B. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, train or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal or to give warning of intent to get into motion or, if in
motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
decelerating of the vehicle has begun; the creation by means of such
signal devices of any unreasonably loud or harsh sounds; and the
§ 184-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 184-1
C:1062
§ 184-2. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in § 184-1 shall be construed to apply to church bells
or chimes, emergency vehicles and bands or orchestras playing in a hall,
building or in the open air in connection with or as a public or private school
activity or with a parade permit issued by the Public Officer.
sounding of any signal device for any unreasonable or unnecessary
period of time.
C. Advertising or attempting to attract the attention of the passing public
or persons inside any structure by means of hawking, crying out or
playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated,
any radio, television, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker,
calliope, sound truck, sound amplifier or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound on the streets, thoroughfares or
public places of the City, or in any place where the sound therefrom is
cast directly upon the streets or public places, or which is so placed or
operated that the sound therefrom can be heard to the annoyance or
inconvenience of passersby or of persons in neighboring premises.
D. Machinery or equipment, or construction or industrial activity, emitting
sounds in proximity to residential buildings which are unreasonably
loud and disturbing to the residents thereof, shall not be used or
conducted other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and
then only if unavoidable and to the extent necessary therefor. Where
any such use other than during the hours aforesaid is unavoidable,
application for a temporary permit therefor shall be made to the
Construction Official, who may authorize such use if, in his opinion,
such use between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is, in fact,
unavoidable and essential for the accomplishment of some lawful
purpose.
E. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or
unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers.
F. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud or
boisterous manner.
G. The keeping, harboring or possessing of any dog, bird or other animal
on premises or in any public place, which animal shall habitually bark,
snarl, growl or make any other disturbing noises to other persons in the
vicinity.
H. Operation of any steam engine or internal combustion engine, except
with a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
I. The blowing of any horns, whistles, sirens or similar device, except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger.
§ 184-1 CHARTER § 184-3
C:1063
§ 184-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
6-1986; 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 34-1988; 12-26-2006 by Ord. No.
35-2006]
Chapter 186
OPEN-AIR LOTS, VEHICLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 125.
Solid waste — See Ch. 156.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Littering — See Ch. 172.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
A. Any person or persons violating § 184-1A et seq. of this chapter shall be
subject to the issuance of a written warning from the East Orange
Police Department upon said Police Department receiving a complaint
and investigating same. Said warning shall notice the person or persons
violating § 184-1A et seq. that, should the East Orange Police
Department issue two written warnings for violation of § 184-1A et seq.
to persons or persons at the same residence, the provisions of § 184-3B
shall apply with full force.
B. Any person or persons at the same residence violating § 184-1A et seq.
of this chapter who have been previously issued two warnings subject
to § 184-3A shall be subject to the following:
(1) The impoundment of the noise-producing device by the City of East
Orange Police Department at the noise level that it was found.
(2) The issuance of a summons by the City of East Orange Police
Department mandating a court appearance by the violator in order
to retrieve said device.
C. Any person or persons convicted of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Art.
II, General Penalty, of the Code.248
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 184-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 184-3
C:1064
ARTICLE I
Parking Stations for Vehicles
§ 186-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN-AIR PARKING STATION FOR MOTOR VEHICLES — Any open-air plot
of ground, lot or land within the City where motor vehicles are parked, kept
or located for a parking fee or parking charge.
§ 186-2. License required.
§ 186-3. Applications for licenses; information required;
investigation.
§ 186-4. Recommendations of Zoning Board of Adjustment;
approval by Council.
No license shall be issued to manage, conduct, operate, maintain or carry
on the business of an open-air parking station for motor vehicles unless
such use of the premises for which such application is made has been
A. No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of
an open-air parking station for motor vehicles without first having
obtained a license therefor as provided in this article.
B. Where any person operates a parking lot without charge or fee to some
users and does make a charge or fee to other persons using the lot, a
license shall be required under this article.
A. The application for a license for the business of managing, conducting
or carrying on an open-air parking station for motor vehicles shall be
made to the City Clerk and shall accurately specify the location of the
open-air parking station, the portion of the lot to be used and the
number of square feet of area to be occupied thereby. The application
shall be accompanied by a map or plot plan accurately showing the
location of the open-air parking station, the area to be used and the
location of the open-air parking station in regard to adjacent buildings,
public streets and all driveways within 100 feet of all entrances and
exits. Such map or plot plan shall also show the entrances and exits to
be open for use and individual car parking stall arrangement.
B. Upon the receipt of an application for such license, the Clerk shall refer
the same to the Director of Public Works for investigation and report,
and if such report shows that the applicant's lot complies with §§ 186-6,
186-7, 186-12 and 186-13, the City Clerk shall issue the license. Any
application for the renewal of an existing license shall, in like manner,
be referred to the Director of Public Works for investigation and report.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
§ 186-1 CHARTER § 186-4
C:1065
recommended by the Board of Adjustment and the City Council has adopted
a resolution approving such recommendation for such variance.
§ 186-5. Transferability of licenses.
Licenses issued under this article are transferable or assignable with the
consent of the City Council. The business or occupation shall be conducted
only at the place therein specified.
§ 186-6. Surfaces of lots.
The surface of each lot or plot of land to be occupied as an open-air parking
station shall be composed as follows:
§ 186-7. Drainage.
The surface of each lot or plot of land to be occupied as an open-air parking
station shall be so constructed as to provide sufficient drainage to prevent
an accumulation of water upon the surface of the lot.
§ 186-8. Parking restrictions; proximity to residences.
No motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or located in any open-air parking
station within 10 feet of any building occupied as a residence.
§ 186-9. Manner of driving into or out of parking lots.
No licensee under this article shall permit any vehicle to be driven in such
a manner that its movement into or out of any designated parking lot shall
endanger pedestrians or other traffic on a public street or sidewalk, nor
shall any vehicle parked under any license issued under this article be
parked on any street, sidewalk or part thereof.
§ 186-10. Entrances and exits. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
Entrances or exits to any open-air parking station shall be made only
within the set limits of the entrances and exits provided. In all cases, these
entrances and exits shall be paved, and where operation is one-way only,
they shall be properly marked with suitable signs of a type approved by the
Director of Public Works.
§ 186-11. Parking near street line.
No vehicle parked on any open-air parking station lot shall be permitted to
extend nearer than one foot from the street line.
A. The entire area of the parking lot, as set forth in the plot plan, shall be
surfaced with concrete or asphaltic mix.
B. All individual car parking stalls, as set forth in the plot plan, shall be
outlined with paint or other suitable marking.
§ 186-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 186-12
C:1066
§ 186-12. Fencing or bumpers required.
Whenever the boundaries of the licensed area of an open-air parking station
do not contain natural or artificial barriers, in order to prevent damage to
adjacent property, such boundaries shall be enclosed by a fence of durable
construction, permanently installed, but not less than 30 inches in height.
Where natural or artificial barriers exist on such boundaries, bumpers may
be installed in lieu of such fencing.
§ 186-13. Illumination.
§ 186-14. Cleanliness of premises.
Licensees under this article shall keep the licensed premises free from filth,
paper and rubbish.
§ 186-15. Snow removal.
Following a snowfall, licensees under this article shall clear all areas within
eight hours of daylight after snow or ice shall have fallen, provided that no
snow, ice or other debris shall at any time be placed in a City street.
§ 186-16. Repairing vehicles.
At no time, other than in an emergency, shall the repair of vehicles be
permitted within the area designated as the open-air parking station.
§ 186-17. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts.
§ 186-18. Applicability of provisions; temporary parking facilities.
A. Any open-air parking station open to the public later than one hour
after sunset or earlier than one hour before sunrise shall be sufficiently
lighted by the licensee while so opened and occupied so as to provide a
minimum of 0.2 lumens per square foot throughout the lot.
B. All lights shall be shaded in such a manner that no direct rays are
visible to adjacent property owners or motorists using the public
streets.
A. No commercial vehicles in excess of one-ton capacity or with dual rear
wheels shall be parked in licensed parking lots located in residential
districts as delineated in Chapter 51, Land Use.
B. No commercial vehicle parked in accordance with this section shall
contain tools, equipment or debris exposed or visible to the public.
A. Except as otherwise provided, this article shall not apply nor shall any
license be required where premises are used for open-air parking for a
temporary period not exceeding two consecutive days, provided that
there shall be no overnight parking on such premises and that entrance
§ 186-12 CHARTER § 186-18
C:1067
§ 186-19. Supervision of operations by Director of Public Works.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or his representative to
supervise the operations of all open-air parking stations and to prosecute all
violations of this article in the Municipal Court.
and exit to such premises shall be made through normal driveways and
not over the curbs.
B. Temporary parking facilities on premises located in close proximity to
sporting events or other large public gatherings, not required to be
licensed by reason of this section, shall, however, comply with the
following requirements:
(1) An attendant shall be on duty at all times during which the
premises are utilized for public parking purposes.
(2) The charge for parking shall be posted prominently, visible from
the street and entrance to the parking area, setting forth the rates
to be charged, and no charge for parking shall be made in excess
thereof.
§ 186-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 186-19
C:1068
ARTICLE II
Sale or Exchange of Vehicles
§ 186-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN-AIR PARKING STATION FOR THE SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES —
Any open-air plot of ground, lot or land within the City where secondhand
motor vehicles are exhibited or are stored, parked, kept or located for sale
or exchange.
§ 186-21. License required.
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of an
open-air parking station for the sale or exchange of motor vehicles without
first having obtained a license therefor.
§ 186-22. Applications for licenses; information required.
The application for a license for the business of managing, conducting or
carrying on an open-air parking station for the sale or exchange of motor
vehicles shall be made to the City Clerk and shall accurately specify the
location of the open-air parking station, the portion of the lot to be used and
the number of square feet of area occupied thereby. The application shall be
accompanied by a map or sketch showing the exact location of the proposed
parking station and the area proposed to be used.
§ 186-23. Fees.
§ 186-24. Transferability of licenses.
The licenses issued under this article are transferable or assignable with the
consent of the City Council. The business or occupation shall be conducted
only at the place therein specified.
§ 186-25. Fences required; exception. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 25-1986]
Within 10 days after any license is granted under this article, the area
included in the license shall be enclosed by a fireproof fence, which fence
A. The annual license fee for an open-air parking station for the sale or
exchange of motor vehicles shall be as provided in Chapter 170,
Licenses and Fees.
B. If at the time of the application for a license under the provisions of this
article less than six months of the license year have expired, the
applicant shall be required to pay the full fee for the year; if six months
shall have expired, the applicant shall be required to pay 1/2 of the fee
for the year.
§ 186-20 CHARTER § 186-25
C:1069
shall be not less than 18 inches in height and shall be of sturdy permanent
construction conforming to the requirements of the Building Code of the
City.249 There shall be no openings for entrance or exit in such fence
along the street line, except where the street curb has been lowered in
accordance with the rules of the Director of Public Works office or, where
the licensed premises front on a county road, then from the County
Engineer's office, and such opening shall not exceed in number or width the
portions of the curb so lowered, provided that, where the street curb has
not been lowered, an entrance to the licensed premises through such fence,
not exceeding four feet in width, shall be permitted. All such fences shall be
at all times maintained and kept in proper repair during the period covered
by the license. No fence shall be required where a building wall, other than
a residence building wall, marks the boundary of the area licensed.
§ 186-26. Illumination.
§ 186-27. Hours of operation.
No person shall conduct, operate or carry on the business of an open-air
parking station for the sale or exchange of motor vehicles between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 186-28. Parking restrictions: proximity to residences.
No motor vehicle shall be exhibited, stored, parked or located for sale or
exchange under the license issued under this article within 10 feet of any
building occupied as a residence.
§ 186-29. Parking near street line.
No vehicle parked on any open-air parking station for the sale of motor
vehicles shall be permitted to extend nearer than one foot from the street
line.
A. Any open-air parking station for the sale or exchange of motor vehicles
shall, after 10:00 p.m. and until sunrise of the following day, be lighted
so as to provide 0.2 lumens per square foot throughout the licensed
area.
B. Lights shall at all times be covered with a standard globe and shall be
shaded in such a manner that no disturbing glare is visible to occupants
of adjacent properties or to motorists using the public streets.
C. No light used on the licensed premises shall be of a type known as a
swinging light.
249. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 186-25 EAST ORANGE CODE § 186-30
C:1070
§ 186-30. Parking on streets or sidewalks.
No motor vehicle or other object shall be exhibited, stored, parked, kept or
located under the license issued under this article on any street, sidewalk
or part thereof.
§ 186-31. Public garages and land adjacent thereto.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any lot or plot of land
occupied by a public garage building, wherein the business of public
automobile repair or storage is maintained or conducted, but this shall not
be construed to exempt any lot or plot of land adjacent to any such garage
building from the provisions of this article.
§ 186-32. Supervision of operations by Chief Building Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Building Inspector or his representative
to supervise the operation of all open-air parking stations for the sale or
exchange of motor vehicles and to prosecute all violations thereof in the
Municipal Court.
§ 186-30 CHARTER § 186-32
C:1071

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 186-33. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980250]
Violators of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, and/or 90 days of community service.
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 186-33 CHARTER § 186-33
C:1073
Chapter 188
OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Peddlers, solicitors and mobile food
vendors — See Ch. 118.
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Hours of operation — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Littering — See Ch. 172.
Loitering — See Ch. 173.
Noise pollution — See Ch. 184.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 190.
Public parks — See Ch. 193.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
Poles and wires — See Ch. 203.
Recreational facility fees — See Ch. 214.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 238.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
Board of Health regulations — See Part IV of
the Code.
§ 188-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
AMUSEMENT PROMOTION — An outdoor activity restricted to the use of
kiddy rides and kiddy games which may only operate without charge.
BAZAAR — An outdoor activity restricted to the sale of homemade food and
beverage, used clothing, homemade or handmade merchandise and bric-abrac,
both new and used.
BLOCK PARTY — An outdoor activity restricted to the use of kiddy rides,
food and drink concessions and strolling vendors.
CARNIVAL — An outdoor activity restricted to adult and kiddy rides, adult
and kiddy games, food, drink, souvenir concessions and entertainment for
which there is no admission charge. 251
CIRCUS — An outdoor activity restricted to the exhibition of animals and
the performance of animal acts, high wire and similar acts of any kind,
including clowns, and the sale of food and beverage, balloons, pennants,
souvenirs and similar small items.
CITY — The City of East Orange.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of East Orange.
CONCERT — An outdoor event for which there is an admission charge,
restricted to the use of singers, singing groups and musicians, using
251. Editor's Note: The definition of "car wash," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 9-26-1983 by Ord. No. 39-1983.
§ 186-33 EAST ORANGE CODE § 188-1
C:1074
electrically amplified equipment, and the sale of food, beverage and items,
such as tapes, records, T-shirts and souvenirs.
CONCESSION — A single game of chance or skill, a single food or beverage
booth, stand or mobile vehicle from which merchandise is dispensed, or a
single amusement ride.
CONCESSIONAIRE — A person who operates or participates in the running
or operation of one or more concessions, a vendor or an operator.
EXEMPT CITY OFFICIAL — The Mayor of the City of East Orange and the
City Councilperson or Councilpersons acting in their official capacity. This
exemption shall not apply to activity that is commercial in nature.[Added
6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019]
FAIR — An outdoor activity restricted to the use of kiddy rides, kiddy games,
food and drink concessions and strolling vendors.
FESTIVAL — An outdoor activity restricted to the sale of food and beverage.
252
FLEA MARKET — An open market, usually held outdoors, where used
household goods, antiques and inexpensive items are sold.[Added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
GARAGE, PORCH AND YARD SALE — An outdoor activity restricted to the
sale of used merchandise and bric-a-brac of a household nature.
LICENSE — The permission, in writing, of the Subdivision of Licensing of
the City of East Orange, issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
LICENSEE — The individual person named as agent for the sponsor on
the outdoor activity license application, who executes the same, accepting
ultimate responsibility for the operation of the outdoor activity.
MARCH — An organized procession of demonstrators who are supporting
or protesting something.[Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
MOTORCADE — A procession of motor vehicles, as in a parade.[Added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
OPERATOR — A person who engages in the sale or dispensation of food or
merchandise or participates in the running of games of skill or chance or
the running of amusement rides.
OUTDOOR ACTIVITY — Any activity conducted outdoors or within or about
tents or other such contrivances within the City in the nature of and
including but not limited to fairs; carnivals; festivals; the operation of
rides; revivals; block parties; amusement promotions; flea markets; garage,
porch or yard sales; bazaars; cake and food sales; and circuses, which are
open to the public at large; temporary outdoor displays of merchandise,
vehicles or manufactured products; promotions, gatherings of people and
similar activities, excluding sidewalk sales for which an encroachment has
252. Editor's Note: The definition of "food sale," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 9-26-1983 by Ord. No. 39-1983.
§ 188-1 CHARTER § 188-1
C:1075
been obtained from the Engineering Department.[Amended 12-27-2005
by Ord. No. 32-2005]
PARADE — An organized public procession on a festive or ceremonial
occasion; to march or walk in a procession.[Added 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. 32-2005]
PERSON — Every natural person, entity, association or corporation,
whether profit or nonprofit.
PICKETING — Any person or group of persons present outside a building to
protest.[Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
PROMOTER — Any person who organizes, owns, operates and manages
an outdoor activity, carnival, fair, festival, group of amusement rides or
booths.[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
RALLY — To call together for a common purpose, assemble a gathering,
especially one intended to inspire enthusiasm for a cause (includes prayer
vigils).[Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
REVIVAL — An outdoor religious gathering which imposes no charges other
than voluntary contributions, with limited food and beverage privileges.
RIDE (ADULT) — Any mechanical amusement device designed for and
capable of carrying or transporting one or more fully grown people.
RIDE (KIDDY) — Any mechanical amusement device designed for carrying
or transporting one or more small children.
SITE PLAN (FINAL) — A detailed diagram to scale, as required by
§ 188-3B(10) of this chapter.[Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
SITE PLAN (PRELIMINARY) — A sketch or diagram which outlines the
perimeter of an area or site for which an outdoor activity license is being
requested. It shall further diagram streets both inside and bordering the
area or site.
SPONSOR — The person or entity named in the application for the outdoor
activity license on behalf of which or whom the outdoor activity is to be
held and which or who retains responsibility, including ultimate financial
responsibility, for the operation of the outdoor activity.
VENDOR — A person who, during the life of the license for an outdoor
activity, operates a booth or a stand or otherwise occupies space in which
he conducts games of skill or chance or dispenses food, beverage or the
like and merchandise of any kind.[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
32-2005]
VENDOR (STROLLING) — A person who, during the life of the license for an
outdoor activity, dispenses food, beverage or merchandise of any kind from
a portable container, tray or pushcart, and who is not confined to a fixed
location.[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
WALK-A-THON — A walk or run covering a considerable distance, organized
especially to support or raise money for a cause.[Added 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. 32-2005]
§ 188-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 188-2
C:1076
§ 188-2. Purpose. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019]
§ 188-3. Licenses; general provisions.
A. The purpose of this chapter is the regulation, through licensing and
inspections, of outdoor activities to be conducted in the City on public
or private property and for the protection of the health, welfare and
safety of the public in general.
B. The licensing requirement under this chapter shall not be required by
an exempt City official as defined herein. However, the appropriate
applications need be filed as notice to all City departments that need to
provide for the event.
A. General provisions.
(1) No application for a license for outdoor activities shall be
considered unless and until the sponsor desiring to conduct the
outdoor activity shall have made and signed a written application to
the Subdivision of Licensing for a license, in the form provided by
the City, and paid the proper fee therefor. Each application must be
completed with a preliminary site plan and delivered to the
Subdivision of Licensing not less than 45 days prior to the first day
of operation of the proposed outdoor activity. The aforementioned
restrictions may be waived by the City Administrator. [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
(2) No outdoor activity license shall issue for more than one carnival,
circus or concert, or any combination thereof, to be held within the
same calendar week.
(3) No more than an aggregation of eight carnivals or circuses may be
held within one calendar year.
B. The outdoor activity license application shall be denied upon failure to
meet the following requirements within the prescribed time limits:
[Amended 9-26-1983 by Ord. No. 39-1983; 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
7-1986; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
32-2005]
(1) The sponsor must, at least 20 days prior to the proposed opening
date of the outdoor activity, obtain from the City Council permission
to use property owned by the City. Marches, motorcades, parades,
picketing, rallies and walk-a-thons shall not be subject to the
requirements of this subsection unless otherwise determined
pursuant to § 188-3C.
(2) When applicable, the sponsor must request and obtain permission
to close the street or streets upon which the sponsor intends to
conduct the outdoor activity pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9.
§ 188-2 CHARTER § 188-3
C:1077
(3) Where required, the sponsor must obtain the approval by the Fire
Department upon a satisfactory examination of the premises with
respect to compliance with Fire Department regulations as
hereinafter set forth in the fire prevention section of this chapter.253
City Council may approve a resolution each year authorizing the
Tax Collector or her designee to close certain streets for
preapproved outdoor activities during the months of June through
December. All applications for such activities shall be reviewed
and approved at the discretion of the Tax Collector or her
designee.
(4) Deposits.
(a) The sponsor shall put on deposit with the Subdivision of
Licensing, at the time of filing of the application, in cash or
certified check made payable to the City, the following
amounts:
Activity Amount of Deposit
Amusement promotions $1,5001
Bazaars $ 1001
Block parties $ 0
Carnivals $2,500
Circuses $2,500
Concerts $2,500
Fairs $1,5001
Festivals $1,5001
Flea markets $1,5001
Garage, yard and porch sales _____
Revivals $1,5001
NOTES:
1 Except when held on tax-exempt property owned by the
sponsor.
(b) Deposits are to ensure that, upon termination of the outdoor
activity, the general area where the outdoor activity has been
conducted will be left in good condition, cleaned up and
cleared of all paper, litter, refuse, waste materials and debris
within one day from the termination of the outdoor activity and
to cover any extraordinary expenses incurred by any
department of the City as a result of the operation of the
253. Editor's Note: See § 188-6 herein.
§ 188-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 188-3
C:1078
outdoor activity. If any person fails to meet this requirement,
the City, in its discretion, may clean and restore the area to
its condition prior to the outdoor activity, deducting the cost
of the cleanup from the deposit as liquidated damages and not
as a penalty. Restoration shall include, but not be limited to,
damage to curbs, sidewalks, pavement and shrubbery in the
public rights-of-way.
(5) The sponsor shall provide copies of all agreements relating to the
operation of the outdoor activity to the Subdivision of Licensing no
later than two weeks prior to the first day of operation or, if none
exist, so state.
(6) The approval of the Police Director must be obtained, upon a
satisfactory examination of the site plan and premises with respect
to security, law enforcement and lighting as it pertains to safety
and security. The evidence of the approval of the Police Director or
his designee shall be submitted to the Subdivision of Licensing no
later than one week prior to the first day of operation of the outdoor
activity. Garage, yard and porch sales shall be exempt from the
preceding requirement when the activity is confined to property
owned by the sponsor. When applicable, the sponsor or licensee
shall comply in all respects with § 188-5, Security, of this chapter.
(7) Excluding garage, porch and yard sales conducted on property
owned by the sponsor, the sponsor must obtain the approval by the
Health Officer of the City or his designee upon a satisfactory
demonstration that all health and sanitary requirements,
regulations and licensing are being adhered to by the sponsor,
licensee, promoter and vendor/operator of the outdoor activity, as
provided for in Chapter 12 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code
and Chapters 270, 276,254 282 and 292 of the Code of the City of
East Orange, all of which are incorporated by reference herein as if
fully set forth. The sponsor and the promoter of an outdoor activity
shall provide a sufficient number of temporary or permanent toilet
facilities for use at the site of the outdoor activity. The number of
toilet facilities required shall be determined by the Health Officer
of the City or his designee and the Subdivision of Licensing. The
sponsor shall provide a first-aid station approved by the Health
Officer. The first-aid station shall be equipped to treat minor injury
and illness until emergency services arrive on the scene. Where
they exist, all food and drink concessions must display in a
prominent place an approval certificate from the Health
Department of the City prior to being allowed to operate.
(8) The approval by the Director of Public Works or his designee must
be obtained, upon a satisfactory examination of the site plan and
premises with respect to compliance with Chapters 203, 238 and
254. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 5, Art. XVI, Department of Health and Human Services, of this
Code.
§ 188-3 CHARTER § 188-3
C:1079
260 of the Code of the City of East Orange and other applicable
ordinances and regulations of the City and state statutes over
which the Director of Public Works has jurisdiction.
(9) The sponsor or licensee of an outdoor activity shall provide a
minimum of eight temporary litter and refuse receptacles at the
site of the outdoor activity and shall provide for the regular
collection of the contents of the receptacles. The number (if more
than eight are deemed necessary), type and placement of the
receptacles shall be approved by the Director of Public Works or his
designee.
(10) Final site plan.
(a) The submission and approval of a final site plan which reflects
any changes from the preliminary site plan and further details,
when applicable, including the following:
[1] Sanitary facilities and sewage disposal sites.
[2] Refuse disposal sites.
[3] Location of mobile and fixed food vending operations and
cooking or other heat- or flame-producing devices.
[4] Fire hydrants and waterlines.
[5] Traffic flow.
[6] Parking.
[7] Security.
[8] Location of rides by type, including booths and generators.
[9] Location of games.
[10] Living quarters.
[11] Access for emergency services, including but not limited
to ambulances, firefighting and fire-prevention equipment
and police vehicles.
[12] Location of stands, booths, vehicles and tables from which
merchandise is to be sold or dispensed, identified by type.
[13] All streets and rights-of-way within and bordering upon
site areas.
(b) A final site plan shall not be required for garage, yard and
porch sales when activity is confined to property owned by the
sponsor. A final site plan must be submitted to the Subdivision
of Licensing no later than 17 days prior to the first day of
operation of the outdoor activity. The final site plan, where
required, shall be approved by the Police Department, Fire
§ 188-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 188-3
C:1080
Department, Health Department, Engineering Department,
Subdivision of Licensing no later than one week prior to the
first day of operation of the outdoor activity.
(11) All electrical requirements, regulations and licensing shall be
adhered to by the sponsors, promoters and vendors/operators of
the outdoor activity as provided for in the Code of the City, of which
the applicable sections are hereby incorporated by reference
herein as if fully set forth. Electrical connections and other utility
connections, if any, shall be approved by the appropriate City
official(s).
(12) Where the license being applied for involves the use of adult and
kiddy rides, evidence of a current approved inspection by the State
of New Jersey must be prominently displayed prior to their
becoming operational.
(13) Prior to conducting business, all vendors, strolling vendors,
operators and concessionaires, where they are utilized, must be
registered with the Subdivision of Licensing by name, home and
business addresses and activity in which each will engage during
the life of the license of the outdoor activity and must be prepared
to properly identify themselves upon request.
(14)No outdoor activity license shall issue for circuses, carnivals, fairs
and concerts unless, one week prior to the first day of operation of
the outdoor activity, the sponsor shall furnish to the Subdivision of
Licensing satisfactory proof of the sponsor's, vendor's, operator's,
concessionaire's and promoter's compliance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 34:15-71, Employer's obligation to injured employee.
C. Motorcade, march, parade, rally or walk-a-thon. Before any sponsor or
licensee shall conduct a motorcade, march, parade, rally, picket or
walk-a-thon within the City, a license must first be obtained from the
Subdivision of Licensing, which, prior to the issuance thereof, shall be
approved by the Police Director or his designee. Application for such
license shall be made 30 days prior to the proposed activity and state,
where applicable, the route to be followed, location, number of persons,
vehicles and floats that will participate, length of time, anticipated
security concerns and such other factors deemed relevant by the
Subdivision of Licensing and the East Orange Police Department. The
application deadline may be waived by the City Administrator. The
appropriate provisions of this chapter shall apply to the aforementioned
activities as determined by the Subdivision of Licensing and East
Orange Police Department but shall not apply to funeral processions.
[Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
§ 188-3 CHARTER § 188-4
C:1081
§ 188-4. License fees; duration and hours of operation; additional
regulations. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
All license fees indicated on the accompanying chart255 are nonrefundable
and payable in advance to the Subdivision of Licensing. Unless otherwise
indicated on the accompanying chart, all outdoor activity licenses are
limited to one per year per sponsor.
§ 188-5. Security. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
§ 188-6. Fire prevention requirements.
A. All sponsors or licensees must utilize the services of the East Orange
Police Department during the operation of certain designated activities
that the Subdivision of Licensing and Police Director deem necessary.
Such services must be paid for at the prevailing East Orange Police
Department overtime rates and shall be subject to the provisions of
Article XVI, Chapter 60, § 60-95 et seq., of the Code of the City of East
Orange.
B. Upon the written approval of the Police Director, sponsors or licensees
may provide for their own security.
A. The sponsor and vendors, with the consent of the Fire Department,
shall be authorized to install, hook and connect to fire hydrants
specially marked by the Fire Department a master hose or other watercarrying
device to supply water to the booths and stands operating at
the outdoor activity, subject to the following provisions: [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
(1) The Fire Department, in its sole discretion, shall determine which
fire hydrants will be used as hereinabove stated.
(2) The sponsor and vendors shall maintain all fire hydrants within the
perimeter of the outdoor activity free and clear of any obstruction,
with the closest object located next to a fire hydrant at no less than
10 feet in any direction from its geometrical center.
(3) The sponsor and vendors shall meet and observe at all times the
requirements of the Board of Water Commissioners of the City.
B. Anyone operating a booth or stand in which there is heating or cooking
apparatus for the preparation of food shall keep at all times, in a visible,
easily accessible location within the booth or stand, a fully charged fire
extinguisher of the kind classified as 1A-5BC multipurpose dry
chemical.
C. All doors or gates on entrances to and exits from the premises where
the outdoor activity shall be conducted shall be kept open and
unobstructed during the hours of operation of the activity in order to
255. Editor's Note: Said chart is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 188-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 188-6
C:1082
§ 188-7. Games of skill and chance; gambling. [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
The licensee shall not suffer, permit or allow any games of skill, games of
chance and gambling in any form to be engaged in on the site of the outdoor
activity except as permitted and regulated by federal law, Title 5 of the New
Jersey Statutes, Title 13 Chapter 47 of the New Jersey Administrative Code
and the Code of the City of East Orange. Evidence of approval by the State
of New Jersey or the City Clerk, when applicable, for all games of chance
or skill must be presented to the Subdivision of Licensing and the Police
Director or his designee no later than one week prior to the first day of
operation of the outdoor activity.
§ 188-8. Insurance requirements. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
32-2005]
facilitate the rapid ingress or egress of all persons attending. In case of
an emergency, the enclosed outdoor area must have at least two means
of egress.
D. It shall be the obligation and duty of the licensee to maintain, for the
duration of the outdoor activity, an unimpeded and unobstructed lane
for emergency traffic at least 15 feet in width for the rapid ingress and
egress of vehicles required for emergencies or other governmental
purposes.
E. Any tents used in connection with the outdoor activity larger than 120
square feet are required to be in compliance with BOCA Fire Prevention
Code, Section F1800.0 with regard to flame resistance, and Section
F-1803.0, Fire Safety Requirements, with respect to combustible
materials in tents, and have at least two unobstructed exits. No exposed
flame from any source shall be maintained or used inside a tent or
within 20 feet of a tent.
A. Insurance for any outdoor activity held on City-owned property may be
required at the discretion of the Subdivision of Licensing and the Police
Director. Each application shall be reviewed by the Subdivision of
Licensing and the Police Director or his designee, and their
determination to require insurance shall be based on factors such as
the volatility of the activity, prior similar activities, the time, place and
manner in which the activity will be held and other relevant conditions.
(1) Upon request, the sponsor shall furnish to the Subdivision of
Licensing evidence of a liability insurance policy to be in the
amount of $1,000,000/$3,000,000 to be in effect during the life of
the outdoor activity license, with the Mayor, City Council and the
City of East Orange as named insured, indemnifying the City of
East Orange and holding the City harmless.
(2) In addition, the Subdivision of Licensing may require the sponsor to
furnish evidence of property damage insurance in the amount of
§ 188-6 CHARTER § 188-8
C:1083
§ 188-9. License revocation.
§ 188-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. 32-2005256]
The sponsor, licensee, the promoter and vendors/operators/concessionaires
or their agents shall, upon conviction of a violation of provisions of this
chapter, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000, incarceration not
exceeding 90 days, and/or 90 days of community service, per violation. Each
day a violation persists shall be a separate violation.
$30,000 also indemnifying the City, which insurance shall also be
in effect during the life of the outdoor activity license.
(3) The insurance requirement does not include City-sponsored
activities.
B. For any outdoor activity at which animal rides, kiddy rides and adult
rides will be operated, the sponsor, operator or promoter shall furnish
to the Subdivision of Licensing evidence of a public liability insurance
policy to be in the amount of $1,000,000/$3,000,000 to be in effect
during the life of the outdoor activity license.
A. Card games, video games, pinball machines and the dispensing of
alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited at all outdoor activities. Failure
to comply with this subsection will result in suspension or revocation of
the outdoor activity license in addition to other penalties enumerated
herein or elsewhere in the Code of the City of East Orange or in Title 2C
of the New Jersey Statutes.
B. The outdoor activity license or that of any vendor/operator/
concessionaire may be revoked or suspended by the Subdivision of
Licensing, after notice and hearing, at any time during the life of such
license for any violation by the sponsor, licensee, promoter or individual
vendor/operator/concessionaire of any provision of this chapter, any
violation of the Code of the City of East Orange or violation of any
applicable state or federal law. The revocation or suspension may be in
addition to the penalties set forth in the general penalties section of this
chapter. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
C. When any public official employed by either the Subdivision of
Licensing, the Police Department, the Fire Department or the Health
Department determines that an imminent hazard to life, health or
safety has been created by any facet of the operation of the outdoor
activity, he shall have full power and authority to require the immediate
cessation of the operation of the entire outdoor activity, or any part
thereof, until such time as the hazardous condition is abated.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 32-2005]
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 188-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 188-10
C:1084
Chapter 190
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Graffiti — See Ch. 157.
Littering — See Ch. 173.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 190-1. Parental responsibility for unlawful activities of minors;
penalties. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]
A parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a juvenile
18 years of age or under who fails or neglects to exercise reasonable
supervision and control of the conduct of such juvenile shall be liable to a
fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed
90 days, or both, provided that:
Chapter 192
PARKING LOTS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Open-air vehicle lots — See Ch. 186.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
A. Such juvenile, while on probation pursuant to an order by a juvenile and
domestic relations court, engages in conduct, either by act or omission,
which if engaged in by an adult would constitute a disorderly persons
offense or a crime and the failure or neglect of said parent, guardian or
other person to exercise reasonable control or supervision is causally
related to said conduct of such juvenile; or
B. Such juvenile engages in conduct, either by act or omission, which if
engaged in by an adult would constitute a disorderly persons offense or
crime and said parent, guardian or other person shall have actual
knowledge or implied knowledge of the conduct of such juvenile, and
the failure or neglect of said parent, guardian or other person to
exercise reasonable control or supervision is causally related to said
conduct of such juvenile.
§ 188-10 CHARTER § 192-1
C:1085
§ 192-1. Legal holidays enumerated.257
Legal holidays, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be New Year's Day,
Presidents' Day, Martin Luther King Day, Good Friday, General Election Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. If any of the aforesaid holidays fall on
Sunday, then the Monday following shall be deemed to be a legal holiday.
§ 192-2. Parking lots designated as public places.
All municipal parking lots are hereby designated as public places, and no
person shall commit any act thereon which is prohibited by this Code or
other City ordinance in a public place.
§ 192-3. Use of parking lots restricted. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 25-1986]
§ 192-4. Spaces for City employees and City school personnel.
A. Except as provided for metered parking, permit parking, free parking in
municipal parking lots and use by City employees and school personnel
as designated by the Director of Public Works, no person shall park in
or otherwise utilize any municipal parking lot.
B. Parking stalls shall be used for the parking of passenger automobiles
and commercial vehicles not exceeding a one-ton capacity and not
equipped with dual rear wheels. Any commercial vehicle parked in
accordance with this section shall not contain tools, equipment or
debris exposed or visible to the public. All vehicles shall be parked
within the white lines designating each stall.
A. No person shall park in any area of a municipal parking lot which has
been reserved by the Director of Public Works, with or without meters,
for the exclusive use of authorized City employees and authorized City
school personnel. All such areas shall be marked by the Director of
Public Works by signs of sufficient size to advise that such areas are
reserved for use of City employees and school personnel. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
B. The Director of Public Works or his duly designated agent shall issue for
City employees, and the Board of Education or its duly designated agent
shall issue for school personnel, an official sticker insignia which such
City employees and school personnel shall place on the rear window of
any motor vehicle utilizing such reserved areas. [Amended 5-27-1986
by Ord. No. 25-1986]
C. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to park in any areas
reserved by suitable signs for use by authorized City employees and
authorized City school personnel.
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 192-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 192-5
C:1086
§ 192-5. Overnight, weekend and holiday parking: monthly permits.
[Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
Overnight parking in municipal parking lots is prohibited unless a permit
shall be issued by the Tax Collector or his duly authorized agent. Unless
otherwise provided herein, the fee for such permit shall be as provided for
in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, and the holder thereof shall thereby be
entitled to park the passenger automobile and commercial vehicle specified
in the permit in the designated municipal parking lot between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, and from 12:00 midnight of the previous
day to 9:00 a.m. daily, Mondays through Saturdays, and all day on Sundays
and legal holidays, as defined herein. On such lots as the Director of Public
Works shall determine that additional hours of parking can be permitted
without impairing the primary function of the lot to provide additional
public parking during the hours of usual business activity, the monthly
fee shall be as provided for in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, and the
time of permitted use shall be between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00
midnight, and 12:00 midnight of the previous day to 9:00 a.m., Mondays
through Fridays, and all day on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays,
as defined herein. Each passenger automobile and commercial vehicle for
which a permit is issued shall be identified by a sticker insignia approved
by the Director of Public Works and issued by the Tax Collector or his duly
authorized agent.
§ 192-6. (Reserved)258
§ 192-7. Loading zones.
No motor vehicle shall be parked in any loading zone on a municipal
parking lot unless actively engaged in loading or unloading, nor shall a
motor vehicle load or unload freight for commercial purposes in any such
lot except in such designated loading zones, and then only for that period
of time necessary for the loading or unloading of freight for commercial
purposes.
§ 192-8. Impeding traffic.
It shall be unlawful to park, stop, stand or unnecessarily impede the flow of
traffic over areas of municipal parking lots used for the movement of motor
vehicles.
§ 192-9. Removal of illegally parked or standing vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parking or standing on a municipal parking lot in
violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the
safe and proper regulation of traffic. The Chief of Police may provide for the
258. Editor's Note: Former § 192-6, Overnight, weekend and holiday parking: weekly permits,
as amended, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 192-5 CHARTER § 192-9
C:1087
removal of such vehicle and payment by the owner of reasonable costs of
the removal and storage.
§ 192-10. Enforcement.
The Police Department, through its officers or deputized officers, shall
enforce this chapter and regulations promulgated hereunder as required by
law.
Chapter 193
PARKS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 94.
Alcoholic beverages generally — See Ch. 100.
Solid waste — See Ch. 156.
Littering — See Ch. 172.
Loitering — See Ch. 173.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 193-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "East Orange
Ordinance Regulating Conduct in Public Parks."
§ 193-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the following meanings:
BICYCLE — A vehicle with two wheels propelled solely by human power and
having pedals, handle bars and a saddle-like seat. The term shall include
a bicycle for two or more persons, having seats and corresponding sets of
pedals arranged in tandem. [Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 28-2006]
CITY — The City of East Orange.
CONFINED WILDLIFE — Sequestered animals that are not
domesticated.[Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 21-2006]
DIRECTOR — A person immediately in charge of any park area and its
activities and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of nourishing, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or
game.[Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 21-2006]
§ 192-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 193-2
C:1088
HELMET — A properly fitted and fastened head covering of sturdy material
which meets the standards set forth under N.J.S.A. 39:4-10.1 et seq.[Added
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 28-2006]
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other area in the City which is owned or used by the City, open to and
used by the public and devoted to active or passive recreation.[Amended
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 28-2006]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
ROLLER SKATES — A pair of devices worn on the feet with a set of wheels
attached, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels, and used
to glide or propel the user over the ground.[Added 10-10-2006 by Ord.
No. 28-2006]
SCOOTER — A vehicle (either mechanically propelled or propelled by
human power) with a long footboard having a set of wheels attached,
regardless of the number or placement of those wheels, and controlled by
an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel or wheels.[Added
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 28-2006]
SKATEBOARD — A short narrow board having a set of wheels mounted
underneath.[Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 28-2006]
TRICYCLE — A vehicle with three wheels, propelled solely by human power
and having pedals, handle bars and a saddle-like seat.[Added 10-10-2006
by Ord. No. 28-2006]
UNCONFINED WILDLIFE — Free-ranging animals that are not
domesticated.[Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 21-2006]
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size,
kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in
the service of the City parks.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are not domesticated. [Added 9-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 21-2006]
§ 193-3. Park property.
No person shall, in regard to park buildings and other property:
A. Disfigurement and removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridges; tables, benches,
railings; paving or paving materials; waterlines or other public utilities
or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent; monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary
markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or structure of
whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or
§ 193-2 CHARTER § 193-3
C:1089
§ 193-4. Sanitation.
No person in a park shall:
§ 193-5. Traffic.
No person in a park shall:
§ 193-5.1. Operation of certain vehicles by persons under 17 years
of age. [Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 28-2006]
No person under 17 years of age in a park shall:
string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except
on special written permit issued hereunder.
A. Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park, or in any tributary, stream,
storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or
thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said
waters.
B. Refuse and trash. Have brought in or dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, papers, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on
the grounds thereof but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where
such are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
C. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the City, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife.
[Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 21-2006]
A. Operation of vehicles. Drive any vehicle on any area of any park, except
that this prohibition shall not apply to any park employee or other
person having special written permission from the Director to do so.
B. Bicycles and tricycles. Ride a bicycle or tricycle on any area of any park
nor leave a bicycle or tricycle lying on the ground or paving or set
against any trees or in any place or position where other persons may
trip over or be injured by it.
A. Bicycles and tricycles. Operate or ride upon a bicycle or tricycle on any
area of any park unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and
fastened helmet. This requirement shall apply to a person who rides
upon a bicycle while in a restraining seat which is attached to the
bicycle or in a trailer towed by the bicycle.
§ 193-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 193-5.1
C:1090
§ 193-6. Behavior.
No person in a park shall:
§ 193-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980; amended 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 28-2006]
B. Roller skates, scooters and skateboards. Operate any roller skates,
scooters or skateboards on any area of any park unless that person is
wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet.
A. Intoxicating beverages prohibition.
(1) Knowingly possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any
public park in the City.259
B. Fireworks and explosives. Bring or have in his possession, or set off or
otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecracker,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material,
or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or
highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance,
compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with any other
substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing
standpoints.
C. Gambling. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
D. Loitering and boisterousness. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats
or benches or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly
conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
A. Violators of any of the provisions of this chapter (except § 193-5.1) shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and/or 90 days of
community service.260
B. Violators of any of the provisions of § 193-5.1 shall be warned of the
violation by the enforcing official. The parent or legal guardian of the
violator shall be cited and may, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by a fine of $25 for a first offense and a maximum of $100 for a
subsequent offense. The penalties provided under the provisions of this
subsection for failing to wear an approved helmet may be waived if the
parent or legal guardian of violator presents suitable proof that an
approved helmet or appropriate personal protection equipment has
been purchased since the violation occurred.
259. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(2), Drunkenness, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 193-5.1 CHARTER § 193-7
C:1091
Chapter 195
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51. Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 195-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY OFFICIAL — The Chief of Police.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities or printed evidences of indebtedness; or purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as a furniture storage warehouseman and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PLEDGE — An article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker in the course
of his business.
PLEDGOR — A person who delivers the pledge into possession of a
pawnbroker, unless such person discloses that he is or was acting for
another, in which event "pledgor" means the disclosed principal.
§ 195-2. Requisites for maintaining business.
No pawnbroker shall maintain, keep and operate a business within the City
unless all the provisions of Chapter 51, Land Use, of this Code, and N.J.S.A.
45:22-1 through 45:22-20, its supplements and amendments, have been met
and evidences of such compliance delivered to the City official.
§ 195-3. Application for license; determination of issuance or
denial.
Upon demand, the City official shall deliver to the pawnbroker an
application for the purposes of maintaining, keeping and operating a
pawnbroker business within the City. No permit shall issue unless such
application is completed, executed and all requirements contained therein
are fully met and delivered to the City official. The City official shall make
determination if the maintenance, keeping and operation of such
pawnbroker business at the place or places named in the application shall
affect the health, welfare and morals of the City. If such application is
denied, the City official shall set down in writing his findings and
conclusions and deliver a copy of same to the applicant upon demand.
§ 193-7 EAST ORANGE CODE § 195-4
C:1092
§ 195-4. Fee; separate license for each premises.
If the City official approves the license to operate such pawnbroker
business, the same shall be issued for a fee in accordance with the schedule
of license fees in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, of this Code. Such fee
shall be for each place of business, and separate licenses shall be issued
therefor. The license fee shall be paid to the issuing officer as defined in
Chapter 170, § 170-1, of this Code.
§ 195-5. Revocation of licenses.
The City official shall, upon written notice and hearing, revoke the license if
the pawnbroker violates any provision of N.J.S.A. 45:22-1 through 45:22-20,
together with such further or other regulations adopted by the City Council,
which regulations are contained in the application delivered to pawnbrokers
under this chapter.
§ 195-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980261]
Violators of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for
not more than 90 days and/or 90 days of community service.
Chapter 198
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 97.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 100.
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Loitering — See Ch. 173.
Parental responsibilities — See Ch. 190.
Public parks — See Ch. 193.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 198-1. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess or consume any
alcoholic beverage in any public park in the City or to consume any alcoholic
beverage on any street or in any public place or in any motor vehicle in the
City. There shall be a rebuttable presumption against every person charged
with the offense of possession of any alcoholic beverage in a public park
that he was knowingly in possession thereof.
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 195-4 CHARTER § 198-2
C:1093
§ 198-2. Destruction or injury to property.
§ 198-3. Disorderly houses; houses of ill fame.
No person shall keep or maintain a disorderly house or house of ill fame
or permit his house or other property to be so used or to be frequented or
resorted to by riotous or disorderly persons or gamblers. No person shall
frequent or resort to any such house or premises when it is so maintained.
§ 198-4. Use of drugs.262
§ 198-5. False alarms; possession of duplicate keys to fire or police
boxes.
No person shall knowingly cause a false alarm of fire, or make or cause to
be made or have in his possession any key or impression or duplicate of any
key of any fire alarm or police signal box without the permission of either
the Fire or Police Commission.
A. Private property. No person shall intentionally cut, break or otherwise
destroy, deface or injure any property of another without the permission
of the owner or person responsible therefor.
B. Public property. No person shall intentionally injure, deface or destroy
any public property.
C. Trees, shrubs, etc. No person shall cut, root up or otherwise injure or
destroy any tree, shrub, plant or other growing thing without the
permission of the owner thereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or be under the influence of
amphetamine, barbiturate, barbital, hypnotic or somnifacient drugs,
tranquilizers or any prescription legend drug which is not a narcotic
drug within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 24:21-2 for a purpose other than the
treatment of sickness or injury as prescribed or administered by a
person duly authorized by law to treat sick and injured human beings.
[Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
B. In a prosecution under this section, it shall not be necessary for the City
to prove that the accused did use or was under the influence of any one
of the afore-listed specific drugs, but it shall be sufficient for a
conviction under this section for the City to prove that the accused did
use or was under the influence of such drug as provided herein by
proving that the accused did manifest physical and physiological
symptoms or reactions caused by the use of any such drug.
262. Editor's Note: As to distribution of medicine, see § 198-13 of this chapter.
§ 198-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 198-6
C:1094
§ 198-6. Persons under influence of drugs or alcohol in public
areas.263 [Added 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 32-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of drugs or
alcohol in any public park in the City or any street or in any public place.
In order to be prosecuted under this section, the City must prove that
the accused mental or physical faculties were impaired. A manifestation of
physical and physiological symptoms or reactions caused by the use of said
substance is proof of said violation.
§ 198-7. Gambling.264
§ 198-8. Guns, firearms and slingshots: use restrictions.
§ 198-9. Indecent conduct; obscene literature and pictures.
A. No person shall set up, keep, maintain or permit in his house or
premises any faro table, faro bank, roulette or other device or game of
chance or hazard for the purpose of gambling. No person shall frequent
or resort to any such house or premises when it is so maintained.
B. No person shall deal, play or engage in faro, roulette or any other
device or game of chance, or buy or sell what is commonly known as a
pool or any interest or share in any such pool, or shall take what is
commonly known as a "book" upon the racing, pacing or trotting of any
horse, mare, gelding or other animal or any game, racing or contest, or
have in his possession any ticket, slips or other writing of an interest or
share or showing or indicating an interest, share, bet or pledge in any
pool, lottery, racing contest or other game of chance, or shall keep or
attend a place to which persons may resort for engaging in any such
acts or for betting upon the event of any horse race or other race or
contest or for gambling in any form, and no person shall aid, abet, assist
or participate in any such pool, lottery, race or other contest or game of
chance.
A. No person shall discharge or hurl any shot, bullet or other missile of any
kind from any pistol, gun, air gun or slingshot, except for the protection
of life or property.
B. No person shall, without permit by the Mayor, fire or discharge any
firearm of any description, provided that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to members of the Police Department or to any regular
military organization while in the discharge of their duty.
A. No person shall appear on any street or public place in a state of nudity
or cause any indecent or lewd exposure whatever, or be guilty of any
lewdness or indecent act or behavior, or exhibit, sell or offer to sell or
263. Editor's Note: Former § 198-6, Front yard parking, was repealed 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015.
264. Editor's Note: As to gambling generally, see N.J.S.A. 2A:40-1 et seq. See also Ch. 103,
Amusement Devices.
§ 198-6 CHARTER § 198-9
C:1095
§ 198-10. Returning borrowed books to library.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from
the public library of the City or any branch thereof contrary to the rules
and regulations of the library after 30 days has elapsed from the date of
posting, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice demanding
return thereof, addressed to such person at the last address furnished to
the library or branch.
§ 198-11. Damage to library books.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or other article or any part thereof which is owned by
or is in the custody of any public library of the City or branch thereof.
§ 198-12. Use of false information in borrowing library books.
No person, with intent to defraud, shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any card other than the one issued to such person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or other article from the public library of the
City or any branch thereof.
§ 198-13. Distributing medicines.
No person shall distribute, cast, deposit, place, leave or cause to be
distributed, cast, deposited, placed or left in any public street, highway or
public place or in or upon any stoop, vestibule, areaway, house or premises
any medicine, medicinal preparation or any sample thereof, provided that
nothing contained in this section shall be held to forbid the delivery of any
such article mentioned in this section at the request, expressed or implied,
of the owner or occupant of any such premises.
§ 198-14. Misrepresentation of facts in applications to City.
Any person who knowingly misrepresents any material fact on any
application for a permit or license or on any other paper or document
submitted to the City or any of its agencies pursuant to any state law,
City ordinance or any regulation issued by the state or City, to induce any
publish any obscene performance, picture, book or writing. [Amended
6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 20-2019]
B. No person shall place, mark, post, draw or cause to be placed, posted,
marked or drawn upon any fence, billboard, building, door, wall,
pavement or other surface exposed to public view any obscene word,
writing, picture, representation or drawing.
C. The word "obscene," wherever it appears in this section, shall mean
that which to the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, when considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or
purpose an appeal to prurient interests.
§ 198-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 198-14
C:1096
official action or dissuade officials from taking any steps to enforce any law,
ordinance, regulation or order, shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 198-15. Obstructing officers; neglecting to assist.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, oppose, obstruct or hinder
any City officer or employee or any police or other peace officer in the
performance of his duty or refuse or neglect to assist any such officer in the
discharge of his duty when lawfully required by such officer to do so.
§ 198-16. Playing games in streets.
No person shall engage in any street in any practice, sport or exercise other
than as may be required to traverse the same in accordance with traffic
regulations.
§ 198-17. Reward for securing conviction of violators.
The Mayor shall have power, with the consent of the City Council, to offer
such reward, not exceeding $3,000, as he shall deem suitable for securing
the conviction of any person who has committed any crime within the City
or violated any provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the City.
§ 198-18. Throwing stones and other offensive substances.
No person shall throw any stone, stick, glass or any dangerous, injurious or
offensive substance in or into any public place or at any car, vehicle, house,
building, fence or at any person.
§ 198-19. Dumping garbage and junk into watercourses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, discharge or otherwise
place any junk, ashes, garbage, debris or other waste matter into any
natural watercourse located within the City.
§ 198-20. Prohibited swimming.
No person shall bathe or swim in any pond, river, brook or stream within
the City.
§ 198-21. Illegal parking on private property. [Added 2-28-1972 by
Ord. No. 8-1972]
A. No person shall park, stop or stand a motor vehicle upon any private
parking lot, parking area, driveway or any private property without
proper authority of the owner thereof.
B. Any unoccupied motor vehicle parked, stopped or standing on a private
parking lot, parking area, driveway or any private property in violation
of this section shall be deemed a trespass. The owner of said premises
§ 198-14 CHARTER § 198-21
C:1097
§ 198-22. Illegal parking on Parking Authority parking lots. [Added
9-8-1975 by Ord. No. 61-1975]
§ 198-23. Minors frequenting poolrooms. [Added 4-27-1970 by Ord.
No. 23-1970]
No person under the age of 16 years shall frequent any poolroom, nor
shall the operator thereof permit any such minor to use any pool table,
whether mechanical or not, unless such minor is accompanied by at least
one parent or grandparent. No pool table, whether or not mechanical,
shall be permitted or allowed in and about any premises authorized to
dispense alcoholic beverages either for consumption upon such premises or
otherwise.
§ 198-24. Tampering with fire protection equipment. [Added
5-23-1977 by Ord. No. 25-1977]
The damaging, vandalizing, defacing or stealing of or in any way tampering
with fire protection equipment, including but not limited to fire escapes, fire
doors, exit signs, standpipe, sprinkler system equipment, fire extinguishers
and smoke detectors, is hereby prohibited.
§ 198-25. (Reserved)265
may provide for the removal of such motor vehicle, and the costs of said
removal and storage shall be borne by the owner of said vehicle.
C. The uniform traffic summons shall be used as the complaint form for
this violation. The owner or his designated agent shall sign that portion
of the summons as the complainant. A police officer shall countersign as
witness.
A. No person while operating a motor vehicle shall pass over and enter
into Parking Authority parking lots operated by mechanical gates
without having impliedly by that act agreed to pay such fees, rates or
charges for parking as may have been set by said Parking Authority.
Payment of such fees, rates or charges shall be made upon egress from
said Parking Authority lot.
B. Refusal or failure of such person to make payment of such fees, rates or
charges aforesaid shall constitute a violation, and the uniform traffic
summons shall be used as the complaint form for this violation. The
Parking Authority or its designated agent shall sign that portion of the
summons as the complainant. A police officer shall countersign as
witness.
265. Editor's Note: Section 198-25, Mobile telephones, added 11-24-2003 by Ord. No. 22-2003,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 198-21 EAST ORANGE CODE § 198-26
C:1098
§ 198-26. Violations and penalties.266
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter (except as provided
otherwise herein) shall be sentenced to a fine of not more than $2,000, not
more than 90 days' imprisonment and/or 90 days of community service.
§ 198-27. Protective custody of DWI suspects. [Added 12-15-2003
by Ord. No. 26-2003]
A. Persons to be held in protective custody. Any person who is arrested by
the East Orange Police Department for a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50
shall be held in protective custody at an appropriate police or other
facility where such person's condition may be monitored until the
person is no longer a danger to himself or to others.
B. Duration of protective custody.
(1) Any person so arrested shall be released from protective custody
when his or her blood alcohol concentration is less than 0.05% and
the person is no longer under the influence of any intoxicating
liquor, narcotic, hallucinogenic or habit-forming drug to the extent
that the person's facilities are impaired.
(2) In no event shall a person being held in protective custody pursuant
to this section be held for a period longer than eight hours without
being provided an appropriate hearing by the East Orange
Municipal Court.
C. Release due to age, health or safety.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, provided that
it is not a detriment to public safety, if a person's age, health or
safety so warrants, the East Orange Police Department may,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22 et seq.:
(a) Release any person held in protective custody; or
(b) Provide an appropriate alternative to protective custody.
(2) The City of East Orange shall not be subject to liability if a person is
released from custody pursuant to the provisions of this subsection.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the use of State
Police facilities by the City of East Orange for the purposes of this
section.
266. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 198-26 CHARTER § 198-27
C:1099
Chapter 201
PLUMBERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
§ 201-1. Work to be supervised by master plumber.
No person, except a single-family homeowner in his own dwelling, shall
perform any water piping, plumbing or drainage work, or shall expose the
sign of plumbing or drainage, or any advertisement in connection therewith,
or engage in the business of installing, repairing, replacing or altering any
plumbing, drainage system or fixtures, unless such work performed is under
the direct supervision of a state licensed master plumber.
Chapter 203
POLES AND WIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 238. Wireless communications and equipment
facilities — See Ch. 262.
§ 203-1. Permission required to erect poles; minimum width of
sidewalk.
No pole shall be erected within any public right-of-way by any telegraph,
telephone or electric light company or by any board or commission of the
City or by any other person without the consent of the City Council. No pole
shall be erected on any sidewalk less than seven feet wide.
§ 203-2. Specifications for poles. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
The Director of Public Works shall establish specifications as to the height,
size, type and character of poles to be erected within the City. All poles
within the City shall be erected and maintained in accordance with such
specifications.
§ 203-3. Right of City to use poles.
The City shall have the right to use the top crossbeam of any telegraph,
telephone or electric light pole for the purpose of attaching and maintaining
wires of the City.
§ 198-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 203-4
C:1100
§ 203-4. Removal of unsafe or decayed poles. [Amended 5-27-1986
by Ord. No. 25-1986]
All decayed or unsafe poles in any street or sidewalk of the City shall be
removed within 24 hours after notice in writing by the Director of Public
Works to the person maintaining any such pole, and if not removed within
such time, the same may be removed by the Director of Public Works.
§ 203-5. Climbing or hanging objects on poles; obscuring
streetlights.
No person shall climb upon any light post or hang or place any goods or
merchandise thereon or place any material upon or against the same or
extinguish or partially extinguish or obscure the light of any streetlight,
unless duly authorized to do so.
§ 203-6. Suspension of wires over or across buildings.
No person shall suspend or maintain over or across any building any wire
or cable for the purpose of conducting electricity for light, heat or power.
§ 203-7. Minimum height of wires above street.
No telegraph, telephone or electric light wire shall be less than 16 feet
above the surface of any street or sidewalk.
§ 203-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980267]
Violators of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for
not more than 90 days and/or 90 days of community service.
Chapter 206
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170. Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 195.
§ 206-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of the purchase of precious metals
and gems and all forms of previously owned jewelry without first obtaining
a license issued by the Department of Licensing and Inspections.
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-4 CHARTER § 206-2
C:1101
§ 206-2. Investigation of applicant; recommendation; appeal.
§ 206-3. Identification and receipt required.
All licensees shall require each person offering an item for sale to produce
identification and to sign a receipt for said item.
§ 206-4. Inspection and maintenance of records.
Each licensee shall maintain records for each sale which contain a
description of the item purchased, any identifying numbers and a copy of
a signed receipt pursuant to § 206-3 of this chapter. These records shall be
available for inspection by the East Orange Police Department within 24
hours of the purchase and shall be maintained for a period of one year from
the date of the transaction.
§ 206-5. Bond.
Each licensee shall deliver a bond to the Director of Inspection and
Licensing, executed by the applicant as principal, with a surety company
authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New Jersey as
surety. The bond, to be approved by the Corporation Counsel, shall be in
the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance
of and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances
of the City of East Orange in force or which may be adopted respecting the
conduct of this business, and conditioned further that the bond shall be and
remain for the benefit of any person or persons who shall have received
judgment against any person licensed under this chapter by reason of any
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to Chapter 170 of
this Code, the Director of Inspection and Licensing shall refer such
application to the Chief of Police, who shall institute such investigation
of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility as he
deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare.
B. Upon completion of the investigation, which in no case shall take more
than 10 days, the Chief of Police shall return the application or a copy
thereof to the Director of Inspection and Licensing, accompanied by a
recommendation as to whether the license should be issued or denied.
If the recommendation of the Chief of Police is to deny the license, the
grounds for such recommendation shall be stated. Grounds for
recommending denial of a license may include, inter alia, information
regarding the applicant's moral character, demonstrated business
responsibility for or conviction of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud,
deceit or misrepresentation. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, the Director of Inspection and Licensing shall issue or
deny the license accordingly.
C. Any person aggrieved by a denial of the license application may appeal
to the Mayor, who may confirm or reverse the denial based upon his
independent review of the administrative record and recommendations.
§ 206-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 206-5
C:1102
damage sustained by any such person as a subsequent purchaser of items
previously sold to the licensee by any third party having made a sale to such
licensee, due to dishonesty, fraud or deceit practiced in effecting purchase.
§ 206-6. Fees; waiver of investigation.268
The fee for an initial application and for each annual renewal fee shall be as
set forth in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees. If on the effective date of this
chapter a person, partnership or corporation has been in business pursuant
to § 206-1 of this chapter for a period not less than five years, the fee for
initial application shall be $25 and investigation pursuant to § 206-2 of this
chapter may be waived by the Director of Inspection and Licensing.
§ 206-7. Applicability of other provisions.
Any person issued a license pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
provisions of Article IV, Enforcement, of Chapter 170.
§ 206-8. Violations and penalties.269
Violators of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for
not more than 90 days and/or 90 days of community service.
Chapter 214
RECREATION FACILITIES: FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 214-1. Tennis courts.
A. Any persons wishing to use tennis courts owned and operated by the
City of East Orange must obtain a permit to do so from the appropriate
licensing agency of the City of East Orange. The fee schedule for such
tennis permit is as follows:
(1) Residents.
(a) Adults: $14.
(b) Children 17 years and under: $8.
(c) Seniors: $8.
268. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
269. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 206-5 CHARTER § 214-1
C:1103
§ 214-2. Swimming pool at East Orange Middle School.
(2) Nonresidents.
(a) Adults: $28.
(b) Children 17 years and under: $14.
(c) Seniors: $14.
(3) Guest passes: 10 for $50 (only 20 per family).
B. The fee schedule for tennis instructions is as follows:
(1) Residents.
(a) Adults (eight weeks): $35.
(b) Children (eight weeks): $10. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 21-2018]
(c) Seniors (eight weeks): $14.
(2) Nonresidents.
(a) Adults (eight weeks): $63.
(b) Children (eight weeks): $28.
(c) Seniors (eight weeks): $28.
C. The permit shall be valid from April 1 through March 31.
D. Tennis tournaments and special events court rental fee: $276 per day.
A. Middle school pool.
(1) Any person wishing to use the indoor and outdoor swimming pools
at East Orange Middle School must obtain a permit to do so from
the appropriate licensing agency of the City of East Orange.
(a) Residents, year-round (outside and inside pool).
[1] Adults: $20.
[2] Children: $10 (three years and up).
[3] Seniors: free.
[4] Family: $50.
(b) Registration fee for classes: $10.
(c) Guest passes: 10 for $50.
(d) Nonresidents: year-round (outside and inside pool).
§ 214-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 214-2
C:1104
§ 214-3. (Reserved)270
§ 214-4. Day camp.
[1] Adults: $75.
[2] Children: $45.
B. Swim club fees.
(1) Age group (nine to 17 years):
(a) City residents: $210.
(b) Nonresidents: $350.
(2) Developmental (five to eight years):
(a) City residents: $70.
(b) Nonresidents: $140.
(3) A permit can be obtained through the East Orange Recreation
Department.
A. Residency. In order to pay the resident day camp fees, each camper
must be a City of East Orange resident and provide the Department of
Recreation with at least three of the following to establish proof of
residency:
(1) Report card (must be provided as one of the three forms of proof);
(2) Birth certificate or passport;
(3) Parent's driver's license and/or state identification card;
(4) Parent's utility bill or phone bill or tax bill.
B. Day camp registration fees. Each camper must pay the following onetime
registration fee per camp session: [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 21-2018]
(1) Resident: $110.
(a) Registration: $10.
(b) Trip fee: $90.
(c) Swim badge: $10.
(2) Nonresident: $160.
(a) Registration: $25.
270. Editor's Note: Former § 214-3, East Orange Golf Course, as amended, was repealed
12-28-2015 by Ord. No. 56-2015. See now § 5-70M(3).
§ 214-2 CHARTER § 214-4
C:1105
(b) Trip fee: $90.
(c) Swim badge: $45.
C. (Reserved)
D. Resident summer camps fees.
(1) In addition to the fees required pursuant to Subsection B above,
campers must pay the following weekly fees, depending on the
camp selected: [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 21-2018]
(a) Fellowship Civic Center Day Camp (coed, seven to 12 years).
[1] $60 (per camper); or
[2] $145 (three campers in immediate family); or
[3] $145 plus additional $25 for each additional camper (four
or more campers in immediate family).
(b) Hart Middle Day Camp (coed, seven to 12 years).
[1] $60 (per camper); or
[2] $145 (three campers in immediate family); or
[3] $145 plus additional $25 for each additional camper (four
or more campers in immediate family).
(c) Grow & Glow Day Camp (coed three to six years).
[1] $60 (per camper); or
[2] $145 (three campers in immediate family); or
[3] $145 plus additional $25 for each additional camper (four
or more campers in immediate family).
(d) Tennis and Basketball Instructional Day Camp (coed, eight to
15 years).
[1] $65 (per camper); or
[2] $160 (three campers in immediate family); or
[3] $160 plus additional $30 for each additional camper (four
or more campers in immediate family).
(e) Cheerleading Day Camp (coed, seven to 15 years).
[1] $65 (per camper); or
[2] $160 (three campers in immediate family); or
[3] $160 plus additional $30 for each additional camper (four
or more campers in immediate family).
§ 214-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 214-4
C:1106
(f) Teens in Media Camp (coed, 13 to 15 years).
[1] $60 (per camper); or
[2] $145 (three campers in immediate family); or
[3] $145 plus additional $50 for each additional camper (four
or more campers in immediate family).
(g) Autism Camp (coed, up to 18 years).
[1] $90 (per camper).
(2) Weekly camp fees must be paid by 4:00 p.m. on the preceding
Friday or the camper(s) will be precluded from attending camp
until Tuesday of the following week or until said fees are paid. No
fees shall be prorated.
E. Nonresidents. In addition to the fees required pursuant to Subsection B
above, summer camps fees for nonresidents are $125 per week per
camper, irrespective of the day camp selected and/or the number of
campers in the immediate family.
F. Early payment discount.
(1) Early payment discounts do not apply to sponsoring agencies or
nonresidents. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 21-2018]
(2) A discount of $30 per camper may be applied if the camper is
enrolled for the entire season and fees are paid in full no later than
June 1 of the year for the applicable camping season.
(3) Early payment discounts only apply to three campers in the
immediate family that first apply.
G. Additional care.
(1) Before-camp care: For designated camps, before-care begins at
7:00 a.m. until 7:45 a.m.; for residents and nonresidents, cost shall
be $5 per week, per child.
(2) After-camp care: For designated camps, after-care begins at 4:15
p.m. and ends at 6:00 p.m.; for residents and nonresidents, cost
shall be $10 per week, per child.
H. Nonpayment of camp fees. Campers shall not attend camp if the fees
required herein are not paid by such dates and times as required by the
Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs.
I. Late pickup fees. There shall be a late pickup fee of $10 for every 30
minutes or part thereof for each camper.
J. Refunds.
§ 214-4 CHARTER § 214-4
C:1107
§ 214-5. Miscellaneous fees.
(1) Any and all requests for camp refunds must be submitted in writing
for consideration. Refund requests must be made no later than the
first official day of camp for the current season. Refund requests
will not be considered, accepted or honored thereafter.
A. Standard program fees. Fees are only valid for the program/activity
period as specified by the Department of Recreation and Cultural
Affairs. Program fees are nonrefundable, unless program has been
canceled at the discretion of the Department of Recreation and Cultural
Affairs.
(1) Residents: general recreation activities/programs.
(a) Under 18 years: $10 plus supply and equipment fee.
(b) Above 18 years: $20 plus supply and equipment fee.
(2) Nonresidents: general recreation activities/programs.
(a) Under 18 years: $20 plus supply and equipment fee.
(b) Above 18 years: $40 plus supply and equipment fee.
B. Special program fee.
(1) Golf: $14.
(2) Boxing: $30.
(3) Bowling:
(a) Bantams, per week: $8.
(b) Juniors, per week: $10.
(c) Adults, per week: $13.
(d) Registration: $10.
(4) Dance: $14.
(5) Tennis:
(a) Adult resident/six weeks: $55.
(b) Youth resident/six weeks: $21.
(c) Adult nonresident/six weeks: $69.
(d) Youth nonresident/six weeks: $35.
(6) Track: $10.
(7) American Legion: $28.
§ 214-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 214-5
C:1108
(8) FCC membership fee, per year: $5. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 21-2018]
(a) FCC after school, per week, per child: $20.
(9) Farmers market, per vendor: $100.
(10) Sports programs: $25. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
21-2018]
(11) 271Martial arts (per year): $30.
(12) Pride & Power Fitness: $25 per year. [Amended 4-23-2018 by
Ord. No. 21-2018]
C. Special events fees. Costs will be equal to pro rata share of actual cost
of event. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 21-2018]
(1) Roller-skating.
(2) Movies.
(3) Theater shows.
(4) Sporting events.
(5) Fourth of July:
(a) Senior citizens (62 years and older): free.
(b) Adult: $10 to $25.
(c) Youth: $5.
(6) Canteen: $4.
D. 272Facility application fee: $35.
E. FCC rental fee for gym.
(1) Flat rate/all-purpose area:
(a) Nonresident: $350.
(b) Resident: $250.
(2) Rate per hour for lights: $30.
(3) Flat rate: $200.
F. Sport events (all).
271. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(11), Weight-lifting fee (per year), was repealed
4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 21-2018. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of
former Subsection B(12) and (13) as B(11) and (12), respectively.
272. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, FCC membership fee per year, was repealed
4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 21-2018. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
former Subsections E, F, and G as Subsections D, E, and F, respectively.
§ 214-5 CHARTER § 214-5
C:1109
Chapter 218
RENT CONTROL AND CONVERSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Court — See Ch. 21.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 218-1. Board membership; repealer; effect on prior authority and
decisions of Board; meetings of Board.
(1) Transportation per person under 18 years of age: $2.
(2) Transportation per person over 18 years of age: $4.
A. There shall be a Rent Control Board of seven members as follows: Three
must be landlords owning rental property located within the City; three
must be tenants living within the City; and the seventh member shall be
a homeowner living within and owning property located within the City,
which property shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by City
Council, each for a three-year term, served without compensation.
B. This chapter is intended to repeal and replace Ordinance No. 52 of
1975 and amendments and supplements thereto. Ordinance No. 1 of
1974, Ordinance No. 9 of 1975, Ordinance No. 52 of 1975, Ordinance
No. 51 of 1977, Ordinance No. 13 of 1978, Ordinance No. 52 of 1978
and Ordinance No. 42 of 1979 are repealed and replaced by this
chapter. However, nothing in this chapter shall abrogate, dissolve or
affect any of the powers, rent restrictions, authority or actions
heretofore held or taken by the Rent Control Board created under
Ordinance No. 1 of 1973 or Ordinance No. 42 of 1973, which were
replaced by Ordinance No. 1 of 1974 and further amended by
Ordinance No. 9 of 1975, Ordinance No. 52 of 1975, Ordinance No. 51
of 1977, Ordinance No. 13 of 1978, Ordinance No. 52 of 1978 and
Ordinance No. 42 of 1979, and all actions and opinions heretofore taken
or made shall remain in full force and effect. The fixing of rents and
judgments, findings and conclusions with respect to the control of rents
within the City of East Orange shall remain unimpaired under this
chapter and shall be subject to this chapter in future determinations.
C. All members of the Board are required to attend all official meetings of
the Board. Any Board member who is absent from three or more
committee meetings or public hearings during the course of a calendar
year shall be subject to removal from the Board by the Mayor.
§ 214-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-2
C:1110
§ 218-2. Powers and duties of Board.
The Rent Control Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter, including
but not limited to the following:
§ 218-3. Powers and duties of Rent Regulation Officer.
There is hereby established the position of Rent Regulation Officer, who
shall perform under the direction of the Rent Control Board and shall have
the following powers and functions:
A. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, which rules and
regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or
amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its
discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the City Clerk.
B. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help
them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental as hereinafter provided.
D. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants as to
probable violations of this chapter.
E. As to judicial determinations, to give both landlord and tenant
reasonable opportunity to be heard before making any determination.
F. To advise and give direction to the Administrator of the Rent Leveling
Board and approve and/or disapprove any determinations outlined
under § 218-3 of this chapter.
G. To administer and implement the amendatory and supplementary Act of
P.L. 1981, c. 226,273 which provided protection to senior citizens and
disabled tenants against rent increases and relocation as a result of
rental housing conversion to a condominium or cooperative.
A. To obtain, keep and maintain all relevant records and other data and
information.
B. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants and to
bring together tenants and landlords in formal conferences and suggest
resolutions of conflicts between them in order to assist them in
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
C. To notify landlords that there is no record of compliance by the landlord
with the provisions of § 218-14.
273. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
§ 218-2 CHARTER § 218-3
C:1111
D. To remedy violations of this chapter by ordering rent rebates,
deductions and increases and bring appropriate legal charges as
provided by this chapter. No order for a rent deduction shall be
effective for any period prior to the date the complaint for the deduction
was received by the Rent Regulation Officer unless the violation has
been previously investigated and found to exist by an appropriate City
agency. Any order for a rent rebate, deduction or increase issued by the
Rent Regulation Officer shall be final unless a hearing before the Rent
Leveling Board is requested, in writing, by the party objecting to it
within 30 days of the date of said determination. The refusal of the Rent
Regulation Officer to order a rent rebate, deduction or increase shall be
final unless a hearing before the Rent Leveling Board is requested, in
writing, by the party objecting to it within 30 days from the date of said
refusal.
E. To accept and process complaints from tenants of illegal rental
increases and to investigate said complaints prior to any decisions
being rendered.
F. To accept, process, review and investigate applications from landlords
for rental increases and/or surcharges under the hardship increase and/
or capital improvement recovery sections of this chapter.274
G. Determinations.
(1) Any rebate ordered by the Rent Regulation Officer or the Board
shall be considered a penalty by the landlord. If said rebate is not
received by the tenant within 30 days of the date of said
determination, the tenant may file suit in the Municipal Court
against the landlord for violation of this section of this chapter.
(2) Any rental increase granted to the landlord shall be paid the
following calendar month rent becomes due from the date of said
determination. In the event of failure by the tenant to pay the rents
as determined by the Administrator or the Board, the landlord may
exercise appropriate legal action in a court of law for nonpayment
of rent.
(3) Determinations of the Rent Regulation Officer shall be deemed final
unless, within 30 days of the date of such determination, an
aggrieved party appeals for a hearing before the Rent Control
Board under § 218-5 of this chapter.
H. To attend hearings of the Rent Control Board and perform in a
secretarial capacity at such hearings in taking minutes and preparing
determinations in accordance with decisions made at such hearings.
I. To receive notification from any owner of his/her intention to convert
any rental premises to a condominium or cooperative and to thereafter,
274. Editor's Note: See §§ 218-17 and 218-16, respectively.
§ 218-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-3
C:1112
§ 218-4. Definitions.
In applying and interpreting this chapter, the following definitions shall be
used:
APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION OF CONVERSION — An application for
registration filed with the Department of Community Affairs in accordance
with the Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act. P.L. 1977, c.
419 (N.J.S.A. 45:22A-21 et seq.).
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Suitable for habitation as defined
by the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State
of New Jersey and the City of East Orange and occupied or unoccupied and
offered for rent.
COMPLETED HARDSHIP APPLICATION — Any application which has not
been returned due to deficiency in supportive documentation, i.e., copies
of canceled checks, executed statements, proof of expenditures, etc., nor
due to a failure of said application to be completed in every section and
thereafter dated and duly executed by an authorized agent of a corporate
applicant or by an individual applicant. If the application has been returned
by the Rent Leveling Board, it shall be deemed incomplete and will not be
considered as duly filed until such time as the specified deficiency has been
cured.
CONVERSION RECORDING — The recording with the appropriate county
officer of a master deed for a condominium or a deed to a cooperative
corporation for a cooperative or the first deed of sale to a purchaser of
an individual unit for a planned residential development or separable fee
simple ownership of the dwelling units.
within 10 days, notify each residential tenant, in writing, of the owner's
intention and of the applicability of the provisions of the act.
J. To provide affidavits to the Department of Community Affairs of the
compliance with the Act by the owner of any proposed conversion site.
K. To review the applications for protected tenancy status submitted by a
tenant and to make a determination of eligibility and ineligibility under
the criteria set forth by the Act and to further solicit any documents and
information necessary to establish a tenant's eligibility for a protected
tenancy status.
L. To perform such other duties as the Rent Control Board may specifically
direct.
M. To prepare and submit a yearly report to the Housing, Licensing and
Inspection Committee. [Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
N. To audit rent rolls that are submitted by property owners and inform
tenants of their right to take action that is consistent with the East
Orange City Code. [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
§ 218-3 CHARTER § 218-4
C:1113
CONVERT — To convert one or more buildings or structures containing,
in the aggregate, not fewer than five dwelling units from residential
development separable fee-simple ownership of the dwelling units.
DISABLED TENANT — A person who has been deemed 100% disabled
by the United States government or an agency operating under its
authority.[Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 24-2018]
DWELLING OR HOUSING SPACE — Includes any building or structure
rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants or family units, either
occupied or unoccupied.
HOUSING SPACE — Includes that portion of a dwelling, rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit,
together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property.
PARKING SPACE — Includes all spaces used for the parking of motor
vehicles, whether indoor or outdoor, when rented by a tenant from his
landlord, landlord's agent, concessionaire or assignee and when such
spaces are rented in conjunction with apartment rentals. For the purposes
of this chapter, "parking spaces" shall not include spaces owned by and
rented to a tenant by persons other than the landlord, landlord's agent,
concessionaire or assignee and located at a location different from the
rented housing space.
PROTECTED TENANCY PERIOD — The 40 years following the conversion
recording for the building or structure in which is located the dwelling unit
of the senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant.
QUALIFIED SENIOR TENANT — One shall be deemed a qualified senior
tenant if they are 65 years of age or older.[Added 5-14-2018 by Ord. No.
24-2018]
REGISTRATION OF CONVERSION — An approval of an application for
registration by the Department of Community Affairs in accordance with
the Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act, P.L. 1977, c. 419
(N.J.S.A. 45:22A-21 et seq.).
REPRISAL — Action by a landlord as defined by N.J.S.A. 2A:42-10.10.
SENIOR CITIZEN TENANT — A person who is at least 62 years of age on
the date of the conversion recording for the building or structure in which is
located the dwelling unit of which he is a tenant, or the surviving spouse of
such a person if the person should die after the owner files the conversion
recording, provided that the building or structure has been the principal
residence of the "senior citizen tenant" or the spouse for the two years
immediately preceding the conversion recording or the death, as the case
may be.
TENANT'S ANNUAL HOUSEHOLD INCOME — The total income from all
sources during the last full calendar year for all members of the household
who reside in the dwelling unit at the time the tenant applies for protected
§ 218-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-4
C:1114
tenant status, whether or not such income is subject to taxation by any
taxing authority.
THE ACT — The Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act,
P.L. 1974, c. 49, and P.L. 1975, c. 311, and amending and supplementing
legislation P.L. 1981, c. 226.275
§ 218-5. Right to appeal.
The right of appeal from a decision of the Rent Control Board by either
landlord or tenant, or both, to an appropriate court of law shall be reserved
as a matter of right. Said appeal shall be filed within the time limitations
for appealing municipal administrative rulings as established by the rules
governing the courts of the State of New Jersey.
§ 218-6. Diminution of essential services, care or maintenance.
A. Whenever essential services, care or maintenance decline in common
areas and dwelling units which substantially affect the habitability of a
premises, the tenant may file a complaint with the Rent Regulation
Officer requesting a decrease or reduction in rent. The complaint shall
set forth in detail the condition complained of and its duration. The
Rent Regulation Officer shall immediately order an inspection of the
premises and condition complained of. The following factors shall be
considered by the Rent Regulation Officer before ordering a rent rebate
for the diminution of essential services:
(1) Whether the diminution of services complained of substantially
affected the habitability of the premises.
(2) When the condition first occurred.
(3) The duration of the condition and whether the landlord was
responsible for it.
(4) When the tenant initially notified the landlord and whether any
corrective action was taken by him within a reasonable period of
time after notice by the tenant and the Rent Regulation Officer.
(5) Whether the condition violates any provision or standard set forth
in Chapter 159, entitled "Housing Standards; Property
Maintenance," of the Code of the City of East Orange.
(6) The reasonable percentage of rental income allocated by the
landlord for the service complained of as determined by the Rent
Regulation Officer.
(7) Any other factors reasonably related to the habitability and value of
the rented premises.
275. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-53, 2A:18-61.1 to 2A:18-61.12 and 2A:18:61-22 et seq.
§ 218-4 CHARTER § 218-6
C:1115
§ 218-7. Excessive rent.
No landlord shall, after the effective date of this chapter, charge any rents
in excess of what he was receiving from the effective date of this chapter,
except for increases as permitted by this chapter or as heretofore provided
in this chapter from the effective dates of Ordinance No. 1 of 1973,
Ordinance No. 42 of 1973, Ordinance No. 1 of 1974 and Ordinance No. 52
of 1975.
§ 218-8. Exemptions; new tenant rent limitations and prohibitions.
B. Essential services shall include but not be limited to general
maintenance, heat, air conditioning, hot and cold water, elevators/
escalators, electricity, gas, furniture, furnishings and equipment, as
provided for in Chapter 159 of this Code.
C. After the above factors and standards are considered, the Rent
Regulation Officer shall grant a reasonable rent rebate to the tenant for
the diminution of essential services. In no event shall the rent rebate
exceed 30% of the tenant's monthly rental for each condition
complained of.
A. Exempt from this chapter are the following types of dwellings:
(1) Dwellings containing three or fewer separate living units.
(2) Motels.
(3) Hotels.
(4) Licensed rooming houses.
(5) Newly constructed dwellings which are rented for the first time and
dwellings which have been vacated due to substantial
rehabilitation. After the first rental, such dwelling unit shall not be
exempt, and subsequent rentals or rent increases shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
(6) For purposes of the implementation of the Protected Tenancy Act,
dwellings containing five or fewer separate living units.
(7) Housing developments owned or subsidized by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, as well as
unsubsidized developments with HUD-insured mortgages. [Added
5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 24-2018]
B. Limitations.
(1) The rental of all units and parking spaces for the first time to a new
tenant shall be limited to a rent which includes an increase not to
exceed 5% over the last rent paid by the former tenant or the
percentage difference between the consumer price index three
months prior to the expiration or termination of the lease and three
§ 218-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-8
C:1116
months prior to the commencement of the lease term, whichever is
less.
(2) The last rent paid by a former tenant as registered by the landlord
pursuant to the provisions of § 218-14 of this chapter shall be
considered a new tenant's base rent. If the new tenant's base rent
must be established by independent means because of the
landlord's failure to file the documents required pursuant to said
§ 218-14, the new tenant will be allowed a reduction, pursuant to
§ 218-30, from the rent charged said new tenant.
(3) A landlord at the time of leasing to a new tenant shall inform said
new tenant, in writing, that the landlord cannot charge a new
tenant a rental which includes an increase higher than the
permitted percentage increase, pursuant to § 218-8B(1), over the
rent paid by the former tenant and shall further inform the new
tenant, in writing, as to the amount of the prior tenant's rent, and
that information specifying said prior rent is available for the new
tenant's review at the Property Maintenance office, and that if said
information is unavailable at the Property Maintenance office
because of the landlord's failure to file the same, the new tenant
shall be entitled to the rental reductions set forth herein.
(4) Under any and all circumstances, however, any increase in rent
charged to a new tenant must be charged within 60 days of
occupancy by said new tenant. The landlord's failure to make said
charge within said sixty-day period will be deemed a waiver of the
landlord's new tenant increase rights. Any landlord, landlord's
agent or employee shall not demand or accept more than one rental
increase during any twelve-month period from any occupant of any
dwelling unit or parking space.
(5) If the rent to a new tenant is higher than that paid by the previous
tenant, even if not in violation of Subsection B(1) above, and if the
landlord has failed to secure a certificate of habitability as required
by the Code, then, upon complaint, the Rent Leveling Board shall
prohibit the landlord from collecting any rent in excess of that paid
by the former tenant until the first day of the calendar month
following the landlord's obtaining the required certificate. Any
rents in excess of those paid by the present tenant must be
refunded to the tenant who paid the increased rent.
(6) A rent increase for a new tenant with a protected tenancy status, as
defined under this chapter, shall not exceed the increase
authorized by this section. Increased costs which are solely the
result of a conversion, including but not limited to any increase in
financing or carrying costs, and which do not add services or
amenities not previously provided shall not be used as a basis for
an increase in a fair return or hardship hearing before the
Municipal Rent Board or on any appeal from such determination.
§ 218-8 CHARTER § 218-8
C:1117
§ 218-9. Inspection; effect of outstanding violations on collection of
rental increases; exceptions.
§ 218-10. Establishment of rent increases for current tenants.
Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this
section is applicable shall hereafter be determined as follows:
(7) A landlord seeking a rent increase under this section shall pay an
application fee of $5 per unit.
(8) The landlord shall have a registered rent roll with the Department
of Property Maintenance to qualify for any rental increase.
A. A tenant, in addition to all other rights granted citizens by state law and
the Code of the City of East Orange, may, upon receipt of a notice of an
increase in rent, request an inspection by the Department of Inspection
and Licensing of the City of East Orange at no charge, through the filing
of a complaint with the Rent Leveling Board. If the Department of
Inspection and Licensing, upon making said inspection, finds violations
to be present involving the heat and hot-water systems, including
central air conditioning, violations of the Electrical Code, violations of
the Plumbing Code, inadequate roofing or any other violations in the
common areas of the building or the specific apartment involved which,
in the opinion of the Public Officer, present a threat to life, health or
safety, a notice shall be sent to the landlord informing him of the
violations and stating that the specific increase complained of may not
be collected until a reinspection shows the violations to have been
corrected.
B. This section shall not preclude the Department of Inspection and
Licensing from enforcing the Code of the City of East Orange under the
methods provided therein. It shall be an exception to this section if a
violation is determined by the Public Officer to be the result of
malicious mischief or any other criminal act deemed not to have been
committed by the landlord or his agents.
C. A notice of increase may be sent to the tenants even if violations exist,
but said increase may not be collected or demanded unless all violations
of the nature referred to above have been corrected and a certificate to
that effect issued prior to the effective date of the notice. If said
certificate is eventually obtained, the increase may be collected,
beginning with the rental due the month following the issuance of the
certificate.
A. For a periodic tenant (i.e., month-to-month, week-to-week) whose lease
term is less than one year, said owner, agent or employee of the same
shall not demand, receive or accept any rent increase which is greater
than 4% of the existing rent at the time the notice of increase is
delivered to the tenant. Simultaneously with the delivery of a notice of
increase in rent, the landlord shall notify the tenant that he/she has
§ 218-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-10
C:1118
complied fully with the provisions of § 218-14. Said notice shall be
delivered in accordance with the provisions of § 218-19. No rental
increase of any amount or percent shall be demanded, received or
accepted, however, unless the landlord has complied fully with the
provisions of § 218-14 of this chapter. In the event that a landlord fails
to have a current rent roll on file in accordance with the provisions of
§ 218-14 of this chapter at the time he demands a rental increase from
a tenant, he shall be precluded from obtaining any increase from said
tenant or tenants objecting to said proposed increase for a period of 12
months from the date that the proposed increase was to take effect. Any
complaint of a tenant challenging the propriety of an increase based on
violation of § 218-14 shall be filed within 12 months of the date when
the proposed increase is to take effect.
B. For a year-to-year tenant or for a tenant under a lease term in excess of
one year, said landlord, owner or agent of the same shall not seek or
demand an increase in rent which exceeds 4% of the prior rent for each
twelve-month period that the existing lease has been in effect.
(Example: A written lease runs for three consecutive years at a fixed
rent without increases. At the end of the third year, the landlord is
entitled to a maximum increase in rent of 12% or $120.) Simultaneous
with the delivery of a notice of increase in rent, the landlord shall notify
the tenant that he/she has complied fully with the provisions of
§ 218-14. Said notice shall be delivered in accordance with the
provisions of § 218-19. No rental increase of any amount or percent
shall be demanded, received or accepted, however, unless the landlord
has complied fully with the provisions of § 218-14 of this chapter. In the
event that a landlord fails to have a current rent roll on file in
accordance with the provisions of § 218-14 of this chapter at the time he
demands a rental increase from a tenant, he shall be precluded from
obtaining any increase from said tenant or tenants objecting to said
proposed increase for a period of 12 months from the date the proposed
increase was to take effect. Any complaint of a tenant challenging the
propriety of an increase based on violation of § 218-14 shall be filed
within 12 months of the date when the proposed increase is to take
effect.
C. The limitations in rental increases set forth above shall be retroactive to
February 1, 1975, and any rents increased on or after that date shall be
reduced to reflect an increase of no more than that allowed under this
section. Any moneys paid over and above the allowable rent for any
apartment shall be credited to the tenant through a reduction in rent in
the month following enactment of this section; or, in the case of a tenant
who has moved, the excess moneys paid will be sent to the former
tenant in the form of a check within 30 days of enactment of this
section.
D. All limitations on rental increases as applied to housing space under
Subsections A, B and C of this section also apply as limitations on rental
increases for parking spaces. All notice requirements, time limitations
§ 218-10 CHARTER § 218-10
C:1119
§ 218-11. Excessive increase.
§ 218-12. Notice requirements for rental increase. [Amended
4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
and other applicable duties or obligations of the landlord to the tenant
as set forth in this chapter are hereby made applicable to increases in
rent for parking spaces.
E. Each landlord is required to complete a rental increase application and
pay a nonrefundable application fee to the City. The City will not
process any application until the landlord: 1) submits the completed
application; 2) pays the nonrefundable application fee; and 3) delivers
the notice to quit, under § 218-12, to the City's Rent Control Office. The
nonrefundable application fee shall be an amount equal to $5 multiplied
by each unit owned by an owner or the owner's agent seeking an
increase. [Amended 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
F. The landlord shall have a registered rent roll with the Department of
Property Maintenance to qualify for any rental increase.
G. Pursuant to § 159-1 et seq. of the Code of the City of East Orange, the
landlord shall file an updated rent roll within 30 days of any change to
the rent roll.
H. For a qualified senior tenant, said landlord, owner or agent of the same
shall not seek or demand an increase in rent which exceeds 2% of the
rent charged during the preceding twelve-month period. In apartments
that contain multiple persons, the 2% cap shall only apply if a senior
qualified tenant is identified on the lease as tenant in the subject
apartment. [Added 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 24-2018]
A. Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease shall be void.
B. Any rental increase given a tenant which exceeds that allowed by this
chapter may be voided in its entirety by the Rent Leveling Board or
Administrator or may be adjusted by the Rent Leveling Board or
Administrator to conform to the amount allowed by this chapter. Such
action can be taken by the Administrator at informal conferences or
after public hearing on a complaint. Any rental increases in excess of
that allowed by this chapter and paid by the tenant must be returned to
the tenant.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any landlord, owner, agent or employee
of the same shall not demand or accept more than one rental increase
during any twelve-month period from the same tenant in the same
apartment. No tenant's rent may be increased during the first 12
months of the tenancy.
A. Any owner, landlord or agent or employee of a landlord seeking an
increase in rent shall give the affected tenant written notice of
§ 218-10 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-12
C:1120
§ 218-13. Time limitations on filing of rental increase complaints;
refunds.
termination of the existing lease or tenancy (commonly called "notice
to quit") 60 days prior to the increase. Said notice shall have annexed
thereto and delivered simultaneously a written and signed statement
setting forth the following data:
(1) The name and address of the tenant and the apartment number.
(2) The date the tenant's existing lease began or the date the tenant
took possession of the premises.
(3) The present rent of the tenant.
(4) The date of the last increase in rent prior to the notice of increase.
(5) The actual dollar amount of the proposed increase.
(6) The amount of the proposed increase in terms of percentage.
B. No application will be processed until all requirements highlighted
under this chapter are satisfied by an owner or such owner's agent
seeking an increase.
A. Time limitations.
(1) Complaints by either the landlord or the tenant may not be filed
more than 12 months after the effective date of the increase
involved, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(2) No complaints concerning rental increases pursuant to § 218-9 of
this chapter may be filed more than 90 days after the effective date
of the increase involved.
(3) Complaints based on a violation of § 218-14 of this chapter may not
be filed more than 12 months after the effective date of the
increase involved.
B. All rental increases shall be paid by the tenant to the landlord until such
time as the complaint has been adjudicated. If it shall be deemed that
the landlord is not entitled to the rental increase, any moneys that have
been overpaid shall be refunded in the form of a rental rebate to the
tenant.
C. Absent the filing of a complaint pursuant to the applicable provisions of
this chapter, payment of a rental increase for 24 consecutive months or
more shall be construed to be an agreed increase and not subject to the
provisions of this chapter, except when the landlord in violation of this
chapter does not inform or misinforms the tenant concerning the rent
paid by the prior tenant, or in any manner illegally increases the
tenant's rent, the Board shall waive the limitations period, and then
§ 218-12 CHARTER § 218-13
C:1121
§ 218-14. Filing and updating of list of rents; confidentiality of
information.
§ 218-15. Requirements under Truth-in-Renting Act (N.J.S.A.
46:8-43 et seq.). [Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
accept, hear and adjudicate the matter based on the landlord's
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. If a landlord is found to have been in violation of § 218-9, § 218-10,
§ 218-11, § 218-12 and § 218-14, then the tenant shall have a remedy to
receive a rental rebate for the overcharge (if paid in accordance with
§ 218-13B) retroactive to the effective date of the increase or the
violation involved.
A. Time limitations. Within 60 days of the passage of this chapter, all
owners of property within the City of East Orange whose rents are
subject to this chapter shall file with the Department of Property
Maintenance a list of rents for all units in the property owned by them.
The list shall contain a sworn affidavit as to the accuracy of said list.
Within 30 days of the date of any change in rent for any dwelling unit,
an owner shall notify the Department of Property Maintenance of such
change. The information contained in said lists shall not be considered
confidential and shall be a public record as defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1
et seq. All owners of property within the City of East Orange whose
rents are subject to this chapter shall also file a rent roll on September
1 of every year pursuant to § 5-84A(10) of the Code of East Orange. A
spreadsheet showing how each rent was calculated in compliance with
the rent control regulations shall be provided with the rent roll.
B. Fee. (NOTE: The annual fee and the late fees are for the whole building,
not per unit.)
(1) For annual filling of a rent roll, a fee of $100 shall be paid
simultaneous with filing.
(2) Untimely rent rolls shall be subject to following late charges:
[Amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
(a) September 2 through September 30: $300.
(b) October 1 through October 31: $500.
(c) November 1 through November 30: $750.
(d) December 1 through December 31: $1,000.
A. This section shall be consistent with the terms highlighted under the
truth-in-renting statement.
B. The Truth-in-Renting Act requires the distribution of the truth-inrenting
statement to all tenants with a rental term of at least one month
§ 218-13 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-15
C:1122
§ 218-16. Capital improvement rent surcharge.
living in residences with more than two dwelling units (or more than
three if the landlord occupies one).
C. Each landlord shall provide a copy of the current truth-in-renting
statement to each tenant when a lease is entered into, and shall make
available the current statement in the building where the tenants can
easily review it.
D. Each landlord shall keep documentation or receipts verifying the
distribution of the truth-in-renting statement to each new tenant.
E. Each landlord who does not properly distribute the truth-in-renting
statement is subject to a penalty of up to $100 for each offense.
Enforcement of this section is handled through the Superior Court,
Special Civil Part, Landlord-Tenant Section of the county where the
building is located or of the county where the defendant resides.
A. A landlord who proposes capital improvements for the premises he
owns may apply to the Board for the recovery of 50% of the cost of the
expenditure excluding interest and carrying costs. In no event shall a
landlord assess a capital improvement rent surcharge without first
applying to the Board therefor. In the event that capital improvement
surcharges are assessed by a landlord without prior approval of the
Board, the Rent Regulation Officer shall order rebates therefor for each
month thereof.
B. A capital improvement is a substantial monetary investment in real
property. It shall provide additional services, benefits or amenities to
tenants not previously existing which change the housing
accommodations throughout the premises. All capital improvements
shall last a minimum of five years and provide an actual benefit to the
tenants and the overall maintenance of the premises. A capital
improvement surcharge is a privilege, and not a right of the landlord,
granted by the City of East Orange to promote property upkeep, which
may be withheld by the Board within its discretion where the same does
not meet the criteria set forth in these provisions.
C. A capital improvement is not normal upkeep, maintenance, repair,
replacement, rehabilitation, painting, roofing or mailboxes.
D. The following shall be considered capital improvements: change of
heating apparatus throughout the entire premises from oil heat to gas
heat or vice versa or the installation of furnaces, air conditioners or
central heating and cooling systems; new appliances in all dwelling
units, including stoves, dishwashers and refrigerators; new thermoinsulated,
energy-efficient storm windows throughout common areas
and dwelling units; new bathrooms in all dwelling units, including new
tile, tubs, sinks and toilets; new kitchens throughout all dwelling units,
including tile floors, cabinets, pantries and storage bins; new carpeting
§ 218-15 CHARTER § 218-16
C:1123
throughout common areas and all dwelling units; new doors and
security locks throughout common areas and all dwelling units,
including burglar alarms. The foregoing capital improvements are not
exclusive, and the Board may, at its discretion, review other types of
improvements for relief pursuant to these provisions.
E. The actual cost of a capital improvement expenditure excluding interest
and carrying costs may be recovered by a landlord over five consecutive
years in 60 equal monthly installments apportioned fairly among the
tenants. The Board may increase or decrease the foregoing period
within its discretion to effectuate the objectives of these provisions.
F. To qualify for a capital improvement, the landlord shall obtain a capital
improvement application from the Rent Regulation Officer. The
following information shall be filed with the application:
(1) A current rent registration form with the registered rents for the
premises in which the landlord seeks capital improvement relief
with a list of the names and apartment numbers of each tenant.
(2) A certification from the Tax Collector that the municipal property
taxes at the premises are current. All taxes must be current to be
eligible for capital improvement relief.
(3) A certification from the Water Department that the water and
sewer charges at the premises are current. All water and sewer
charges must be current to be eligible for capital improvement
relief.
(4) A certification or other verifiable proof of the actual life of the
capital improvement and a description thereof.
(5) A work schedule indicating the approximate dates work is to be
done and completed; also a reasonable estimate of the interruption
of any essential services.
(6) A certification from all contractors that they are licensed to
perform the work to be done, with applicable license numbers.
(7) All work done on the premises must be conducted with the
appropriate local approval as evidenced by permits and compliance
with fire and other code regulations of the City.
G. Once a capital improvement application has been filed and accepted as
complete by the Rent Regulation Officer, the landlord shall give notice
to the tenants by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
posting notices throughout the premises in conspicuous places that an
application has been filed with the Rent Regulation Officer for capital
improvement relief. After the application is filed, the Rent Regulation
Officer shall cause the premises to be inspected for property
maintenance code violations.
H. Hearing.
§ 218-16 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-16
C:1124
§ 218-17. Hardship increase; notice required; fees; time period for
determination.
(1) Once the Rent Regulation Officer determines that all necessary
documents have been received and completed, he shall schedule a
hearing before the Board and notify the landlord thereof. The
landlord shall give notice to the tenants of the hearing date and
time by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting
notices throughout the premises in conspicuous places 15 days
prior to the hearing date. The notice shall also state that the basis
for the relief sought and the date when written exceptions to the
application shall be filed, that the tenants may be represented by
named tenant representatives or an attorney at their expense, and
that all documentation submitted in support of the application will
be open for inspection by the tenants or their representatives at the
Rent Leveling Office prior to the hearing date. Once the notices
have been delivered and posted, the landlord shall file a
certification with the Rent Regulation Officer 10 days prior to the
hearing, indicating that notice has been given in compliance with
these provisions.
(2) Any request by the landlord or tenant for the appearance of the real
estate appraiser shall be made, in writing, to the Rent Regulation
Officer 10 days prior to the hearing date. Failure to request the
presence of the appraiser shall be deemed a waiver of the right to
cross-examine him by the aggrieved party at the hearing.
I. The Board shall review all relevant information regarding the capital
improvement request before making a decision. The Board, in making
its decision, shall assess the capital improvement surcharge to the
tenants. All capital improvement decisions granted by the Board are
contingent upon the successful completion of all work to be done. The
landlord shall notify the Rent Regulation Officer immediately once the
work is completed. The Rent Regulation Officer shall cause the
premises and work to be inspected for final approval by the Board. The
Board may schedule another hearing in the event that the work is
determined by the Rent Regulation Officer to be unsatisfactory. In any
event, all capital improvement surcharges shall be assessed within 60
days after final approval by the Board. Once the capital improvement is
approved, the landlord must file an amended rent roll registration with
the Department of Property Maintenance, separately, indicating the
capital surcharge information with the current rent roll registration.
J. The Board may deny any capital improvement application where it
determines that a landlord has willfully neglected the upkeep and
maintenance of his premises or where the landlord has failed to comply
with the provisions hereinabove. The Board may also make capital
improvement relief decisions contingent upon a landlord's making all
necessary repairs to bring a premises up to code within a specified
period of time.
§ 218-16 CHARTER § 218-17
C:1125
§ 218-18. Review of technical data.
All technical data presented to the Rent Control Board pursuant to
§§ 218-16 and 218-17 of this chapter shall be reviewed and investigated by
a professional designated by the Office of the Mayor.
§ 218-19. Delivery of notice to tenants.
All required notices hereinabove mentioned, except as otherwise provided,
may at the option of the landlord be either hand-delivered and personally
served by the landlord or his agents and employees or delivered by certified
mail, return receipt requested. In any event, the burden of proof of actual
delivery shall be on the landlord.
A. A landlord who is unable to meet his mortgage payments, expenses and
maintenance costs or is operating at a loss shall be entitled to apply for
a hardship increase to the Rent Control Board. The Rent Control Board
shall supply forms for this purpose and require the landlord to notify
the tenants of the pendency of this hardship increase application.
B. Prior to any determination, the landlord must give notice to the tenants
by posting in the lobby of each affected building or, if no lobby, in a
conspicuous place or places in and about the premises a notice of said
hardship increase request, setting forth thereon the basis for said
request. Said notice must be posted for at least five consecutive days
prior to the proposed hearing date. The affected tenants shall have a
right to challenge the basis or facts for the hardship increase on the
hearing date thereof. The Rent Control Board shall have the right after
notice and hearing to grant or deny a hardship increase with regard to
the rental restrictions set forth in this chapter or its amendments.
C. Fees. There shall be a fee assessed for the filing of each hardship and
capital improvement application in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1) For 10 units or fewer, a fee of $150 shall be paid simultaneous with
the filing of said application.
(2) For 11 to 20 units, a fee of $300 shall be paid simultaneous with the
filing of said application.
(3) For 20 or more units, a fee of $400 shall be paid simultaneous with
the filing of said application.
D. The Rent Leveling Board shall make a determination within 45 days of
the filing of a completed hardship application as defined in § 218-4. Any
application that does not meet the criteria set forth in the definition of
"completed hardship application" in § 218-4 shall be returned to the
applicant, and the forty-five-day period shall not commence until after
the application has been corrected and resubmitted to the Rent
Regulation Officer.
§ 218-17 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-20
C:1126
§ 218-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-9-2018 by Ord. No.
9-2018]
§ 218-21. Conversion filing requirements.
The owner of any building or structure who seeks to convert any premises
shall, prior to his filing of the application for registration of conversion with
the Department of Community Affairs, notify the Rent Regulation Officer of
his intention to so file.
§ 218-22. Conversion filing procedures.
A. A willful violation of any provision of this chapter, including but not
limited to the willful filing with the Rent Control Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $300
and not more than $2,000 per day and imprisonment for not more than
120 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. A violation affecting more
than one leasehold shall be considered a separate violation as to each
leasehold. All violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the
Municipal Court of the City of East Orange upon a complaint and
summons signed by either the affected tenant, his authorized agent, the
Chairman of the Rent Control Board or its agent(s) or the Rent
Regulation Officer.
B. The City of East Orange adopts the State of New Jersey's Reprisal Law,
which prohibits a landlord from retaliating against a tenant exercising a
legal right under the law. This section shall be consistent with the terms
highlighted under said law, N.J.S.A. 2A:42-10.10 et seq.
A. The owner of the building or structure seeking the conversion shall
supply the Rent Regulation Officer with a list of every tenant residing
on the premises, with stamped envelopes addressed to each tenant and
with sufficient copies of the notice to tenants and application form for
protected tenancy status. Within 10 days thereafter, the Rent
Regulation Officer shall notify each tenant, in writing, of the owner's
intention and of the applicability of the Act. Said notice shall require the
tenant to submit the application for protected tenancy status within 60
days after the mailing date by the Rent Regulation Officer.
B. Within 30 days after receipt of an application for protected tenancy
status by a tenant, the Rent Regulation Officer shall make a
determination of eligibility. Notice of eligibility shall be sent to each
senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant who:
(1) Applied therefor on or before the date of registration of conversion
by the Department of Community Affairs;
(2) Qualifies as an eligible senior citizen or disabled tenant pursuant to
the Act;
(3) Has an annual household income that does not exceed an amount
equal to three times the county per capita personal income, as last
§ 218-20 CHARTER § 218-22
C:1127
§ 218-23. Applicability of protected tenancy status.
Protected tenancy status shall not be applicable to any eligible tenant until
such time as the owner has filed his conversion recording. The protected
tenancy status shall automatically apply as soon as a tenant receives notice
of eligibility and the landlord files his conversion recording.
§ 218-24. Termination of protected tenancy status.
reported by the United States Department of Labor and Industry on
the basis of the United States Department of Commerce's Bureau
of Economic Analysis date; and
(4) Has occupied the premises at his/her principal residence for the
past two years.
C. The Rent Regulation Officer shall likewise send a notice of denial with
reasons to any tenant whom he/she determines to be ineligible, after
reviewing the aforegoing factors and provisions, which shall be used as
a criterion for eligibility. The owner shall be notified of those tenants
who are determined to be eligible and ineligible.
A. The Rent Regulation Officer shall terminate the protected tenancy
status immediately upon finding that:
(1) The dwelling unit is no longer the principal residence of the senior
citizen tenant or disabled tenant; or
(2) The tenant's annual household income, or the average of the
tenant's annual household income for the current year, computed
on an annual basis, and the tenant's annual household income for
the two preceding years, whichever is less, exceeds an amount
equal to three times the county per capita personal income as last
reported by the Department of Labor and Industry on the basis of
the United States Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic
Analysis data.
B. Upon the termination of the protected tenancy status by the Rent
Regulation Officer, the senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant may be
removed from the dwelling unit pursuant to the summary dispossession
statute, except that notice shall be calculated and extended from the
date of the expiration or termination of the protected tenancy period or
the date of the expiration of the last lease entered into with the senior
citizen tenant or disabled tenant during the protected tenancy period,
whichever shall be later.
C. In the event that a senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant purchases
the dwelling unit he occupies, the protected tenancy status shall
terminate immediately upon purchase.
§ 218-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-25
C:1128
§ 218-25. Fees for conversion.
Any owner seeking to convert any premises pursuant to this chapter shall,
upon presentation to the Rent Leveling Board of the required materials
under this chapter for notification to be given to the tenant, shall pay to
the East Orange Rent Leveling Board the sum of $100 for each unit being
converted.
§ 218-26. Rules and regulations of Rent Control Board.
A. Meetings.
(1) The Rent Leveling Board (hereafter "Board") shall meet for one
public session and one executive session each month.
(2) The Board may meet at such additional times in public session and/
or executive session as it may deem necessary.
(3) To convene a meeting, a quorum of four members must be present.
(4) Board meetings shall take place in the Council chambers of the City
Hall and shall convene no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the first and
third Thursday of each month.
(5) Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall in all cases, when not in
conflict with the procedural rules adopted by the Board, be
considered as standard authority for parliamentary procedure of
the Board.
B. Officers.
(1) The Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson who
shall serve for one-year terms.
(2) The Chairperson of the Board shall preside at all meetings, whether
the same are public or executive session.
(3) The day-to-day business and affairs of the Board shall be managed
by the Administrator to the Board and his/her administrative staff,
in consultation with the Chairperson of the Board.
(4) During the absence and/or inability of the Chairperson to render
and perform his/her duties or exercise his/her powers, the same
shall be performed and exercised by the Vice Chairperson.
(5) The Chairperson shall have general control of the meetings and
shall sign all determinations, along with the Administrator, duly
made by the Board. He/she shall enforce these rules and
regulations and perform all the duties incident to the position as
may be required.
C. Order of business at public meetings. At all public meetings of the
Board, the order of business shall be as follows:
§ 218-25 CHARTER § 218-26
C:1129
(1) The Chairperson shall conduct a roll call of all members present,
and declare that a quorum is present.
(2) Announcement of decisions deferred or taken under advisement
from previous meetings of the Board.
(3) The meeting shall be called to order by the Chairperson, who
thereafter shall:
(a) Advise the audience that the meeting conforms to the Open
Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975, c. 231;276
(b) Introduce the Board members, both present and absent;
(c) Introduce the Rent Regulation Officer and counsel of the
Board;
(d) Set forth the procedural protocol for the hearing of complaints
and hardship applications;
(e) Call calendar of current cases;
(f) Call cases to be heard before the Board, in the order in which
they are ready to proceed;
(g) Informational requests from the floor (public comments); and
(h) Adjournments.
(4) Witnesses called before the Board shall affirm the truth of such
testimony before the Board.
(5) The Board shall maintain records and minutes of all meetings and
proceedings pursuant to § 218-3 of the Rent Leveling Ordinance
(hereafter "this chapter"). Applicants are advised that if it is
anticipated that a verbatim record may be necessary for the
purposes of appeal, the applicant shall be responsible for retaining
its own certified shorthand reporter, as such service will not be
available from the Board.
(6) For the purposes of voting, a majority vote shall consist of a simple
majority of those present and voting.
D. Complaint; probable cause; joinder.
(1) A tenant shall initiate a proceeding by signing a complaint in a form
as adopted and amended from time to time by the Board. All
complaints shall be filed with the Rent Regulation Officer. Said
tenant complaint must be filed personally or by an authorized
representative of the tenant.
276. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 218-26 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-26
C:1130
(2) Hardship and capital improvement rent increase proceedings may
be initiated by the filing of a written application in a form as
adopted and amended from time to time by the Board, signed by
the landlord or his managing agent or attorney. Said hardship and
capital improvement rent increase applications shall be submitted
to the Rent Regulation Officer.
(3) A complaint form filed by a tenant shall be accompanied by the
following documentation. Failure to supply said documentation
with the complaint shall constitute a basis for excluding the same
from consideration by the Board, and said application shall be
considered incomplete.
(a) Last two current rent receipts.
(b) Notice of Rental Increase (if applicable).
(c) Affidavit of Rent Registration (if applicable).
(d) Affidavit of Certificate of Habitability (if applicable).
(e) Any other documents which will substantiate or clarify said
complaint.
(4) The Administrator shall notify the landlord of a complaint of an
alleged improper rental increase and forward a copy of said
complaint, together with all pertinent documentation. The landlord
shall respond within 10 days of any receipt of the above, outlining
any defenses and submitting any pertinent documentation.
E. Decisions.
(1) A written notice of final determinations of all cases requiring a
public hearing shall be sent to the complainant and the defendant.
This notice will be sent following the public hearing at which the
final determination has been made. Both the complainant and
defendant will be advised of their rights to a judicial appeal.
(2) All determinations by the Board shall be a matter of public record
and shall be maintained in City Hall.
F. Hardship applications under § 218-17.
(1) In determining whether a landlord is entitled to a hardship
increase, the Board shall consider the landlord's ability to meet
expenses and a fair and reasonable return on his property.
(2) A landlord shall be eligible for consideration for a hardship
increase if:
(a) He/she has been the owner of the building for a twelve-month
period preceding the filing of such application. The Board may
consider, at its discretion, applications presented for the
owners of buildings who have held possession of such buildings
§ 218-26 CHARTER § 218-26
C:1131
for less than 12 months. Certified public accountants' records
must be submitted with said application, and the Board may
consider all reasonable factors as to the prudence of said
investment in determining whether or not a hardship shall be
granted; and
(b) He/she can demonstrate that the building is in substantial
compliance with the Property Maintenance Code as defined in
§ 218-9 of this chapter.
(3) The following factors shall be considered in determining the
fairness and reasonableness of the landlord's rate of return:
(a) Taxes;
(b) Costs of efficient maintenance and operation of the property;
(c) The kind, quality, quantity and efficiency of the services being
rendered;
(d) The number and frequency of prior hardship and capital
improvement increases for the building; and
(e) Present tax and tax appeal status.
(4) Upon scheduling of hearings, the Administrator shall give notice of
the same to each affected tenant, five days prior thereto. All
documentation submitted to the Administrator shall be open to
inspection by affected tenants or their legal representative. Any
such notice delivered to the tenant shall include a statement that
all such documentation is available for inspection at the office of
the Rent Regulation Officer. Requests for the appearance of the
real estate appraiser shall be made, in writing, two days prior to
the hearing date. Failure to request the presence of said appraiser
shall be deemed to have waived the right of his cross-examination
by the party.
(5) The Board, in calculating a fair rate of return, shall employ either
an investment-based formula or a ratio of income to operating
expenses, as follows:
(a) "Investment" is defined as down payment plus all accrued
equity. Rate of return shall be 6% above the maximum
passbook demand deposit savings account interest rate
available in the City of East Orange at the time of the filing of
the application. Principal payments shall not be considered an
expense, but interest payments shall.
(b) A "fair ratio of income to expenses" shall be defined as the 60/
40 formula (when an owner's operating expenses exceed 60%
of the owner's rent roll, the amount which exceeds 60%
constitutes a hardship).
§ 218-26 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-26
C:1132
§ 218-27. Rental decontrol.
(6) The Board may reduce the investment figure where there is a
withdrawal of capital.
(7) Depreciation shall not be considered an expense in any formula.
(8) The Board, at its discretion, shall utilize whichever formula it
deems appropriate. The Board may exercise its discretion after
consideration of any and all factors it deems relevant.
Furthermore, the Board shall determine the reasonableness of
expenses requiring such determination as it deems necessary to
make a determination.
G. Establishment of protected tenancy Appeal Board and procedure.
(1) There is hereby created an Appeal Board, composed of one
landlord Board member, one tenant Board member and the
homeowner Board member. Said Board shall hear appeals as a
result of the disallowance of the eligibility/ineligibility status
rendered by the Rent Regulation Officer. Appointment of said
Board will be on a voluntary, monthly rotating basis.
(2) Said Board shall convene 10 days after written notice of appeal is
received and filed by the Rent Leveling Office.
(3) There shall be a filing fee of $25 assessed to the applicant, in
advance, to cover the expenses of such a hearing process. Said
filing fee is a prerequisite to filing an appeal.
(4) An administrative hearing shall be conducted under the herein
subject Rules and Regulations.
A. Upon the vacation of a residential unit by a tenant, the unit shall
become eligible for decontrol. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No.
53-2016]
(1) The rental decontrol inspection fee for initial inspection of the
dwelling unit is $125.
(2) Subsequently, the rental decontrol inspection shall include an
additional fee of $50.
B. Circumstances under which decontrol shall be considered.
(1) The landlord shall be eligible for decontrol only under the following
circumstances:
(a) The tenant vacates the apartment voluntarily, and there is no
unreasonable pressure from the landlord or his agent.
(b) The tenant vacates the apartment as a result of a court order
from a court of competent jurisdiction. This ground shall not be
available to a landlord who receives a court order to dispossess
§ 218-26 CHARTER § 218-27
C:1133
a tenant based upon a tenant holding over and continuing in
possession of the premises after the expiration of his/her term.
(2) The Rent Regulation Officer shall investigate the circumstances
under which the tenant vacated the apartment. Issues concerning
circumstances of the vacation of a unit by a tenant which are
deemed contrary to the provisions of this section by the
Administrator shall be reviewable by the Rent Leveling Board. In
the event that the Board determines that a landlord is seeking to
decontrol or has decontrolled a dwelling unit under circumstances
other than those set forth in this section, the Rent Leveling Board
may:
(a) Rescind the decontrol of the dwelling unit, and the rent shall
revert to that rental on the dwelling unit prior to vacation of
the unit; and
(b) Prosecute the landlord for violation of this chapter.
C. In those situations where tenants move to different units within the
same building or complex, the apartment into which the tenant moves
will not be decontrolled. The unit vacated will be eligible for decontrol.
D. When a landlord seeks to decontrol a dwelling unit under this section,
the landlord shall file a vacancy decontrol application, with the
applicable fee and the new lease agreement, with the Rent Regulation
Officer prior to the effective date of the new tenancy. [Amended
11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 53-2016]
(1) Before the dwelling unit is approved for a certificate of decontrol,
the landlord shall meet the following inspection requirements:
(a) There must be standard locks on all doors of ingress and
egress in accordance with the applicable code provisions in the
building and the subject dwelling unit.
(b) Floors, if wood, shall be sanded and refinished to their original
color and condition, or wall-to-wall carpet shall be installed
throughout the unit.
(c) Kitchen and bathroom floors shall be tiled or of water-resistant
material and reflect their original color and condition.
(d) All walls and ceilings shall be painted, covered or decorated to
reflect original or modern styles.
(e) Kitchens shall contain a minimum of four electrical outlets for
appliances and other kitchen usage. The sink, stove and
refrigerator shall be operable and reflect original or modern
styles. If the sink is not cleanable, it shall be replaced.
(f) Bathrooms shall contain tub and/or a shower, commode and
face basin reflecting original or modern styles. If any of the
§ 218-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-27
C:1134
foregoing fixtures are not operable and cleanable, they shall be
replaced.
(g) All windows shall be weathertight and workable. All windows
shall be properly glazed and free of cracks or breaks. Screens
shall be available during the required time of the year.
(h) All tenant facilities shall be in proper working order and clean,
which shall include bells, buzzers, intercoms, elevators,
laundry rooms, garbage rooms and storage rooms, where
necessary.
(i) All common areas throughout the building shall reflect original
or modern styles and be free from any damage, cracks, peeling
paint, dirt and debris.
(j) Garages shall be maintained in accordance with applicable
code provisions. Driveways and parking areas shall be properly
lit and marked for parking and free from breaks and holes or
any other ground hazard which may exist in the parking area.
(k) All utilities shall be operational at the time of inspection. A
functioning stove and refrigerator shall be in the unit at the
time of inspection.
(l) At the time of inspection, there shall be no open code violations
throughout the common areas of the building or premises
where the unit is located.
(m) At the time of inspection, the exterior of the premises shall be
free of peeling paint on the building and building trim. All
painting shall be in reasonable condition.
(2) After the foregoing inspection requirements are met, the Director
of Property Maintenance and Revitalization shall cause a certificate
of decontrol to be issued for the dwelling unit.
(3) Any dwelling unit decontrolled pursuant to the foregoing shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter for rent-controlled dwelling
units. After the certificate of habitability/decontrol is issued, the
landlord shall register his rents pursuant to § 218-14 of this
chapter. All dwelling units decontrolled prior to the effective date of
this section shall also be registered pursuant to § 218-14 and be
subject to the provisions of this chapter for rent-controlled dwelling
units. In addition, any dwelling unit decontrolled in accordance
with the foregoing provisions shall not be eligible for decontrol for
10 years from the issuance of the certificate of habitability/
decontrol for the unit.
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, should inspection requirements not
be met, any subsequent inspection shall include an additional fee of
$50 for each inspection.
§ 218-27 CHARTER § 218-27
C:1135
§ 218-28. Consent to rental surcharge.
Tenants of a multidwelling unit may present to the Rent Leveling Board a
written petition signed by a majority of the tenants and consented to by the
landlord of the property agreeing to a specific rent surcharge for a specific
purpose or project. Said petition shall provide for the landlord's permission
to permit the tenants' representative to review the expenditures involved
for the particular purpose or project surcharge. Upon approval by the Rent
Leveling Board, the cost shall be a surcharge and become a part of all the
tenants' rents in the property whether the individual tenant executed the
petition or not. Each dwelling unit shall be considered a single tenant for
the purposes of this section. If the aforementioned surcharge is approved by
the Rent Leveling Board, the surcharges shall run for a period of one year.
Said surcharge shall be renewed for an additional year unless a petition for
discontinuance of the surcharge is signed by a majority of the tenants and
filed with the Rent Leveling Board at least 60 days prior to the expiration
date of the approval order of the Rent Leveling Board.
§ 218-29. Warehousing of dwelling units.
E. The landlord of a newly constructed dwelling or housing unit which is
rented for the first time and the landlord of a substantially
reconstructed or rehabilitated dwelling or housing unit shall not be
restricted in any way in the setting of the rent he/she charges.
"Substantially rehabilitated" means that the cost of capital
improvements exceeds 50% of the current equalized assessed value or
the fair market value, whichever is higher, prior to the improvements
adjusted to 100% (as determined by the local Tax Assessor's office) and
is in compliance with all City housing maintenance codes. Further, all
work done on the structure must have been with appropriate local
approval as evidenced by permits, and the complete construction must
be in accord with building, fire and other code regulations. Both a
certificate of habitability and a certificate of code compliance must be
produced as evidence.
F. The owner of a substantially reconstructed or rehabilitated building
shall apply to the Rent Leveling Board for an exemption under this
section. Applications must follow the same format and procedure as for
a capital improvement application.
G. The landlord of a newly constructed or a substantially reconstructed or
rehabilitated dwelling or housing unit shall be exempt from the
restrictions for the setting of rent he/she charges during the term of any
first mortgage secured from a financial institution or mortgage
institution. Said first mortgage shall be an amount not less than 75% of
the estimated market value at the completion of the subject
construction. The landlord shall submit evidence, the first day of
September every year, from the financial or mortgage institution that
the first mortgage is still secured.
§ 218-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-29
C:1136
A. Any dwelling unit subject to rent control under this chapter shall be
rented and occupied by a new tenant within 60 days after the end of the
preceding tenancy, which shall be designated as the last day of
residence by the preceding tenant except when this provision has been
waived by the Rent Regulation Officer.
B. The landlord of any dwelling unit which is vacant 30 days after the
preceding tenancy shall notify the Rent Regulation Officer on the 31st
day of the vacancy, in writing, that the dwelling unit is vacant. The
notification shall include the following information:
(1) The address and location of the premises and apartment number of
the dwelling unit.
(2) The rent charged the preceding tenant and the proposed rent to be
charged the incoming tenant.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the landlord, agent
and resident manager, if any.
(4) No notification shall be required with respect to any unit rented
and occupied within 30 days or less from the end of the preceding
tenancy except to the extent as required by § 218-4.
C. Failure to have the unit rented and occupied within 60 days after the
end of the preceding tenancy, except where a waiver has been granted
by the Rent Regulation Officer, shall be considered a violation of this
provision and subject the landlord to the penalties set forth in § 218-20.
D. A landlord may seek a waiver of the provisions of § 218-29A where the
condition of the unit or other circumstances make rental within the time
period impossible.
E. To obtain a waiver the landlord must notify the Rent Regulation Officer,
in writing, within 45 days from the end of the preceding tenancy and set
forth with specificity the following:
(1) The reasons that the unit cannot be rented within the subject time
period.
(2) The steps the landlord shall take to remedy the conditions that
make it impossible to rent the unit.
(3) The date the unit shall be rented and occupied.
F. Full documentation, such as code violation reports, engineering or
inspection reports, etc., shall be provided by the landlord. Any waiver
granted by the Rent Regulation Officer under this section shall specify a
date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied. The Rent
Regulation Officer may extend that date upon written request of the
landlord but may not provide more than two extensions of more than 30
days. In no event shall any waiver, including extensions, exceed six
months from the end of the preceding tenancy.
§ 218-29 CHARTER § 218-29
C:1137
§ 218-30. Establishing rents.
If a landlord is found to have been in violation of §§ 218-8B, 218-9, 218-10,
218-11, 218-12 and 218-14, then the tenant shall have a remedy to have
the rent calculated in accordance with the last registered rent, plus the
applicable percentage increase for each year as provided for in this chapter.
[Example: Current tenant, year 2010: last registered rent is $600 in 2008.
Tenant's rents shall be calculated at $648 for 2010. New tenant, year 2010:
last registered rent at $600 in 2008. Tenant's rents shall be calculated at
$648 for 2010 ($600 plus 4% for 2009 and 5% for 2010) if a five-percent
increase is deemed the appropriate new tenant increase pursuant to the
provisions of § 218-8B of this chapter.]
§ 218-31. Fees for late payment of rent and bounced checks.
Prospectively, upon renewal of a lease or upon entering a new lease, the
landlord shall include a provision in the lease agreement limiting fees for
G. The following circumstances shall constitute grounds for granting of a
waiver by the Rent Regulation Officer:
(1) The landlord wishes to maintain a vacant unit in order to reserve
said unit for a family member. The owner shall provide in the
waiver request full documentation, such as the name of the future
tenant and the date of occupancy.
(2) A landlord wishes to maintain a vacant unit in order to improve the
conditions of said unit pursuant to § 218-27.
(3) A landlord maintains a vacant unit in order to correct code
violations in said unit. The owner shall provide in the waiver
request full documentation, such as code violation reports,
correction plans, permits and the date by which the unit shall be
rented and occupied.
(4) A landlord demonstrates that reasonable efforts have been made to
rent a dwelling unit without success.
H. Any tenant living at premises where a dwelling unit is vacant, civic
organizations or municipal, state or federal agencies may petition the
Rent Regulation Officer to investigate alleged violations of these
provisions.
I. Any landlord of any unit which has been vacant 30 days or more from
the end of the preceding tenancy as of the effective date of this chapter
shall be required to file the notifications required under the foregoing
provisions of this chapter within 30 days of the effective date of this
chapter.
J. The Rent Regulation Officer shall issue a summons for any violation of
any provision of this section.
§ 218-29 EAST ORANGE CODE § 218-31
C:1138
payment of rent by the tenant more than five days late to a maximum of $50
and limiting fees for bounced checks to a maximum of $35.
§ 218-31.1. Rental receipts. [Added 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 24-2018]
All persons that lease dwelling units within the City of East Orange shall
provide rental receipts to all tenants reflecting rent that has been paid.
Receipts shall be provided either via e-mail, regular mail or hand delivery
within seven days of the receipt of payment. They shall also keep a record of
said receipts on file at their listed business address for review upon request
by the rental officer.
§ 218-32. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or any other part of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter, but shall be
confined in its effect to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or
other part of this chapter directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 218-33. Construal.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the City of East Orange
and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes
thereof.
Chapter 223
SALES, FORCED-OUT-OF-BUSINESS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 223-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT and ADVERTISING — Includes
any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of
intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper
advertisement, by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by written notice,
by printed notice, by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio
announcement and any other means, including oral, written or printed.
SALE — The sale or any offer to sell to the public of goods, wares and
merchandise, of any and all kinds and descriptions, on hand and in stock
in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising, on the
§ 218-31 CHARTER § 223-1
C:1139
part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the removal, termination,
closing, liquidation, windup, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment
of the business in connection with such sale. It shall also include any
sale advertised to be a "fire sale," "adjustment sale," "creditor's sale,"
"liquidation sale," "creditor's committee sale," "trustee's sale," "executor's
sale," "reorganization sale," "alteration sale," "administrator's sale,"
"insolvent sale," "insurance salvage sale," "mortgage sale," "assignee's
sale," "adjuster's sale," "receiver's sale," "loss-of-lease sale," "wholesaler's
closeout sale," "forced-out-of-business sale," "removal sale," "damaged
goods sale" and any other sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably
convey to the public that, upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand
or upon the end of the sale, the business will cease and be discontinued or
be removed to another location or be reorganized.
§ 223-2. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
§ 223-3. License expiration and renewal; fee.
§ 223-4. Inventory of stock to be filed. [Amended 11-10-1980 by
Ord. No. 15-1980]
At the time of filing an application for a license for a sale regulated by
this chapter, the applicant shall also file with the City Clerk an itemized
inventory of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at such sale, together
with the number on hand of each item, and an authorization permitting the
City Clerk or his representative to enter the place prior to and during the
course of the sale to compare the application with the merchandise and the
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order, writ or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officers, such as sheriffs and marshals.
C. Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
A. Every license for a sale regulated by this chapter shall expire 60 days
after the date of issuance, and no such license shall be renewed for a
period of one year from the expiration thereof. No such licensee or his
executors, administrators, heirs, successors and assigns shall make an
application for another license until one year has elapsed since the
expiration of the last license issued to conduct a sale at the same place
or any other place within the City.
B. The fee for a license shall be as set forth in Chapter 170, Licenses and
fees, § 170-18.277
277. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 223-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 223-4
C:1140
conduct of the sale. Such inventory shall be verified by the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the affidavit shall be that of one of its officers.
§ 223-5. Duplicate copies of inventory and application.
Each person licensed to conduct a sale regulated by this chapter shall keep
on the premises where the sale is conducted a duplicate original of the
application and stock inventory pursuant to which such license was issued,
and the same shall at all times be available to the City Clerk, and the
licensee shall permit the City Clerk or his duly authorized representative
to examine all merchandise in the premises for comparison with such stock
inventory.
§ 223-6. Advertisements.
All advertisements or advertising in regard to sales regulated by this
chapter and the language contained therein shall be in accordance with the
purpose of the sale as stated in the application pursuant to which a license
was issued, and the wording of such advertisements shall not vary from the
wording as indicated in the application. Such advertising shall in no manner
or form whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, indicate that such sale is
held with the approval of the City Clerk. Such advertising shall contain a
statement in these words and no others: "Sale held pursuant to License No.
_____ issued by the City Clerk of the City of East Orange, on the _____ day
of ___________ 20__," and in such blank spaces shall be indicated the license
number and the date of issuance of the license.
§ 223-7. Compliance with advertising; termination by business; sale
of other merchandise.
No person shall undertake any sale regulated by this chapter unless the
intent and purpose thereof is consistent with the advertisement and not
as a subterfuge for the continuation of a business without the removal,
termination or other conclusion of business operation as advertised, nor
shall any person utilize a forced sale as a means of disposition of
merchandise not originally owned by the business, which merchandise is
made available by sale or consignment other than in the ordinary course of
the business operation.
§ 223-8. Adding merchandise to stock prohibited.
No additional merchandise shall be added to the stock in the place of sale
after issuance of the license and during the sale.
§ 223-9. Violations and penalties.278
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, § 1-15, of the Code.
278. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 223-4 CHARTER § 223-9
C:1141
Chapter 225
SENIOR SERVICES FACILITY, RENTAL OF
§ 225-1. Facilities utilization policy.
The City of East Orange agrees to rent specific areas of its senior services
facility to residents of the community. The manager of the senior services
facility will be responsible for administrating the policy contained herein
and implementing the requirements within the fully executed license
agreement entered into between the City and the applicant.
§ 225-2. Rental locations.
The specific areas for rent shall include the:
§ 225-3. Rules and prohibitions.
§ 225-4. Scheduling and cost.
Rental rates shall include:
A. Small meeting room;
B. Large conference room;
C. First floor hall-reception area;
D. Second floor hall-reception area and kitchen;
E. Community room with billiard room and kitchen.
A. No cooking shall be allowed in the kitchen area. Applicants may use the
kitchen for setup purposes only.
B. Alcohol is not permitted.
C. The use of the facilities by non-senior groups shall not conflict with any
schedule of senior services.
D. The applicant and/or sponsoring group shall assume financial
responsibility for any damage incurred to the building or furnishings
during use.
§ 223-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 225-4
C:1142
Room(s) Cost(s) and
Duration of
Rental(s)
Refundable
Deposit
Administrative
Fee(s)
(Includes
Custodial
Service)
Each
Additional
Hour
Small
Meeting
Room or
Large
Meeting
Room
$50 for 2
hours
$25 $50
Community
Room with
Billiard Room
and Kitchen
$300 for 4
hours
$150 $35 per hour $100
1st floor Hall-
Fran
Wilkerson
Reception
Area
$100 for
hours279
$50 __
2nd floor
Hall-Donald
Payne, Sr.,
Reception
Area
$375 for
hours280
$50 __
1st floor Hall-
Fran
Wilkerson
Reception
Area/
Community
Room,
Kitchen/
Billiard Room
$600 for
hours281
$75 $35 per hour __
279. Editor's Note: So in original; number of hours not specified.
280. Editor's Note: So in original; number of hours not specified.
281. Editor's Note: So in original; number of hours not specified.
§ 225-4 CHARTER § 225-4
C:1143
Chapter 226
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Water Commissioners — See Ch.
14A, Art. V.
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 125.
Excavations — See Ch. 142.
Licenses and fees generally — See Ch. 170.
§ 225-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 225-4
C:1144
Part 1
[Adopted 3-25-1968 BySOewrde.r sN Ao.n 2d0 D-1r9ai6n8sAs Ch. 18 Of The 1968
Code, Secs. 18:1-2(a)(3), (C) And (D) And Secs. 18:1-3 Through
18:1-18.282]
ARTICLE I
Sewers and Drains Generally
§ 226-1. Disposal of certain substances prohibited. [Amended
11-28-1977 by Ord. No. 60-1977]
A. No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any
substance in any public sewer or plumbing connection therewith or
otherwise dispose of any substance in such manner that it will tend to
interfere with the free passage of water or sewage within the public
sewer system. Without limiting the foregoing, no person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into any public sewer or plumbing connection
any of the following-described liquids or substances:
(1) The by-products or refuse from any mechanical garbage disposal or
grinder used in the operation of any restaurant, market,
supermarket, mortuary, hotel, hospital or any other mercantile or
business establishment or multifamily dwelling of three or more
units.
(2) Disposal of leaves. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of
leaves by depositing them in any catch basin or sewer or by leaving
them along any curbline or gutter. To the extent necessary in order
to assemble and accumulate leaves, the same may temporarily be
placed in a gutter or along a curbline so long as they are not left
there permanently (i.e., any longer than reasonably necessary in
the assemblage or gathering process). In addition, no person shall
dispose of leaves by placing them or causing them to be placed (i.e.,
through air blowers or other mechanical equipment) upon adjacent
property. Instead leaves shall be placed in biodegradable bags.
[Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 12-2019]
B. No water-cooled air conditioner installed on or after April 1, 1960,
including replacements for existing air conditioners, regardless of size,
nor any refrigeration unit used by any building or structure, shall be
connected or discharged directly or indirectly into the public sewer. In
lieu of draining into the public sewer, water-cooled air conditioners or
refrigeration units as aforesaid shall be provided with circulating water
towers or alternative means of water disposal other than use of the
public sewers.
C. The Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission may, by
regulation, further define substances which may be prohibited from
282. Editor's Note: Former Secs. 18:1-1 And 18:1-2(a)(1), (2) And (4) And (B) Were Superseded
By 11-28-1977 By Ord. No. 60-1977.
§ 226-1 CHARTER § 226-1
C:1145
§ 226-2. Connection of cesspools, privies or privy vaults to public
sewer prohibited.
No person shall connect or cause to be connected any cesspool, privy or
privy vault to the public sewer.
§ 226-3. Connections with public sewer: permit required. [Amended
11-28-1977 by Ord. No. 60-1977]
No connection with any public sewer for nonindustrial users nor any
construction, alteration or repair of any pipe, leader, conduit or facility
between the trunk line and the building shall be made without first
obtaining a permit authorizing the same.
§ 226-4. Application for permit. [Amended 11-28-1977 by Ord. No.
60-1977; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986284]
disposal in the public sewer system by reason of their tendency to
interrupt or interfere with the flow in the sewer system, constitute
a danger of fire, explosion, asphyxiation or other menace to public
safety, or corrode, damage or impair the public sewer system, sewage
treatment process or other facility pertinent thereto, and the Executive
Director of the East Orange Water Commission, upon the request of
any user of the public sewer system, shall provide a determination as
to whether or not a particular substance may be disposed of in the
public sewer system. If the Executive Director of the East Orange Water
Commission shall determine that such substance may be disposed of,
provided certain conditions are met by the user, a permit to use the
sewer system for such disposal, subject to the conditions imposed by
the Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission, shall be
issued by the Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission,
and failure to comply with the aforesaid conditions shall constitute
a violation of this Part 1. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986283]
A. Every application for a permit required by § 226-3 shall be signed by
the owner of the building or premises to be connected with the sewer or
by his authorized agent. It shall state the name and address of the
same, and there shall be provided therewith, in duplicate, copies of a
plan showing the type of construction and course of the proposed
construction, as well as the exact point where it is proposed that the
connection to the public sewer shall be made, and if a leader or pipe or
conduit is to be constructed under the sidewalk, then the location, size
and material of such leader pipe or conduit shall be shown, together
with such other features as may be required pursuant to the regulations
of the East Orange Board of Water Commissioners.
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-4
C:1146
§ 226-5. Review of applications. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
§ 226-6. Fees. [Amended 11-28-1977 by Ord. No. 60-1977;
9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986287]
No permit for construction, alteration or repair of any sewer or drainage
line, pipe, leader or connection to a public sewer shall be issued until
the applicant has paid a nonrefundable permit fee for supervision and
inspection of $150, such fee to be in accordance with the schedule
promulgated by the Executive Director of the East Orange Water
Commission and approved by resolution of the East Orange Board of Water
Commissioners. All money collected by reason of this provision shall be paid
to the East Orange Water Commission.
B. A permit may, at the discretion of the Executive Director of the East
Orange Water Commission, embrace special provisions and conditions
as to the use of flush tanks, size of pipe, method of construction, mode
of use and similar details.
C. The application and supporting documents as above shall be filed with
the Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission and shall
be subject to approval of the Executive Director of the East Orange
Water Commission.
A. The Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission shall
consider the applications for sewer permits, as nearly as possible, in the
order in which they are received. The Executive Director of the East
Orange Water Commission may approve the application, suspend action
on the application, reject any application or may attach such conditions
thereto as may reasonably be required to assure that the proposed
construction and connection to the public sewer conforms with public
interest and established standards for health and safety.285
B. Upon his approval, a permit shall be issued by the Executive Director of
the East Orange Water Commission, and where conditions are attached
thereto, the permit shall set forth such conditions.286
C. The Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission's
approval may include the right to construct leader pipes or conduits
under the sidewalk, and the Executive Director of the East Orange
Water Commission is duly authorized pursuant hereto, by the City
Council, to issue such permits and to permit encroachments extending
upon, over or under the sidewalk, provided that the permit is approved
with such terms as to adequately provide for the safety of pedestrians
and other persons and vehicles using the public thoroughfare or
easement.
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-4 CHARTER § 226-7
C:1147
§ 226-7. Records; revocation of permit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986288]
It shall be the duty of the Executive Director of the East Orange Water
Commission to keep a record of sewer permits issued pursuant to this Part
1. The Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission may revoke
any permit where, in his opinion, the construction, alteration or repair is
not being performed in accordance with the regulations of the East Orange
Board of Water Commissioners or with the conditions of any permit issued
therefor.
§ 226-8. Construction and maintenance of sewer laterals: costs.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986289]
The cost of construction and maintenance of all sewer laterals and
connections from the trunk line of the public sewer to the building of any
private owner to be served thereby shall be at the expense of and shall be
the obligation of the abutting property owner. The construction, alteration
or repair of any conduit, pipe, leader or drain between the trunk line and the
building shall be subject to the supervision and inspection of the Executive
Director of the East Orange Water Commission, and no part thereof shall
be covered up and filled in until opportunity to inspect the construction,
alteration or repair has been afforded the Executive Director of the East
Orange Water Commission. All applicants shall contact the East Orange
Water Commission at least 48 hours in advance to provide and assure
an inspection of the work. Work not inspected by the East Orange Water
Commission will have to be replaced at the applicant's expense. All work
shall confirm to the requirements of Title 5, Chapter 21 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code. Restoration of all excavations shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 142, Excavations, of the Code.
§ 226-8.1. Termination of sewer lateral service.290
The contractor performing the work shall be responsible for the excavation
of the existing sewer service line proposed to be terminated. The service
line shall be terminated by cutting and capping it a minimum of 24 inches
behind the curb. Prior to backfilling of the excavation trench, the contractor
shall contact the East Orange Water Commission for an inspection of the
completed work. The inspection request shall be made a minimum of 24
hours in advance of the completed work. Upon approval of the work by the
East Orange Water Commission, the contractor shall backfill the excavation
trench. Failure to follow this procedure shall result in the contractor being
fined in accordance with § 226-99, Penalties.
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
290. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-7 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-9
C:1148
§ 226-9. Dry wells. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986291]
Where, in the opinion of the Municipal Engineer, the existing stormwater
drain is not located within a reasonable distance from the premises from
which the drainage system is to serve, then the Executive Director of the
East Orange Water Commission may deny a permit for the use of such
stormwater drain. Thereupon, the owner or applicant shall apply forthwith
to the Construction Code Official for a permit to construct an adequate
dry well of sufficient capacity to receive and dispose of stormwater and
other fluid substances from the premises, in accordance with regulations
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP).
§ 226-10. Drainage across sidewalks or in gutters.
A. No sewage, refuse, stormwater, surface water or other fluids shall be
directed or conducted, directly or indirectly, over, across or under any
sidewalk or into any gutter or public street, except as provided in this
Part 1.
B. Where, by reason of close proximity of the premises to a catch basin,
the anticipated use of the gutter for stormwater and surface water
drainage will not cause a significant loss of use of the gutter or gutters
to other persons or for other purposes, the Director of Public Works,
upon written application therefor, may permit drainage of stormwater
or surface water under the sidewalk and into the gutter. Any such
permit for drainage as set forth herein shall be signed by the Director of
Public Works and shall be revocable by the Director of Public Works
upon 90 days' notice. Under no circumstances shall water or other
fluids be discharged across the sidewalk. [Amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986]
C. All permits under this section shall be issued by the Director of Public
Works, who is hereby authorized to charge a nonrefundable permit fee
of $0.25 for each linear foot of leader drain installed or reset, including
one hole cut in the curb, and a permit fee of $2 for each additional hole
cut in the curb. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983; 5-27-1986
by Ord. No. 25-1986]
D. The installing or resetting of leader drains shall be performed in
accordance with regulations to be prescribed by the Director of Public
Works. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983; 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 25-1986]
E. Upon the filing of any application for a permit under this section, the
applicant shall deposit with the Tax Collector the sum of $1 for each
linear foot of leader drain installed or reset, including one hole cut in
the curb, and the sum of $10 for each additional hole cut in the curb,
291. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-9 CHARTER § 226-10
C:1149
§ 226-11. (Reserved)293
§ 226-12. Lampholes.
Lampholes or cleanouts shall be provided for the proper examination of
every sewer connection at the street line and at each change of line or
grade. Wherever the connection is of unusual length, there shall be
provided at least one lamphole or cleanout for each 50 feet thereof, except
where the main sewer is in the sidewalk area and the building is within 40
feet of the main sewer.
§ 226-13. Proximity of other pipes to sewer connections.
No water, gas or other pipe shall be laid within four feet of a sewer
connection.
§ 226-14. Cleanouts in waste pipes.
All cleanouts in the waste pipes to the house sewer connections shall be
raised so that the screw plugs shall be at least one foot six inches above the
cellar floors.
§ 226-15. Right of entry for examinations.294
The agents and employees of the City shall have the right to enter any
building and premises connected to any public sewer whenever necessary
to examine the same or to do any work therein or thereon. Refusal to
permit entry upon appropriate request by City agents or employees shall be
deemed a violation of this Part 1.
provided that no permit shall be issued upon a deposit of less than $20.
[Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983]
F. Upon the certificate of the Director of Public Works that the work of
installing or resetting leader drains as aforesaid has been performed in
a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the regulations adopted
by the Director of Public Works and this section and other ordinances of
the City, the Tax Collector shall return 100% of the deposit to the
applicant one calendar year after the work has been performed. In case
the party to whom the permit has been granted fails to perform the
work in the manner as stated above, the Director of Public Works may
perform or cause to be performed such work as may be necessary to
make the same satisfactory and in accordance with the regulation as
aforesaid, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the deposit; and
the balance, if any, shall be returned to the applicant at the end of the
designated period. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986292]
292. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
293. Editor's Note: Former § 226-11, Costs for excavating roadway areas, as amended, was
repealed 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 15-1992 and 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 6-1993.
294. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-10 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-16
C:1150
§ 226-16. Liability of City. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986295]
No person shall have any claim or right against the City by reason of any
delay by the Director of Public Works or the Executive Director of the East
Orange Water Commission in making any inspection of any construction,
alteration or repair as provided in this Part 1, nor for any defect or failure
of any private owner to construct or maintain any installation properly.
§ 226-17. Promulgation of regulations by Director of Public Works
and Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986296]
A. The Director of Public Works may, from time to time, promulgate such
further regulations and requirements pertaining to the construction of
leaders with departmental standards and provisions and as may be
necessary to the safety of the general public. All such regulations shall
be in writing and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection
at the office of the Director of Public Works.
B. The Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission may, from
time to time, promulgate such further regulations and requirements
pertaining to connections into the public sewers and construction,
alteration or repair of pipelines, conduits or drains appurtenant thereto
in conformity with the standards and provisions of this Part 1 as may be
necessary to the public health and safety and proper operation of the
sewer system. All such regulations shall be in writing, and copies
thereof shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the East
Orange Water Commission during normal business hours.
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-16 CHARTER § 226-17
C:1151

ARTICLE IA
Disposal of Waste Into Storm Sewers
[Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 23-2006297]
§ 226-17.1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement
of this article:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
that is owned or operated by the City of East Orange or other public body
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
UNLAWFUL CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of East
297. Editor's Note: This ordinance added new material as §§ 226-18 through 226-18.4. The
sections were renumbered as §§ 226-17.1 through 226-17.5 because the Code already
contained § 226-18.
§ 226-17.1 CHARTER § 226-17.1
C:1153
Orange, unless that discharge is authorized under NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
§ 226-17.2. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through any unlawful
connection to the City's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater or other
industrial waste.
§ 226-17.3. Permitted discharges.
Notwithstanding any other ordinance to the contrary, the following
discharges shall be permitted:
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscaping and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from firefighting activities.
I. Flows from the rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Equipment used for fighting fires; and
(2) Equipment used in application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residential salt and deicing
materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the
maximum extent practicable using dry-cleaning methods (e.g.,
shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned
to storage for reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of salt and
deicing equipment is limited to exterior, undercarriage and
exposed parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed
machinery.
§ 226-17.1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-17.4
C:1154
§ 226-17.4. Enforcement.
Unlawful discharges to catch basins and manholes shall be enforced by the
East Orange Board of Water Commissioners.
§ 226-17.5. Violations and penalties.298
Any member of the public in violation of the provisions of this article, after
being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, 90 days'
imprisonment and/or 90 days of community service.
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-17.4 CHARTER § 226-17.5
C:1155

Part 2
Serv[iAced oBpyt ePdas1s1a-i2c8 V-1al9l7ey7 SBeywOerrda.g Ne oC.o 6m0m-1i9s7si7o]ners
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 226-18. Applicability of provisions.
This Part 2 shall apply to that section of the City served by the Passaic Valley
Sewerage Commissioners as shown on the map annexed hereto and made a
part hereof.299
§ 226-19. Definitions.
Whenever used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY — A charge to industrial users based on
their use of PVSC facilities to repay the capital cost outlay of the federal
share given PVSC under the provisions of applicable federal law, allocable
to the treatment of the wastes from the industrial user.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nongovernmental user of PVSC facilities
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972, as
amended and supplemented, under Division A, B, D, E or I. A user may be
excluded if it is determined that it introduces primarily segregated sanitary
wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid waste from industrial processes, trade
or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
MAJOR INDUSTRY — An industrial user of PVSC facilities that has a flow
of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday, has in its waste a toxic
pollutant in toxic amounts, or is found by USEPA, NJDEP or PVSC to have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the PVSC treatment works or upon the quality of the effluent
from the PVSC treatment works.
NATURAL OUTLET — An outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or groundwater, including the Passaic River or any of its
tributaries.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
299. Editor's Note: The map referred to in this section is on file in the offices of the City Clerk.
§ 226-18 CHARTER § 226-19
C:1157
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, society, association, corporation
(public or private) or group.
pH — The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution. Neutral water has a pH value of seven (a hydrogen concentration
of 10-7). Lower pHs are acid; higher pHs are alkaline.
PRETREATMENT — Treatment given to industrial waste prior to its
discharge, directly or indirectly, to the PVSC facilities by an industrial user
in order to remove illegal and/or undesirable constituents or to reduce the
strength of the waste.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer controlled by a governmental agency, public
utility or the municipality.
PVSC — Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY WASTE — Waste derived principally from dwellings, office
buildings and sanitary conveniences, and waste which, when segregated
from industrial wastes, may come from industrial plants or commercial
enterprises.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes called "STORM SEWER") — A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from
any source.
STRENGTH OF WASTE — A measurement of suspended solids and/or
biochemical oxygen demand and/or chemical oxygen demand and/or any
other parameter determined by PVSC as a fair indicator of the relative use,
other than volumetric, of PVSC facilities by industrial users.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and that
is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as "nonfilterable
residue."
TOXIC WASTES IN TOXIC AMOUNTS — As defined by USEPA in 40 CFR
129 (38 F.R. 24342, 9-7-73) and any superseding revisions.
§ 226-19 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-19
C:1158
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
USER CHARGE — A charge to users consisting of two parts: the first part
established by PVSC based on volume and, where applicable, on strength
and/or flow rate, to pay for the use of the PVSC facilities; the second part
established by the City to pay for the use of the local sewer system and to
pay for administration of the billing and collection of the funds.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — The PVSC facilities.
§ 226-20. Discharge to natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
municipality any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable
treatment has been provided and where a national pollution discharge
elimination system permit has been obtained from the appropriate
governmental authority, where required.
§ 226-21. Permit required to open or connect with sewer. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986300]
No unauthorized person shall uncover; make any connections with or
opening into; use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a permit from the Executive Director of the East
Orange Water Commission.
§ 226-22. Application for sanitary connections; records and report.
A. Application for sanitary connections for dwellings, groups of dwellings
or industrial or commercial establishments with only sanitary waste
shall be made directly to the City.
B. A fee shall be paid to the City to process the application as provided in
§ 226-6 of this chapter.
300. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-19 CHARTER § 226-22
C:1159
§ 226-23. Applications for industrial permits; changes affecting
discharge.
§ 226-24. Classification of applications for permits.
Applications for permits by industrial users shall be classified by PVSC as
follows:
C. The Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission shall
maintain a record of the number of sanitary applications and
connections that are added and removed from the system and shall
make an annual report to the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners
no later than February 1 of each year. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 25-1986301]
A. Each existing industrial user which is presently connected directly or
indirectly to the wastewater facilities of the City shall make application
for a permit no later than June 30, 1978, whether the connection is for
industrial waste or stormwater.
B. Applications for future connections must be made and approved before
a certificate of occupancy may be issued. The application shall be made
to the City by the industry that generates the waste; however, the
application must be signed by the owner of the property whereon the
industry is located.
C. After approval of the application by the City, the application shall be
forwarded to PVSC for classification and issuance of the permit by
PVSC.
D. Any existing industrial user which proposes to make any change in its
facility or its processing which significantly affects the quality or the
quantity of its discharge into the system shall submit to the City an
industrial sewer waste revision application showing the contemplated
changes. Any new tenant or occupant of an existing industrial user shall
submit an industrial sewer waste revision application. The application,
if approved by the City, shall be sent to the PVSC, accompanied by the
written approval of the City. Existing industrial users that have applied
for permits may continue their discharge until their application has
been processed by PVSC, except for any discharges which constitute
prohibited waste as otherwise provided in this Part 2 or unless notified
by PVSC to cease and desist their discharges. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for an industrial use until an industrial
permit has been issued by the PVSC, and no person shall occupy any
building or structure for the purpose of a new industrial use until an
industrial permit has been issued by the PVSC.
A. Category I.
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-24
C:1160
§ 226-25. Classifications subject to change.
The PVSC classification of an application for permit is subject to change by
PVSC upon written notification from PVSC to the applicant by certified mail.
Any change shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation of the reason
for the change.
§ 226-26. Appeal of permit classification.
Any industry aggrieved by a permit classification by the PVSC shall have
a right to appeal to the PVSC. Such an administrative appeal shall be
taken within 30 days of notification by PVSC of its decision to the industry.
The notice of appeal shall be delivered personally to the offices of PVSC
at 600 Wilson Avenue, Newark, New Jersey, or shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The taking of an appeal shall not stay the
provisions of a Category III denial. During the time of appeal, however, the
Category II permits shall be stayed. However, the staying shall not release
any industry from meeting any requirements of any schedule set by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 226-27. Hearing; rights of appellant; findings.
Upon the filing of an appeal, the PVSC shall set the date and time for
a hearing before the Commissioners. The applicant shall have the right
to present evidence, shall have the right to be represented by counsel
and shall have the right of cross-examination. Upon the conclusion of the
hearing, the Commissioners shall make findings of fact and conclusions.
(1) Class I-A permit shall not be issued to an industry defined as a
major industry. When issued, a Class I-A permit shall allow the
industry to discharge with no modification or pretreatment of flow.
(2) Class I-B permit is one issued to an industry classified as a major
industry. This permit shall allow the industry to discharge with no
modifications or pretreatment of flow; however, PVSC may require
the installation of monitoring equipment.
B. Category II.
(1) Class II-A permit shall allow an industry to discharge pretreated
wastes in accordance with standards established in the permit.
(2) Class II-B permit shall allow an industry to continue discharge,
subject to change of characteristics of its waste by pretreatment or
other means in accordance with a schedule as established by the
PVSC in the permit.
C. Category III. The permit is denied and the discharge of prohibited
materials must be halted or modified by a date established by the PVSC
and in accordance with conditions contained in the permit denial.
§ 226-24 CHARTER § 226-28
C:1161
§ 226-28. Application form for industrial permits.
All applications for industrial permits shall be submitted on forms to be
supplied by PVSC and shall comply with the instructions on said form.
§ 226-29. Responsibility for cost of connection; indemnification.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a
sewer connection shall be borne by the applicant, and the applicant shall
indemnify the City or PVSC from any loss or damage that may be occasioned
by the installation of the sewer connection. All sewer connections shall be
in accordance with the requirements of Article I of this chapter.
§ 226-30. Discharge of groundwater and surface waters to sanitary
sewer restricted.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer unless approved by the City for the purpose of
disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 226-31. Industrial survey.
In addition to the application for the permit as hereinabove provided,
each industrial user must complete an industrial survey form which will
be supplied by PVSC and, from time to time, shall update the form when
required by the PVSC.
§ 226-32. Automatic monitoring system.
Whenever an industry is classified as a major industry, it shall install an
approved, sealed, automatic monitoring system if required by PVSC.
§ 226-33. Discharge of unpolluted water restricted.
No unpolluted water shall be discharged into the PVSC system except with
the prior written consent of the City and PVSC.
§ 226-34. Adherence to pretreatment standards.
When pretreatment standards are adopted by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency for any given category of industries, then
any industry within that category must conform to the United States
Environmental Protection Agency timetable for adherence to pretreatment
requirements as well as all other applicable requirements promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with the
provisions of the law. Additionally, such industries shall comply with such
more stringent standards necessitated by local conditions as determined
from time to time by the PVSC.
§ 226-28 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-35
C:1162
§ 226-35. Industrial users to provide access to facilities.
§ 226-36. Prohibited wastes.
The following wastes are prohibited and may never be discharged into
wastewater facilities of the City and PVSC:
§ 226-37. Wastes requiring special permission.
The following wastes may not be discharged without special permission
from the PVSC, upon a determination by the PVSC that the discharge would
not be detrimental to the system:
A. All industrial users shall provide immediate access to their facilities at
any time during normal working hours or at any other time that there is
a discharge into the PVSC system or into any waters under the
jurisdiction of the PVSC. Access shall be for the purpose of checking the
quality of the discharge, taking samples and making tests of the
discharge or for the purpose of permitting enforcement of this Part 2.
The access shall be made available to the employees of PVSC, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, United States
Environmental Protection Agency and/or the municipality.
B. All users shall provide access to property and premises for inspection
for the purpose of determining if there is any violation of the terms or
provisions of this Part 2.
A. Wastes that may create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer or
wastewater facility, such as gasoline, fuel oil, cleaning solvents, etc.
B. Wastes that may impair or cause to be impaired the hydraulic capacity
of the sewer system, such as ashes, sand, metal, precipitates, etc.
C. Wastes that may create a hazard to people, the sewer system, the
treatment process or the receiving water, such as dangerous levels of
toxic materials.
D. Wastes at a flow rate which is excessive over a relatively short time
period so that there is a treatment process upset and substantial loss of
treatment efficiency.
E. Wastes below a pH of five unless the line is designed to accommodate
such waste.
F. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by PVSC in compliance with applicable state
or federal regulations.
A. Any discharge in excess of 150º F. (65º C.).
B. Any discharge containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of mineral
oil or grease.
§ 226-35 CHARTER § 226-37
C:1163
§ 226-38. Construction of sampling points.
Each major industrial user shall construct or otherwise have available a
sampling point for sampling wastewater before it enters the City sewer
system. Other industrial users may be required to construct such sampling
point if ordered so to do by the City or the PVSC.
§ 226-39. Discharge of damaging materials into wastewater
facilities.
No discharge into the wastewater facilities of the City or PVSC shall be
permitted from any source which causes physical damage, interferes with
the treatment process or results in a violation of effluent limitations or other
conditions contained in the national pollution discharge elimination system
permit to discharge issued to the PVSC by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
§ 226-40. Construction of observation, sampling and measurement
facilities.
When required by the City, USEPA, NJDEP or the PVSC, the owner of
any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable structure, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances to the building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the governmental agency requiring it. The structure shall
be installed by the applicant at his expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 226-41. Furnishing information needed to determine compliance.
All persons subject to this Part 2 shall be required to provide information
to the City and PVSC as needed to determine compliance with this Part 2.
These requirements may include but are not limited to:
C. Any discharge containing floatable oil or grease.
D. Any discharge of heavy metals or any other toxic materials in toxic
amounts, which amounts are to be established by PVSC.
E. Any discharge quantities of flow or concentration which shall constitute
a slug.
F. Wastes with pH outside the limits of 5.0 to 9.0.
A. Wastewaters' discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
B. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
§ 226-37 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-41
C:1164
§ 226-42. Measurements, tests and analyses standards.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Part 2 shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, or other method or procedure as may be approved by
PVSC. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis, subject to the approval of the City
and/or PVSC.
§ 226-43. Compliance with user cost and industrial cost recovery
system regulations.
§ 226-44. Damaging or tampering with wastewater facilities.
No person shall intentionally break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the
wastewater facilities.
C. Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
E. A plot plan of sewers of the user's property, showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
G. Details of systems to prevent and control the loss of materials through
spills to the municipal sewer.
A. All users shall be required to comply with the requirement of user
charge regulations and industrial cost recovery system regulations to
be adopted by the PVSC and the City in accordance with the
requirements of the USEPA. The effective date for the implementation
of user cost regulations and industrial cost recovery system regulations
shall be established by resolution of the PVSC and the City. The
effective date shall be certified by the PVSC, and the said written
certification shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
B. Pending the promulgation of user cost regulations by the PVSC, the City
will assess user charges in the area served by the PVSC in accordance
with the provisions of Part 3 of this chapter.
C. Upon promulgation by PVSC of user charges, the provisions of Part 3
will no longer apply to the area served by the PVSC.
§ 226-41 CHARTER § 226-45
C:1165
§ 226-45. Administrative officer. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986302]
The Executive Director of the East Orange Water Commission shall be
charged with the responsibility of administering this Part 2.
§ 226-46. Compliance with written rules and regulations.
All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements of
the written rules and regulations of the City and PVSC which have been
adopted and which from time to time shall be adopted, which regulations
shall become effective upon the filing of certified copies in the office of the
Municipal Clerk after the effective date of this Part 2.
§ 226-47. Termination of permit or authority to discharge.
Violations of any of the provisions of this Part 2 or any permit issued under
the authority of this Part 2 may result in the termination of the permit and/
or the termination of the authority to discharge into the system.
§ 226-48. Violations and penalties.303
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 2 shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, 90 days' imprisonment
and/or 90 days of community service. Each and every day in which a
violation of any provision of this Part 2 exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-45 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-48
C:1166
Part 3
[AdoptedS1e1r-v2ic8e-1 B9y7 7JoBinytO Mrde.e tNinog. 61-1977]
ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 226-49. Applicability of provisions.
This Part 3 shall apply to that section of the City served by the Joint Meeting
as shown on the map annexed hereto and made a part hereof.304
304. Editor's Note: The map referred to in this section is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 226-49 CHARTER § 226-49
C:1167

ARTICLE IV
Regulation and Control of Use of Public Sewers
§ 226-50. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the meanings of terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The measure of the organic matter
present in the sewage as determined by the dichromate reflux method and
expressed in milligrams per liter (ppm).
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine, expressed in milligrams
per liter or parts per million by weight, which will complete the normal
reactions with all chemicals and materials in the sewage leaving an excess
of 0.1 milligram per liter (0.1 parts per million by weight) after 30 minutes'
contact time at room temperature of approximately 70º F.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state which will separate
by gravity from wastewater through treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly
pretreated in such a manner that the discharged wastewater does not
interfere with the wastewater facilities.
GREASE or FATS — Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
HEAVY METALS — The electronegative metals with a density greater than
five grams per cubic centimeter, including but not limited to lead,
chromium, mercury, nickel and zinc, plus the nonmetallic element arsenic.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
JOINT MEETING — The municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union and
the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926, as
supplemented, in the matter of an outlet sewer and treatment plant for said
municipalities and, when the context requires, shall mean the Executive
Director or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
JOINT SEWER — Includes the joint outlet or trunk sewer constructed by
the several municipalities under a contract dated March 15, 1901; the
supplementary joint trunk sewer and sewage disposal plant constructed
under a contract between the member municipalities dated June 1, 1926,
and contract dated March 9, 1931; or any trunk sewer theretofore or
thereafter constructed and maintained by the Joint Meeting.
§ 226-50 CHARTER § 226-50
C:1169
MAJOR INDUSTRY — An industrial user of municipal or Joint Meeting
wastewater facilities that has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per workday
or has in its waste toxic substances injurious to the treatment process or
sewer system, or is found by USEPA, NJDEP, Joint Meeting or a municipality
to have a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on municipal or Joint Meeting wastewater facilities
or upon the quality of effluent from these wastewater facilities, or has a
detrimental effect upon human health or welfare.
NJDEP — The State of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
or successor agency.
NONSTATIONARY SOURCE — Any mobile vehicle, piece of equipment or
appurtenance thereof that is utilized in the discharge of waste or
wastewater to any sewer or natural outlet. The term includes but is not
limited to tank trucks and dump trucks as well as associated equipment and
appurtenances. Fixed, permanent or semipermanent equipment is excluded
from the category of nonstationary source and is regulated elsewhere in this
Part 3.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, society, association,
corporation (public or private) or group, including heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns.
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS — That portion of the total extractable
grease or fats which is not retained on an activated alumina absorption
column after elutriating with hexane.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT — Treatment given to waste by other than residential
users prior to its direct or indirect discharge to municipal or Joint Meeting
wastewater facilities to remove illegal and/or undesirable waste
constituents or to reduce the strength of waste prior to discharge to publicly
owned wastewater facilities.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
§ 226-50 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-50
C:1170
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
USEPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency or successor
agency.
§ 226-51. Connections with joint sewer: permit required.
Connections of building sewers shall, wherever possible, be made to local
sewers and not to Joint Meeting main lines or trunk sewers. No municipality
or person shall make any direct connection with the joint sewer or alter or
repair any connection with the joint sewer without having first obtained a
written permit from the Joint Meeting and from the City of East Orange.
§ 226-52. Conditions of permit.
Each permit to connect with the joint sewer, if and when issued, will require
that the applicant for such permit agree that it or he will carefully make
the connection with the joint sewer in the manner prescribed by the rules
and regulations of the Joint Meeting; that it or he will indemnify and save
harmless the Joint Meeting from all accidents and damages caused by any
negligence in protecting his work or any imperfect or inadequate work
done by virtue of such permit; that it or he will faithfully comply with the
ordinances of the municipality and that it or he will replace and restore the
sidewalk, pavement or street surface over any opening it or he may have
made, the work to be subject to the inspection and approval of the Joint
Meeting and the municipality.
§ 226-53. Authorized persons to make connections; workmanship
and materials.
Connections with the joint sewer shall be made only by a plumber licensed
in the municipality where the connection is to be made or by some other
person duly authorized by the Joint Meeting. Connections shall be made
with suitable materials approved by the Joint Meeting. All work included in
the construction of connections with the joint sewer or relating thereto shall
be done to the satisfaction of the Joint Meeting, and the person or persons
doing said work shall accept as final all decisions of the Joint Meeting as
to the fitness of all materials furnished or work done and shall immediately
replace all work rejected.
§ 226-54. Flexibility; watertight joints; manholes; inspection; top
connections.
Connections shall be such as to provide flexibility and watertight joints. A
manhole shall be provided if required. Connections shall include a cast-iron
hub, set and sealed in the main sewer. No connections shall be covered until
inspected by the Joint Meeting. No top connections will be permitted.
§ 226-50 CHARTER § 226-55
C:1171
§ 226-55. Certain waters prohibited from sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 226-56. Discharge of drainage and industrial waters.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the City of East Orange, but under no circumstances into
sanitary sewers. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process water may
be discharged, by approval of the City of East Orange, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet, but under no circumstances into sanitary sewers.
§ 226-57. Prohibited wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the followingdescribed
waters or wastes to sanitary sewers:
§ 226-58. Wastes requiring permission.
A. Wastes that may create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer or
wastewater facility, such as gasoline, fuel oil, cleaning solvents, etc.
B. Wastes that may impair or cause to be impaired the hydraulic capacity
of the sewerage system, such as ashes, sand, metal, precipitates, etc.
C. Wastes that contain toxic wastes in toxic amounts as defined by USEPA
regulations.
D. Wastes discharged at a flow rate that is excessive over a relatively short
period of time, which cause or may cause an upset of the treatment
process and a substantial loss of treatment efficiency, or which may
exceed the hydraulic capacity of the sanitary sewer system.
E. Wastes that may create a hazard to people, create a hazard or cause
damage to the wastewater facilities, endanger or interfere with the
treatment process, create a hazard to receiving waters or result in a
violation of effluent limitations or other conditions contained in any
NPDES permit.
F. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the municipality or Joint Meeting in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
G. Noxious or malodorous wastes capable of creating a public nuisance.
H. Leaves and/or grass clippings. [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
§ 226-55 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-58
C:1172
§ 226-59. Discharge from a nonstationary source.
Without having first obtained the signed, written permission of the Joint
Meeting, no person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to be
discharged any quantity of waste or wastewater to any public sewer or
natural outlet from a nonstationary source, including, for example, but not
limited to, the discharge of industrial waste from any tank truck. Each
and every individual operator and/or owner of a nonstationary source that
discharges in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed.
§ 226-60. Major industries: sampling, monitoring facilities.
A. No person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following wastes to the wastewater facilities
controlled by the municipality or Joint Meeting without prior written
permission:
(1) Wastes with a temperature in excess of 150º F. [65º C.].
(2) Wastes containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of mineral oil
or grease.
(3) Wastes containing floatable oil.
(4) Wastes containing heavy metals.
(5) Wastes discharged at such a concentration or rate as to constitute a
slug.
(6) Wastes with pH outside the limits of 5.0 to 9.0.
(7) Wastes containing toxic wastes in less than toxic amounts.
B. Permission to discharge the above wastes may be granted upon a
determination by the Joint Meeting that the proposed discharge will not
be detrimental to the wastewater facilities or the receiving waters; the
burden of proof in such cases shall lie with the discharger.
A. All major industries shall provide a structure for the sampling of
wastewater before the point of discharge to a sanitary sewer. The
sampling structure shall be constructed and maintained by the major
industry at its own expense and shall be kept safe and accessible at all
times to the municipality or Joint Meeting. Sampling structure design
shall be subject to the Joint Meeting's approval.
B. When required by the Joint Meeting, NJDEP and/or USEPA, a major
industry shall install and maintain additional facilities at its own
expense, including, for example, meters, sealed automatic monitoring
systems or other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of wastes. Construction, installation and maintenance of
such additional facilities shall be the responsibility of the major
industry, which shall keep these facilities safe and accessible to the
§ 226-58 CHARTER § 226-60
C:1173
§ 226-61. Minor industries: optional requirements.
When required by the Joint Meeting, NJDEP or USEPA, minor industries
shall be subject to the requirements of § 226-60.
§ 226-62. Adherence to pretreatment standards.
When pretreatment standards are adopted by NJDEP or USEPA for any
given class of industries, then any industry within that class shall conform to
the NJDEP or USEPA timetable for adherence to pretreatment requirements
as well as all other applicable requirements promulgated by the NJDEP
or USEPA in accordance with the provisions of law. Additionally, such
industries shall comply with such more stringent standards necessitated by
local conditions as determined from time to time by the municipality or Joint
Meeting.
§ 226-63. Industries: provisions of access to inspectors.
As a precondition for the right to discharge waste in any form into the
sewers and wastewater facilities of the municipality or the Joint Meeting, all
industrial users shall provide immediate access to their facilities at any time
during which there is a discharge to the wastewater facilities. Access shall
also be provided for the purpose of checking the quality of the discharge,
taking samples and making tests of the discharge or for the purpose of
permitting the enforcement of this Part 3 and shall be made available to
the municipality, Joint Meeting, NJDEP and USEPA. All users shall provide
access to property and premises for inspection to determine if there are any
violations of the terms or provisions of this Part 3.
§ 226-64. Submission of information concerning waste discharge.
As a precondition for the right to discharge waste in any form into the
sewers and wastewater facilities of the municipality or the Joint Meeting,
all persons subject to this Part 3 shall be required to provide information to
the municipality, Joint Meeting, NJDEP or USEPA, as needed, to determine
compliance with this Part 3. This information may include:
municipality and Joint Meeting at all times. Design and construction
of such additional facilities shall be subject to the requirements of the
governmental authority requiring them.
A. Wastewater discharge rate and volume over a specified time period.
B. Chemical analysis of wastewater.
C. Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specified liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
§ 226-60 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-64
C:1174
§ 226-65. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
to which reference is made in this Part 3 shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, or other methods or procedure that may be acceptable
to the governmental authority requiring the measurements, tests or
analyses. Sampling method, location, time, duration and frequency shall be
determined on an individual basis by the governmental authority requiring
the sampling.
§ 226-66. Compliance with written rules and regulations.
All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements
of the written rules and regulations of the City and Joint Meeting, which
regulations shall become effective upon the filing of certified copies in the
office of the City Clerk after the effective date of this Part 3.
§ 226-67. Certain discharges to natural outlets restricted.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any wastewater or other polluting material
into any natural outlet within the municipality except where suitable
treatment has been provided and where an NPDES permit has been
obtained from the appropriate governmental authority where required.
§ 226-68. Injury to or tampering with wastewater facilities.
No person shall maliciously, intentionally or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment that is part of the wastewater facilities of the City or Joint
Meeting.
§ 226-69. Termination of permit or authority to discharge.
Violations of any of the provisions of this article or any permit issued under
the authority of this article may result in the termination of the permit or
termination of the authority to discharge to the public wastewater facilities.
E. A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
G. Details of systems designed to prevent and/or control the loss of spilled
materials to the sanitary sewer (i.e., spill prevention plan).
H. Any other information required by the municipality or Joint Meeting.
§ 226-64 CHARTER § 226-70
C:1175
§ 226-70. Violations and penalties.305
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, 90 days' imprisonment
and/or 90 days of community service. Each and every day during which a
violation of any provision of this article exists shall constitute a separate
violation. Notwithstanding the aforesaid provisions, all violators shall be
liable in a civil action for damages for any expense, loss or damage suffered
by the City or Joint Meeting as a result of said violation or violations.
305. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-70 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-70
C:1176
ARTICLE V
User Charges for Collection and Treatment of Wastewater
§ 226-71. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JOINT MEETING — The municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union
and the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926,
as amended and supplemented, in the matter of a joint truck and outlet
sewer and treatment plant for the sewage wastewater emanating from said
municipalities.
USER CHARGE — The charge levied upon all users of the treatment works
for the annual cost of operation and maintenance, including replacements,
of such lines and such works, all as defined in the federal rules and
regulations.
§ 226-72. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to impose an annual user charge, as defined
in § 226-71, on all domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional and
governmental users of the sewer system of the City of East Orange, which
sewage contributed to such system and flowing therein is collected and
treated by said Joint Meeting.
§ 226-73. User charges.
A. All residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental
users shall be charged at a uniform rate per dwelling unit for domestic
waste contributed to said system. In the case of commercial, industrial
or multifamily residential units, the charge shall be based upon
equivalent dwelling units.
B. The following table shall be the basis for said charges:
Schedule of Dwelling Units
Type of User
Equivalent Dwelling
Units
Single-family dwelling 1
Multifamily dwellings:
First family 1
Each additional family 1
Hotel, motel, rooming or lodging
property:
§ 226-71 CHARTER § 226-73
C:1177
Schedule of Dwelling Units
Type of User
Equivalent Dwelling
Units
First 5 rooms 2
Each additional room 3/4
Wholesale, retail or service business:
With 5 or fewer employees 1
Each employee over 5 0.2
Restaurant, tavern or soda fountain:
With accommodation for 30 or fewer
patrons
4
Each accommodation over 30 0.1
Professional or office building: 1
Additional charge for each tenant and
employee of tenant
0.2
All municipal buildings: 1
Each employee 0.2
Schools:
Per pupil as of September enrollment 0.01
Hospitals:
Per bed 0.6
Nursing, rest or convalescent home:
Per bed 0.4
Industrial domestic use:
Per unit of 30,000 gallons quarterannually
1
All other uses not specifically set forth
herein shall be charged on the basis of
charges for industrial domestic use.
C. Domestic use or waste is hereby defined to be domestic wastewater
from sanitary conveniences.
D. Industrial waste contributors.
(1) User charges for industrial waste shall be charged industrial waste
contributors who discharge industrial waste into the system. User
charges for industrial waste shall be based upon the flow,
suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand of the waste as
determined by the Joint Meeting. Sampling and measurement shall
be accomplished by each industrial discharger at its own expense,
and the results thereof shall be monitored by the Joint Meeting
§ 226-73 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-73
C:1178
§ 226-74. Assessment and collection of charges; interest; lien.
staff. Where deemed necessary by the Joint Meeting, permanent
measurement and sampling facilities shall be installed by the
industrial user at its own expense.
(2) The rate of charges shall be determined annually by resolution of
the Joint Meeting. For the first year of operation of the secondary
treatment facilities, the Joint Meeting shall make an estimate of the
rate of charges based upon the results of an industrial cost
recovery/heavy metals survey and shall embody the estimated first
year of operation charges in a resolution to be adopted.
(3) User charges for industrial waste shall be assessed only where
sampling and testing show that industrial waste from a particular
industrial waste contributor exceeds 2,000 gallons per day or
where the suspended solids contribution exceeds 50 pounds per
day or where the biochemical oxygen demand contribution exceeds
50 pounds per day.
E. The cost of sampling and testing by the Joint Meeting, as referred to in
Subsection D(1) and (3) herein, shall be assessed against each
industrial waste contributor on the basis of the actual cost thereof.
F. "Industrial waste" is hereby defined to be nondomestic wastewater
resulting from industrial processing and manufacturing, and including
cooling water discharge.
G. Where an industry has both domestic wastes and industrial wastes and
said wastes are commingled and so discharged into the sewer system,
the industrial waste charge as set forth in Subsection D(1) herein shall
apply. Any industry may, at its option and at its own cost and expense,
separate its industrial waste from its domestic waste and provide
separate connections to the municipal sewer system for each such type
of waste. If an industry exercises this option of separation of wastes as
herein set forth, the schedule of dwelling units as set forth in
Subsection B shall be applicable to its domestic waste flow, and the
rates set forth in Subsection D(1) herein shall be applicable to its
industrial waste flow and use.
H. User charges shall be determined annually by resolution of the Joint
Meeting and shall be based upon actual usage for the preceding year.
However, for the first year of operation of the joint truck sewer system,
said user charges shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
operation thereof and shall be set forth in a resolution to be adopted by
the Joint Meeting.
A. All charges established and provided for herein shall be assessed
against the owners of the property from which said sewage or
wastewater emanates, respectively, and shall be collected annually by
the City of East Orange.
§ 226-73 CHARTER § 226-74
C:1179
§ 226-75. Determination of number and classification of users.
For the purpose of determining said user charges, the number and
classification of all users of said sewage system shall be made by the City
of East Orange. Said determination shall be subject to audit, review and
redetermination by the Joint Meeting.
§ 226-76. When charges due and payable.
The user charge referred to herein shall be due and payable from and after
the first day of January following the completion of the secondary treatment
facilities by the Joint Meeting.
§ 226-77. Compliance with statutory provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article and the Federal Water
Pollution Act of 1972 requiring the imposition of user charges as defined
herein, as set forth in said Act and as provided for in the rules and
regulations of EPA, and without intending to interfere with or contravene
the provisions and requirements of the imposition of said user charges as
herein and therein defined, it is the express intention of the City of East
Orange to adhere to and comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:63-116,
providing for "annual expenses: estimated and apportioned; additional
expenses if necessary," in order that the Joint Meeting may thereby be
enabled to continue and perform its normal functions.
B. Such charges shall draw the same interest from the time they become
due as taxes upon real estate in the municipality and shall be a lien
upon the premises until paid, and the municipality shall have the same
remedies for the collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties,
as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
C. All sums collected under the terms of this article shall be applied by the
City of East Orange for reimbursement of such sums advanced by it to
the Joint Meeting as the result of estimates made and assessments
levied by said Joint Meeting for the cost of operation and maintenance
of the joint trunk sewer and treatment works, including appurtenances,
as set forth in § 226-77 hereof.
§ 226-74 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-77
C:1180
ARTICLE VI
Industrial Cost Recovery Charges for Construction of Facilities
§ 226-78. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGE — The recovery from industrial
users of the treatment works of the federal grant portion of the cost of
construction of the treatment works allocable to the treatment of waste
contributed by such users, as defined in the federal statutes and
regulations. The portion allocable to each user shall be payable in equal
annual installments in the sum of 1/30 of said portion for a period of 30
years, after which said payments shall cease and come to an end.
JOINT MEETING — The municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union and
the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926, as
amended and supplemented, in the matter of a joint outlet and trunk sewer
and treatment plant for the sewage emanating from said municipalities.
§ 226-79. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to impose an industrial cost recovery charge,
as defined in § 226-78, on all industrial users of the Joint Meeting system
and to provide for the collection of said charges.
§ 226-80. Assessment of annual charge.
A. An annual minimum industrial cost recovery charge shall be assessed
against all industrial waste contributors discharging industrial wastes
into the system in the sum of $100, unless said industrial waste
contributor is subject to a greater charge under the terms of this
article.
B. The annual industrial cost recovery charge shall be a fixed cost per
million gallons of flow, a fixed cost per pound for suspended solids and/
or a fixed cost per pound of biochemical oxygen demand, as shown
following:
Flow $240 per 1,000,000 gallons
BOD $85 per pound of BOD
SS $75 per pound of SS
C. Industries which on any day exceed a flow of 2,000 gallons or 20 pounds
per day of five-day biochemical oxygen demand or 20 pounds per day of
suspended solids shall, on a quarterly basis, report said flow, five-day
§ 226-78 CHARTER § 226-80
C:1181
§ 226-81. Installation of monitoring facilities.
The Joint Meeting, at its option, may require an industry to install metering
and monitoring facilities at the expense of the industry involved for the
purpose of obtaining representative samples of an industry's wastewater
contribution to the Joint Meeting system.
§ 226-82. Entry and access to industrial facilities.
§ 226-83. Exemption from charges.
Industries whose sole flow consists of the discharge from sanitary
conveniences are exempt from industrial cost recovery charges upon
satisfactorily demonstrating to the Joint Meeting that they qualify as a
nonprocess dry industry.
§ 226-84. New industrial users subject to charges.
New industrial users which commence operations after the start of the
industrial cost recovery system shall also be subject to industrial cost
recovery charges, reduced by the ratio of the capacity used, multiplied by
the ratio of its period of use remaining, to the total cost recovery period of
30 years.
biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids concentration to the
Joint Meeting for the purpose of determining the annual cost recovery
charge for said industry. Said reports shall be filed on January 1, April
1, July 1 and October 1 of each year. The Joint Meeting shall establish
uniform regulations for sampling and analyses.
D. The Joint Meeting, at its option, may elect to sample and analyze the
contribution from any industry to verify the quarterly reports
submitted.
E. All tests shall be performed in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater at the
time tests are made.
A. Entry and access to all industrial facilities for the purposes of
monitoring and sampling an industry's discharge shall be granted by
the industry to the authorized representatives of the Joint Meeting or its
duly authorized agents.
B. The Joint Meeting may monitor and sample an industry or industries
without prior warning for the purpose of determining the contributions
of flow, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids so that it may
compute any industry's share of the industrial cost recovery charge.
C. Entry to premises and monitoring referred to herein shall be as
provided in the Federal Water Pollution Act of 1972.
§ 226-80 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-85
C:1182
§ 226-85. Discontinuance by industry of use of treatment works.
Discontinuance by an industry of its use of the treatment works shall relieve
said industry of further industrial cost recovery charges, unless use thereof
is thereafter resumed. The remaining industries shall not be required to
assume the portion of the industrial cost recovery charge unrecovered due
to said discontinuance.
§ 226-86. Appeal of charges; hearing.
Appeal from the industrial cost recovery charge involving the
reasonableness of the allocations and cost recovery assessments shall be
made in writing by an industry affected, by notice to the Executive Director
of the Joint Meeting, by sending said notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The Joint Meeting shall give said industry notice of a hearing on
said appeal at least 10 days before the date thereof. The Joint Meeting shall
determine said appeal within 90 days after the date of said hearing. Notice
of said determination shall be forwarded to said industry by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
§ 226-87. Cost of expansion of collection and treatment system.
In the event that the sewage collection system or the treatment works of the
Joint Meeting are expanded in the future, the respective industrial user's
share for such expansion shall be subject to a cost recovery charge for
the cost of said expansion, to be calculated both as herein provided and
as provided in the Water Pollution Act of 1972. The total industrial cost
recovery charge shall thereupon be adjusted for each industrial user.
§ 226-88. When charges due and payable.
All industrial cost recovery charges shall become due and payable on the
first day of February, May, August and November of each year on a quarterannual
basis and shall be paid to the City of East Orange. The annual charge
to each industrial user shall be determined by the Joint Meeting. Said City
of East Orange shall remit said sums collected to the Joint Meeting within
30 days after they become due and payable.
§ 226-89. Effective date of charges.
The industrial cost recovery charges provided for herein shall become due
and payable from and after the first day of January following the completion
by the Joint Meeting of the secondary treatment plant.
§ 226-90. Construal of provisions.
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, it is the
intention of this article that any reference to treatment works, treatment
system or treatment plant shall be construed to refer to a public sewage
treatment plant and shall mean any structure or structures by means of
which domestic or industrial wastes are subjected to any artificial process
§ 226-85 CHARTER § 226-90
C:1183
in order to remove or so alter constituents as to render the wastes less
offensive or dangerous to the public health, comfort or property of any of
the inhabitants of this state before the discharge of the plant effluent into
any waters of this state.
§ 226-91. Enforcement regulations.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article and the rules
and regulations of the Joint Meeting relating thereto, the Joint Meeting
operating said public sewage treatment plant shall:
§ 226-92. Civil action for injunctive relief.
If any person, corporation or municipality violates any of the provisions of
this article or rules and regulations promulgated by the Joint Meeting, the
Joint Meeting may institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive
relief to prohibit or prevent such violations, and the Court may proceed in
the action in a summary manner.
§ 226-93. Violations and penalties.
In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this article, said
violator shall be subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:11-55.
§ 226-94. Applicability.
This article is intended to apply solely to industrial users for all industrial
waste contributed by them to the Joint Meeting collection and treatment
system.
A. Require that any person, corporation or municipality desiring to make
any sewage connection or to discharge or continue to discharge sewage
which includes or consists of industrial wastes into such public sewage
treatment plant make application therefor in writing on forms provided
by said Joint Meeting.
B. Adopt rules and regulations setting forth the information required to be
stated in the application therefor in order to provide full information as
to the quantity, character and composition of any sewage which may be
discharged into the public sewage treatment plant and establishing
requirements and procedures for prompt amendment of said
application in the event of significant changes in the quantity, character
or composition of such sewage.
C. Make or cause to be made inspection of the discharging facilities of any
person, corporation or municipality who may be discharging sewage or
permitting sewage to be discharged into sewerage systems under the
jurisdiction of the Joint Meeting.
§ 226-90 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-94
C:1184
ARTICLE VII
Rules and Regulations; Enforcement
[Added 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 37-1985]
§ 226-95. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Rules and Regulations of the Joint Meeting adopted on December 20,
1984, and as same are modified from time to time, are hereby adopted as
if fully set forth herein as rules and regulations governing the municipal
sewer facilities as well as the Joint Meeting facilities.
§ 226-96. Enforcement procedures.
A. Whenever the Joint Meeting finds that any person (as defined in said
rules and regulations) has violated or is violating this article or any
prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the Joint
Meeting may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days,
for the satisfactory correction thereof.
B. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the Joint Meeting
may order any person who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge
to show cause before the Joint Meeting and City of East Orange why
service should not be terminated. A notice shall be served on the
offending party, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by
the Joint Meeting and City of East Orange regarding the violation and
directing the offending party to show cause before the Joint Meeting
and City of East Orange why an order should not be made directing the
termination of services. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
at least 10 days before the hearing.
C. The Joint Meeting and City of East Orange may itself conduct the
hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or
any officer or employee to:
(1) Issue, in the name of the Joint Meeting and City of East Orange,
notice of the hearing, requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in any such hearing.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts/records and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Joint Meeting and City of East Orange for
action thereof.
D. At any public hearing, testimony taken before the Joint Meeting and
City of East Orange or any person designated by it must be under oath
and recorded either by the hearing officer in a summary manner or
§ 226-95 CHARTER § 226-96
C:1185
§ 226-97. Violations and penalties.
stenographically. In the latter case, the transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public upon payment of the usual
charges therefor. After the Joint Meeting and City of East Orange have
reviewed the evidence, they may issue an order to the party responsible
for the discharge, directing that, following a specified time period,
the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated, and such
further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate.
E. Any discharge in violation of the substantive provisions of this article or
an order of the Joint Meeting shall be considered grounds for legal
action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes into the treatment facilities contrary to the substantive
provisions of this article or any order of the Joint Meeting, the
Executive Director of the Joint Meeting shall commence an action for
injunctive relief and appropriate legal damages in the Superior Court of
the respective county.
F. The Joint Meeting and/or City of East Orange may suspend the
wastewater treatment service (and/or the nondomestic wastewater
discharge permit) when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of
the Joint Meeting and/or City of East Orange, in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, causes interference to the publicly owned treatment
works or causes the Joint Meeting and/or City of East Orange to violate
any condition of its NPDES permit.
G. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service (and/or the nondomestic wastewater discharge permit) shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure
of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Joint
Meeting and/or City of East Orange shall take such steps as are deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the publicly owned treatment works
system or endangerment to any individuals. The Joint Meeting and/or
City of East Orange shall reinstate (the nondomestic wastewater
discharge permit and/or) the wastewater treatment service upon proof
of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written
statement submitted by the discharger describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the Joint Meeting and/or City of East
Orange within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
A. Any person who is found to have violated an order of the Joint Meeting
and/or the City of East Orange or who willfully or negligently fails to
comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$2,000, 90 days' imprisonment and/or 90 days of community service for
§ 226-96 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-97
C:1186
each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense.306
B. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Joint Meeting and City
of East Orange may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs,
court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate
suit at law against the person(s) found to have violated this article or
the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder.
C. In addition, also, to the penalties previously provided herein, the Joint
Meeting and its tributary municipalities may recover reasonable costs
expended to rectify damages to its treatment facilities and tributary
sewers as well as to rectify treatment process problems caused as a
result of violations of this article.
306. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-97 CHARTER § 226-97
C:1187

Part 4
[Adopted 7M-2i0s-c1e9ll9a2neBoyuOs rFde.e Ns;o V. i1o5la-1ti9o9n2s; AAnmde Pnedneadl tIine sIts Entirety
11-8-1993 By Ord. No. 6-1993]
ARTICLE VIII
Fees and Penalties
§ 226-98. Fees enumerated.307
Miscellaneous fees associated with this chapter shall be as follows:
Item Fee
Copies of City maps (8 1/2 inches by 11
inches)
$1.00
Copies of City maps (8 1/2 inches by 14
inches)
$1.50
Copies of maps (24 inches by 36 inches/ 42
inches by 36 inches)
$5.00
Sanborn Maps (11 inches by 17 inches) $5.00
Copies of deeds
Up to 4 pages $2.00
More than 4 pages $0.50/page
Copies of house connections $1.00/page
Copies of Tax Maps
Small 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches and 8 1/
2 inches by 14 inches)
$4.00
Large (11 inches by 17 inches and 24
inches by 36 inches)
$6.00
Copies of blueprints, Xerox, etc. $4.00
Searches (assessment) $20.00
Searches (continuation) $10.00
Flood certification letters $10.00
Plans and specifications $75.00 (nonrefundable)
Storm and sanitary sewer maps (24 inches
by 35 inches)
$5.00 each
Monument maps $6.00 each
Vertical and horizontal control sheet $1.00 each
Postage $8.00/order
Digital Map Data
Parcel map layer files $25.00/layer
307. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-98 CHARTER § 226-98
C:1189
Item Fee
Planimetric map layer files $25.00/layer
Topographic map layer files $25.00/layer
Water, storm and sanitary sewer map
layer files
$25.00/layer
Fire hydrant location layer files $25.00/layer
Thematic map layer files $25.00/layer
§ 226-99. Penalties.308
The penalty schedule for failure to follow the requirements of articles
specified herein shall be as follows:
A. For unauthorized connections made to the sanitary or storm sewerage
conveyance system: fine, $2,500
B. For failure to obtain a permit prior to working on any East Orange
sewer: fine, $250.
C. For failure to have sewer work inspected prior to closure of trench: fine,
$400 for each location.
308. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-98 EAST ORANGE CODE § 226-99
C:1190
Chapter 230
SMOKE-FREE AIR
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ENCLOSED AREA — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter wall of a structure.
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — Shall include all structures owned, leased,
rented and/or operated by the City of East Orange and/or occupied by City
employees and used for official business of the City of East Orange.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Shall include all public parks,
playgrounds and ball fields publicly owned or leased by the City of East
Orange and all property owned or leased by the City of East Orange upon
which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where
individuals gather for recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to
such facilities, including, but not limited to, any parking area, driveway or
drive aisle.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of, a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
§ 230-2. Prohibition of smoking in public places; signs.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all municipal buildings as defined
herein. No-smoking signs or the international no-smoking symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at each municipal building
entrance and within each closed area where smoking is prohibited by
this chapter. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall
contain letters or a symbol which contrast in color with the sign,
indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The sign shall also
indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited within a fifty-foot radius of the entrances of
all municipal buildings. No-smoking signs or the international nosmoking
symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its
cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted
both on the building and in locations to provide adequate notice to the
public that smoking is prohibited by this chapter. The signs shall be
clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol which
contrast in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited
§ 226-99 CHARTER § 230-2
C:1191
§ 230-3. Enforcement.
The enforcement authority of this chapter shall be the Police Department,
Fire Department, Recreation Department, Public Works Department and
Health Department of the City of East Orange.
§ 230-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $250 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense
and $1,000 for each subsequent offense. Any municipal employee found in
violation of this chapter may also be subject to discipline in accordance with
the provisions of the City of East Orange policies and procedures.
§ 230-5. Rental housing and condominiums.
therein. The sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
The "within" prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to
designated smoking areas. The designated smoking area at the specific
municipal buildings shall be determined and designated by the City
Administrator after consultation with the Chief of the Fire Department
and the Director of the Department of Public Works. "Designated
Smoking Area" signs shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously
posted in all areas exempt from this subsection.
C. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities
owned or leased by the City of East Orange and all property owned or
leased by the City of East Orange upon which the public is invited or
upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather for
recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities,
including, but not limited to, any parking area, driveway or drive aisle,
which have been designated with no-smoking signs. No-smoking signs
or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by this chapter. The
signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or a
symbol which contrasts in color with the sign, indicating that smoking
is prohibited at the designated area. The sign shall also indicate that
violators are subject to a fine.
D. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered to the City of East
Orange.
A. Smoking policy.
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, unless the context
otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following
meanings:
§ 230-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 230-5
C:1192
SMOKING — Any person carrying or having in one's possession
a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or other object giving off tobacco
smoke.
(2) Smoking policy disclosure. A landlord who, or other person who, on
behalf of a landlord, enters into a lease or tenancy at will
agreement for residential premises that are used by a tenant or will
be used by a potential tenant as a primary residence shall provide
to the tenant or potential tenant a smoking policy disclosure that
notifies tenants or potential tenants of the landlord's policy
regarding smoking on the premises.
(3) Notification. A landlord who, or other person who, on behalf of a
landlord, enters into a lease or tenancy at will agreement for
residential premises shall provide written notice to a tenant or
potential tenant regarding the allowance or prohibition of smoking
on the premises. The notice must state whether smoking is
prohibited on the premises, allowed on the entire premises or
allowed in limited areas of the premises. If the landlord allows
smoking in limited areas on the premises, the notice must identify
the areas on the premises where smoking is allowed. A landlord
who, or other person who, on behalf of a landlord, enters into a
lease or tenancy at will agreement for residential premises shall, on
a form prescribed by the Department of Health of the City of East
Orange, notify a tenant or potential tenant of the smoking policy.
The disclosure form must include an acknowledgement that the
tenant or potential tenant has received the disclosure form
required by this subsection. Before a tenant or potential tenant
enters into a contract or pays a deposit to rent or lease a property,
the landlord or other person who acts on behalf of a landlord shall
provide the disclosure form to the tenant or potential tenant, obtain
the tenant's or potential tenant's signature on the disclosure form
and sign the disclosure form. The Department of Health of the City
of East Orange shall post and maintain the disclosure form
required by this subsection on a publicly accessible website in a
format that is easily downloaded.
(4) Penalty. A person who violates this section commits a civil violation
for which a fine of not more than $250 per violation may be
assessed. This subsection is enforceable in the Municipal Court of
the City of East Orange.
§ 230-5 CHARTER § 230-5
C:1193
Chapter 238
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
Excavations — See Ch. 142.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Outdoor activities — See Ch. 188.
Vehicles and traffic generally — See Ch. 260.
§ 230-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 230-5
C:1194
ARTICLE I
General Use
§ 238-1. Vehicles on sidewalks. [Amended 7-17-1972 by Ord. No.
18A-1972]
§ 238-2. Curb jumping. [Amended 7-17-1972 by Ord. No. 18A-1972]
§ 238-3. Mixing mortar in streets.
No mortar or other building material in which water is an ingredient shall
be mixed or retained in any street or public place in anything except a
watertight receptacle.
§ 238-4. Placement of signs, posters or other fixtures. [Amended
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
No sign, poster, device or other fixture shall be placed upon any telephone
pole, traffic controller cabinet or affixed to any signal box or any fixture
or appurtenance thereto or to any lamppost. No such sign, poster, device
or other fixture shall be affixed to any tree located on any street or public
place. No signs or posters shall be permitted to be placed in the municipal
right-of-way. The beneficiary of such advertising shall be held fully
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to carelessly or recklessly operate or
permit to be so operated the following vehicles upon the public
sidewalks, alleyways or other ways dedicated to the public use,
excluding roadways:
(1) Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, minibike, trail bike, dune buggy,
motor scooter, Jeep or other form of transportation propelled by
internal-combustion engine.
(2) Any bicycle or other manually propelled vehicle, except a tricycle
or other manually propelled vehicle not likely to cause personal
injury to pedestrians or any person lawfully upon such public ways,
provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
snow removal equipment, baby carriages or invalid chairs.
B. Any person in violation of this section shall be issued a uniform traffic
summons, which shall be used as the complaint form for this violation,
except that, in the case of a juvenile, the matter shall be referred to the
appropriate court.
A. No person shall cause, permit or suffer any motor vehicle to cross any
curb on any City street except where such curb has been cut or lowered
in compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter or other City
ordinances.
B. Any person in violation of this section shall be issued a uniform traffic
summons, which shall be used as the complaint form for this violation.
§ 238-1 CHARTER § 238-4
C:1195
responsible for the placement of the sign or poster and shall be treated as
if they placed same.
§ 238-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-4
C:1196
ARTICLE II
Handcart Vehicles
§ 238-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
HANDCART VEHICLES — All wheeled carts propelled by human power
which are commonly used as a means of conveyance for merchandise, goods
and chattels.
LOT — Any vacant land, plot or curtilage, wholly or in part, whether there is
thereon a building in whole or in part, said building having been abandoned
and not legally occupied.[Added 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 54-1972]
OWNER — Every person who uses handcart vehicles or who permits or
suffers handcart vehicles under his control to be used by others.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
driveway, sidewalk or crosswalk, and every class of road, square, place or
municipal parking lot used by the public.
§ 238-6. Abandonment unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or employee to leave or
abandon or to suffer or permit to be left or abandoned any handcart vehicle
owned by him or in his possession, custody or control, upon any street in
this City.
§ 238-7. Identification. [Amended 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 54-1972]
An identification tag containing the name of the owner shall be permanently
secured to each handcart vehicle.
§ 238-8. Removal and impoundment. [Amended 12-27-1972 by Ord.
No. 54-1972; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Director of Public Works shall remove or cause to be removed any
handcart vehicle found unattended or abandoned upon any street or lot
and shall take and impound the same or cause the same to be taken and
impounded and shall thereafter dispose of the same as provided in this
article.
§ 238-9. Redemption of impounded vehicles; sale of unclaimed
vehicles. [Amended 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 54-1972; 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986309]
Whenever the Director of Public Works shall take and impound or cause to
be taken and impounded any handcart vehicle, he shall send or cause to be
sent a notice by ordinary mail to the owner thereof if there is identification
309. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-5 CHARTER § 238-9
C:1197
of the owner on such vehicle, advising that such property is held by the
Director of Public Works and that the property may be redeemed within
five days at a rate of $250 per cart. If the same is not redeemed within 10
days after the date of mailing of such notice or within five days after the
same has been taken and impounded where there is no identification of the
owner on such vehicle, the Director of Public Works shall sell such vehicle
or cause the same to be sold as provided by law. Such five-day periods shall
be exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 238-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-9
C:1198
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)310
§ 238-10. (Reserved)
§ 238-11. (Reserved)
310. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Parades, as amended, was repealed 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
32-2005. See now Chapter 188, Outdoor Activities.
§ 238-10 CHARTER § 238-11
C:1199

ARTICLE IV
Obstructions and Encroachments
§ 238-12. Permit required; exceptions. [Amended 6-11-1984 by Ord.
No. 15-1984; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
No person shall place, construct, erect or maintain any obstruction or
encroachment, including but not limited to building materials, projections
from buildings, utility wires, canopies and vaults, on, over or under any
street, sidewalk or public place in the City without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Director of Public Works.
§ 238-13. Deposit required; application fee. [Amended 9-12-1983 by
Ord. No. 32-1983; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
§ 238-14. Conditions of permit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
Permits for obstructions or encroachments shall be issued upon such
conditions as the Director of Public Works shall deem necessary for the
protection of the public health and safety. Such conditions shall be specified
in the permit.
§ 238-15. Term of permit; revocation. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord.
No. 25-1986]
Permits for obstructions or encroachments shall be issued for such periods
of time as shall be specified in the permit by the Director of Public Works,
provided that all such permits shall be subject to revocation not more than
A. No permit required by the preceding section shall be issued for any
such encumbrance unless the person making the application therefor
shall deposit with the Collector of Taxes $0.50 for each square foot of
surface of the street, sidewalk or crosswalk or other public place to be
so obstructed, provided that no permit shall be issued upon a deposit of
less than $20. The deposit shall, at the expiration of the time for which
the permit was granted and upon the certificate of the Director of
Public Works that the street, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public place
has been cleared and restored to its previous condition, be returned to
the applicant upon his demand. In case the party to whom the permit is
granted fails to comply with all the conditions thereof, the Director of
Public Works may clear and restore the street to its previous condition,
and the cost therefor shall be charged against the deposit.
B. In addition to such deposit, the party applying for a permit shall first
pay to the Collector of Taxes a nonrefundable permit fee of $0.10 for
each square foot of surface of the street, sidewalk or crosswalk or other
public place to be so obstructed and obtain a written receipt therefor,
which receipt the applicant shall present to the Director of Public
Works when applying for such permit.
§ 238-12 CHARTER § 238-15
C:1201
30 days after notice of such revocation. Such permits may be revoked for
cause by the Director of Public Works or by the City Council.
§ 238-16. Warning devices. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
Between sunset and sunrise, warning lights of a nature and in such number
as shall be specified by the Director of Public Works shall be placed on all
temporary obstructions and encroachments and on such other obstructions
and encroachments as the Director of Public Works shall specify.
§ 238-17. Minimum height above streets and sidewalks.
No awning, canopy or other encroachment over a sidewalk shall be less
than seven feet above the surface of the sidewalk. No encroachment over a
street shall be less than 16 feet above the surface of the street.
§ 238-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-17
C:1202
ARTICLE IVA
Public Pay Telephones
[Added 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 17-1992; amended in its entirety
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 5-1997]
§ 238-17.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of East Orange.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person responsible for placing or maintaining a pay
telephone.
PAY TELEPHONE — Any self-service or coin- or credit-card-operated
telephone.
PERSON — An individual, business, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The full width of any sidewalk, street, alley,
roadway or parkway dedicated to public use for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
§ 238-17.2. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, own or operate a pay
telephone that does not comply with the standards set forth hereinafter.
§ 238-17.3. Commission agreement and permit required; permit
fee; indemnification and insurance.
A. No person shall install, place or maintain any pay telephone upon or
above the public right-of-way without having first:
(1) Entered into a commission agreement with the City for use of the
City's public right-of-way.
(2) Obtained a permit as provided in this article. Permits shall be
issued by the Division of Licensing, subject to approval of a
construction permit by the Director of Property Maintenance and
approval of the location of the telephone by the Director of Public
Works.
B. The permit required by this article shall be in addition to any permits
required pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-11 et seq.
C. Permits shall be issued on an annual basis for the period January 1
through December 31 (or for the remainder of the calendar year in
which the permit is issued). Permits or denial thereof, with reasons set
forth in the event of denial, shall be issued within 30 working days of
the application for such permits.
§ 238-17.1 CHARTER § 238-17.3
C:1203
§ 238-17.4. Information and emergency calls; telephone rates to be
posted.
D. Prior to installation, a plan or sketch of the pay telephone shall be
prepared by the applicant and furnished to the Director of Public Works
in sufficient detail to describe the size, location, equipment and means
of installation.
E. The fee for a permit shall be $150 per phone for the first year and $75
per phone for each year thereafter.
F. Prior to receiving a permit, an applicant shall:
(1) Execute an indemnification agreement by which the applicant and
any other persons on whose behalf the application is made agree to
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of East Orange
against liability for all claims for damage to property or personal
injury arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
the control, maintenance, ownership or use of each pay telephone.
(2) File with the Department of Public Works evidence of a general
liability insurance policy of $1,000,000 for bodily injury and
$50,000 for property damage naming the City of East Orange as an
additional insured against any injury, loss or damage that may
result from placing or maintaining the pay telephone on or above
the public right-of-way.
A. Pay telephones shall allow the following calls to be placed without
charge:
(1) Calls to the 911 emergency service. However, when the pay
telephone can only access the 911 emergency service by use of a
dialing sequence other than 911, the telephone shall prominently
display on such instrument the appropriate dialing sequence to
access the 911 emergency service.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police
and Fire Departments.
(3) Calls for emergency purposes placed through operator assistance
to the Police and Fire Departments by members thereof.
(4) Calls to access 411 or "Information."
B. Distributors are required to post the current local coin call initial rates
and the charge for additional minutes on the pay telephone or on the
pay telephone booth in a place clearly visible to everyone using the pay
telephone.
C. Distributors are required to post the identity of the long distance
carrier and the information about how to make calls using other long
distance carriers on the pay telephone or on the pay telephone booth in
a place clearly visible to everyone using the pay telephone.
§ 238-17.3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-17.5
C:1204
§ 238-17.5. Standards for maintenance, installation and operation.
A. Pay telephones are required to comply with the following standards:
(1) No booth surrounding a telephone shall exceed eight feet in height,
four feet in width or four feet in depth.
(2) Each coin-operated pay telephone shall be equipped with a coinreturn
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure
an immediate refund if a call cannot be placed. The coin-return
mechanism shall be maintained in working condition at all times.
(3) Each pay telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place clearly visible
to everyone using the pay telephone, the name and address of the
owner and the telephone number of a working telephone service to
report a malfunction or secure a refund.
(4) Pay telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition
and in good repair at all times. All pay telephones shall be serviced
and maintained to ensure that:
(a) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof;
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon;
(c) Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably
free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discolorations;
(d) Any paper, cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading;
(e) The structural parts are not broken; and
(f) The telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
B. Distributors are required to comply with all applicable federal and state
laws and regulations regarding the use of pay telephones by disabled
persons and the hearing impaired.
C. All pay telephones shall be capable of being restricted to outgoing calls
only.
D. Distributors shall restrict pay telephones to outgoing calls only, upon
written request of the East Orange Chief of Police, or his designee,
setting forth the public safety and welfare reasons for the request. The
restriction shall be implemented by the distributor within 10 days of the
request. The owner shall immediately post on the pay telephone or the
telephone booth a written notice advising the public of that pay
telephone's inability to receive incoming calls.
§ 238-17.5 CHARTER § 238-17.5
C:1205
§ 238-17.6. Location and placement of pay telephones.
§ 238-17.7. (Reserved)311
E. Distributors shall remove the restrictions placed upon pay telephones
at the request of the East Orange Chief of Police, or his designee, and
upon notice to the East Orange City Council.
F. Distributors who fail to maintain their pay telephones in accordance
with this article shall receive a twenty-day written notice from the
Director of Inspection and Licensing or his designee to repair or
otherwise bring the pay telephone into compliance. The notice shall
contain the name and address of the distributor, the address at which
the violation occurred and a citation to the specific section of the article
violated. Distributors which fail to comply with the twenty-day notice
shall be subject to a fine as provided herein. Distributors shall also have
their permits revoked and receive a ten-day written notice to remove
the pay telephone. If the distributor fails to remove the pay telephone at
the end of the ten-day period, the telephone shall be removed by the
City of East Orange at the distributor's expense.
A. No pay telephone shall rest upon, in or over any street or sidewalk
when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any
legally parked or stopped vehicles;
(2) Impedes the ingress or egress from any residence or place of
business; or
(3) Interferes with the use of traffic signs, signals, hydrants or
mailboxes located at the location.
B. Pay telephones are required to be secured to prevent their being blown
onto any street or sidewalk but shall not be chained or otherwise
secured to any traffic or street signs, signals, hydrants, mailboxes or
any other fixture owned and controlled by the City of East Orange,
unless a separate lease agreement has been entered into.
C. Pay telephones are prohibited from being installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within three feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalks.
(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
(5) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
§ 238-17.5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-17.8
C:1206
§ 238-17.8. Existing pay telephones.
Distributors of such telephones shall have a period of 180 days after final
passage of this article to enter into a commission agreement with the City
and obtain the permits required by this article. Distributors who fail to
enter into a commission agreement and secure the permits shall remove the
telephone and associated equipment within 20 days. Failure to remove the
telephone and associated equipment shall result in a fine as provided herein
and removal of the telephone and associated equipment by the City of East
Orange at the owner's expense.
311. Editor's Note: Former § 238-17.7, Violations and penalties, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See § 238-76 for violations and
penalties applicable to this chapter.
§ 238-17.8 CHARTER § 238-17.8
C:1207

ARTICLE V
Suspended Street Decorations and Advertising
§ 238-18. Permit required. [Amended 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
32-1983; 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
No suspended street decorations or advertising shall be attached or affixed
to any building or other structure until a permit therefor has first been
secured from the Director of Public Works, nor shall any supporting strings,
lines, wires or other method of suspension be utilized for street decorations
or advertising without first securing a permit therefor from the Director of
Public Works.
§ 238-19. Application for permit.
§ 238-20. Recommendations of Director of Public Works; issuance
of permit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
If the Director of Public Works shall be satisfied, after examination of the
application for a permit under this article and attached diagram, that the
proposed installation can be made without endangering persons or property
and there is adequate provision by the applicant for the maintenance of
the same, then the Director of Public Works shall submit such application
to the City Council for its approval or disapproval, and if the City Council
shall determine, by resolution, that the proposed installation is in the public
interest, then a permit therefor shall be issued upon payment of the
required permit fee.
A. Applications for permits for suspended street decorations or
advertising shall be made on forms provided by the Director of Public
Works. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
B. The applicant shall provide information as to the dimensions, weight
and exact location of the installation proposed; the manner and type of
fixtures to be utilized therefor; the names and addresses of all persons
responsible for the installation, maintenance and removal of the same;
the name and address and telephone number of one person who shall
serve as agent for all interested parties, who may be contacted in case
of emergency where any condition constituting a hazard requires
attention so that immediate contact may be made at any time, including
nights and holidays; such information as to electrical installation and
insulation to assure the safety of the particular property and the
occupants who may be affected thereby and the general public utilizing
the public thoroughfare.
C. A sketch diagram of the private or public thoroughfare over which the
proposed installation will project shall be affixed to such application
form.
§ 238-18 CHARTER § 238-21
C:1209
§ 238-21. Fees. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The fee for a permit required by this article shall be as specified in Chapter
170, Licenses and Fees. For the purpose of determining such fee, a minor
installation shall be any installation which shall not be in existence for more
than seven days from the date of commencement to the date of removal and
shall be of such a minor character by weight and size and so installed that,
in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, there shall be no possible
hazard to persons or property sufficient to warrant protection in the public
interest as set forth in § 238-24. All other installations shall be deemed to
be major installations.
§ 238-22. Removal date to be specified.
Permits issued under this article shall specify a date on which the
installation or attendant material or refuse shall be removed by the
permittee.
§ 238-23. Consent of pole owners required in certain cases.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
No permit for attachment of suspended street decorations or advertising to
any public or private utility pole shall be issued until written consent of the
owner thereof shall be filed with the Director of Public Works.
§ 238-24. Bond and insurance requirements. [Amended 5-12-1986
by Ord. No. 7-1986]
§ 238-25. Minimum height above streets and sidewalks.
No supporting strings, lines or wires for suspended street decorations or
advertising shall be suspended at a height of less than 16 feet above the
surface of any street or sidewalk.
A. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit under this article,
the applicant or his duly authorized agent shall deposit with the City
Clerk a bond, in form approved by the Corporation Counsel, in the sum
of $5,000, to indemnify the City for any costs incurred or damage
inflicted by reason of the installation, maintenance or removal of such
suspended street decoration or advertising, along with the cost of
removal of any material or refuse caused thereby.
B. In addition, an insurance policy, in a form approved by the Corporation
Counsel, for public liability coverage with limits of $1,000,000 for each
accident and $500,000 for any personal injury as a result of any
accident and $500,000 property damage arising out of the installation,
maintenance, removal or any consequences thereof, shall be submitted
prior to securing approval of any such permit.312
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-21 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-26
C:1210
§ 238-26. Inspection; order to remove when hazard exists.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Director of Public Works or his duly authorized agent may inspect the
installation, manner of maintenance or manner of removal of any suspended
street decoration or advertising at any time. In the event he determines
that a hazard exists by reason of the same, he shall order immediate
correction of the condition causing the hazard, either by way of removal
of the installation or other safeguards. Except where the condition is so
emergent as to require immediate correction, he shall provide the permit
holder with written notice to correct the same within 48 hours, and any
failure to comply therewith after the expiration of 48 hours shall constitute
a violation of this article. Each day on which the condition shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation thereof.
§ 238-27. Removal by owners; failure to comply.
§ 238-28. Enforcement. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
Any failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this article or
the regulations or orders of the Director of Public Works issued pursuant to
this article shall constitute a violation of this article, and each day on which
the condition shall continue shall constitute a separate violation thereof.
The right of the City to proceed against the surety company shall not be
construed as being substituted for the right of the City to enforce this article
by proceeding directly against the persons committing violations thereof.
A. All suspended street decorations and advertising shall be removed by
the termination date set forth in the permit issued by the Director of
Public Works. In the event that they are not removed by such date, the
City may cause the same to be removed and may apply its cost against
the bond previously furnished. In the event that any material or refuse
remains after the removal, the cost of removing such material or refuse
shall be charged against the bond previously posted in a like manner.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
B. In the event that any person fails to remove such suspended street
decorations and advertising or any material or refuse therewith after
having been served with an order from the Director of Public Works to
do so in accordance with § 238-26, the City shall have the right to cause
the removal of the same, and the cost of removal and all costs therewith
shall be charged to the bond previously filed. [Amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986]
C. In addition, any fine levied against any person violating this article shall
be paid from the bond previously filed if such fine or any portion of the
same is unpaid.
§ 238-26 CHARTER § 238-28
C:1211

ARTICLE VI
Cutting or Lowering Curbs
[Amended 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983]
§ 238-29. Permit required. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
No person shall at any time construct, raise or lower any curb located on
any street or highway or any other public place within the City without
having previously secured a permit to do so. (See § 238-76 for violation and
penalty hereof.)
§ 238-30. Application for permit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
Any person desiring a permit required by § 238-29 shall file with the
Director of Public Works of the City an application therefor, signed by the
owner of the premises affected, upon which shall be stated the name and
address of the owner, a description of the premises sufficient to identify
the same and specifications or plans showing, as nearly as possible, the
exact point where it is desired that the curb shall be constructed, raised or
lowered.
§ 238-31. Issuance of permit; fee. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
All permits under this article shall be issued by the Director of Public Works,
who is hereby authorized to charge a nonrefundable permit fee of $0.50 for
each linear foot of curb to be constructed, raised or lowered for the issuance
of the same.
§ 238-32. Performance of work. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
The constructing, raising or lowering of curbs shall be performed in
accordance with regulations to be prescribed by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 238-33. Deposit requirement.
Upon the filing of any application for a permit under this article, the
applicant shall deposit with the Collector of Taxes the sum of $10 for each
linear foot of curb to be constructed, raised or lowered, provided that no
permit shall be issued upon a deposit of less than $20.
§ 238-34. Return of deposit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
Upon the certificate of the Director of Public Works that the work of
constructing, raising or lowering the curb as aforesaid has been performed
in a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the regulations adopted by
§ 238-29 CHARTER § 238-34
C:1213
the Director of Public Works and this chapter and other ordinances of the
City, the Collector of Taxes shall return the amount of the deposit to the
applicant upon demand. In the case where the party to whom the permit has
been granted fails to perform the work in the manner as stated above, the
Director of Public Works may perform or cause to be performed such work
as may be necessary to make the same satisfactory and in accordance with
the regulation as aforesaid, and the cost thereof shall be charged against
the deposit, and the balance, if any, shall be returned to the applicant upon
demand.
§ 238-34 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-34
C:1214
ARTICLE VII
Moving of Buildings
§ 238-35. Permit required. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
No house, building or other similar structure shall be moved into or through
any street in the City without a written permit therefor to be issued by the
Director of Public Works by authority of a resolution of the City Council.
§ 238-36. Application for permit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
No permit required by this article shall be issued until a written application
therefor shall have been approved by the Director of Public Works, Chief
Building Inspector and City Forester and filed with the Director of Public
Works, accurately designating the size of the building or similar structure
so to be moved, including the overall length, width and height, and the time
required to complete such moving. In such application, the applicant shall
agree to reimburse the City for all expenses incurred by the City for all
damages to City property resulting from the moving of such building and
shall agree that the Director of Public Works shall be the sole judge of the
amount of the bond provided for in § 238-39 after securing such information
as may be relevant from the Chief Building Inspector and the City Forester.
§ 238-37. Fees; prerequisite to issuance. [Amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986]
No permit required by this article shall be issued until the applicant shall
pay to the Director of Public Works $100 as a permit fee. No such permit
shall be issued until all real property taxes assessed against the premises
from which the building is to be moved are paid.
§ 238-38. Contents and conditions of permit.
Permits issued pursuant to this article shall specify the streets to be used,
shall limit the time in which such moving shall be effected and shall contain
such terms and conditions as may be provided by the City Council.
§ 238-39. Bond requirements. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
No permit required by this article shall be issued until a satisfactory bond
shall have been filed with the Director of Public Works, conditioned to
indemnify the City against every loss, expense, damage and liability by
reason of such moving or the granting of such permit.
§ 238-40. Damages and obstructions.
Neither the house, building or similar structure nor the apparatus used
in moving the same shall unreasonably obstruct any street or remain
§ 238-35 CHARTER § 238-40
C:1215
stationary nearer than 50 feet to any fire hydrant, and no roadbed,
pavement, curbing, tree or other public or private property shall be
disturbed or in any way damaged by such moving.
§ 238-41. Lights and warning devices.
During the hours between sunset and sunrise, every house, building or
similar structure being moved and the apparatus employed in moving the
same shall be adequately guarded by lights sufficient to notify and protect
the public.
§ 238-42. Work to be supervised by Director of Public Works.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
All work under this article shall be done under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works, provided that such supervision by the Director
of Public Works shall not relieve the applicant of the liability expressed in
this article, nor shall it be used as a defense against the payment of any
expenses or damage resulting from the moving of such building.
§ 238-40 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-42
C:1216
ARTICLE VIII
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 238-43. Definitions.
In any case where the premises abutting or bordering upon any street,
avenue or highway shall be occupied by a multiresidence, motel or hotel,
the word "occupant" shall be construed to mean the janitor or
superintendent or person having charge of such apartment house or hotel.
§ 238-44. Duty to remove.
It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee or occupant of any premises
abutting or bordering upon any street, avenue or highway in the City to
remove or cause to be removed all snow and ice from the sidewalk abutting
such premises to the full paved width of the sidewalk within 12 hours of
daylight after such snow or ice shall have fallen or accumulated thereon.
§ 238-45. Failure to remove. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
In the event of the failure of any owner, lessee or occupant to remove or
cause to be removed snow and ice from an abutting sidewalk within the
period of time specified in § 238-44, the City may remove or clean such snow
or ice or cause the same to be removed or cleaned and charge the cost
of such removal or cleaning against the premises abutting such portion of
sidewalk so cleaned or caused to be cleaned as aforesaid. Such cost shall
be certified in writing by the Director of Public Works to the Collector of
Taxes, and the same shall thereupon become and be a paramount lien upon
such premises, and it shall be added to, recorded and collected with and
in the same manner as the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such
premises.
§ 238-46. Enforcement.
The imposition and collection of any fine or penalty imposed for the violation
of this article shall not bar the right of the City to collect the cost of
the removal and cleaning of the snow and ice from the sidewalks as
hereinbefore specified, and such remedies shall be cumulative.
§ 238-43 CHARTER § 238-46
C:1217

ARTICLE IX
Sidewalk Construction and Repair; Specifications
§ 238-47. Duty to construct, repair and maintain.
Sidewalks within the City shall be constructed, reconstructed, repaired,
altered, relaid and maintained at the expense of the abutting landowners.
§ 238-48. Notice to construct or repair; contents. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
Upon advice by the Director of Public Works that there is need for sidewalks
to be constructed, reconstructed, repaired, altered, relaid or maintained
by the abutting landowners responsible therefor, the City Council may,
by resolution, designate the sidewalk to be constructed, reconstructed,
repaired, altered, relaid or maintained and shall, in each such resolution,
direct the Director of Public Works to serve notice upon the owner or
owners of all real estate affected thereby. The notice shall contain a
description of the property affected, sufficient to identify it, a description of
the work to be done and a statement that unless the owners complete the
same within 30 days after service thereof, the City will do the work at the
expense of the owners.
§ 238-49. Service or publication of notice.
A. The notice provided for in the preceding section shall be served upon all
owners residing in the City personally or by leaving the same at their
usual place of residence with a member of the family above the age of
14 years. In the case of infants and those who are wards, such notice
shall be served upon their guardians; when any real estate is held in
trust, upon the trustee; when held by joint tenants, tenants in common
or tenants by the entirety, upon any one such tenant. If the owner of any
such real estate is a nonresident of the City, the notice may be served
upon him personally or upon his agent in charge of the property or upon
the occupant thereof or mailed to the nonresident owner at his last
known post office address.313
B. If the owner is unknown or if for any reason service cannot be made as
hereinbefore directed, the notice shall be published in a newspaper
circulating in the City at least once and not less than 30 days before the
work is done by the City. Notices to the owner or owners of several
distinct parcels of real estate may be inserted in the same publication.
C. Proof by affidavit of service of such notices shall be filed within 10 days
thereafter with the Collector of Taxes, but failure to file such proofs
shall not invalidate the proceedings if service has been made as
hereinbefore provided.
313. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-47 CHARTER § 238-50
C:1219
§ 238-50. Failure to comply. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
In case the owners of subject real estate shall not comply with the
requirements of the notice provided for by § 238-48, the Director of Public
Works, upon filing due proof of service or publication of such notice with
the City Clerk, shall cause the required work to be done and paid for out of
money of the City available for that purpose.
§ 238-51. Record and assessment of costs. [Amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Director of Public Works shall keep an accurate account of the cost
of all work done under §§ 238-47 through 238-54 and shall assess such
cost upon such properties and file a report thereof under oath with the
City Clerk. The City Council shall examine such report and, if properly
made, confirm and file it with the Collector of Taxes, who shall record
such sidewalk assessments in the book in which other assessments of the
City are recorded. Before confirming the report, the City Council shall
give notice to the owners named therein of the time and place fixed for
examination of the report. The notice shall be served in the same manner as
required for service of notices before consideration by a governing body of a
municipality of assessments for benefits for local improvements, but failure
to give any such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
§ 238-52. Interest on assessments; lien on property.
Sidewalk assessments shall bear interest from the time of confirmation at
the same rate and with the same penalties for nonpayment as assessments
for local improvements in the City, and from the confirmation thereof shall
be a first and paramount lien upon the real estate assessed to the same
extent and be collected and enforced in the same manner as assessments
for local improvements. No such assessments shall be invalid by reason
of error in the statement or omission of the name of any owner of real
estate assessed or for any other informality where such real estate has been
actually improved.
§ 238-53. Obligation to inspect sidewalks.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner from
the obligation to inspect any sidewalk abutting his property, nor shall any
provision contained in this article be construed as an assumption by the City
of the obligation to inspect sidewalks.
§ 238-54. Curbing and guttering.
The City Council may provide for curbing or recurbing, guttering or
reguttering of a sidewalk in, upon or along a street, alley or other public
highway or portion thereof, at public expense, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq., anything herein to the
contrary notwithstanding.
§ 238-50 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-55
C:1220
§ 238-55. Flagstone sidewalks.
§ 238-56. Concrete sidewalks. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986314]
The ingredients of the concrete of every sidewalk shall be only portland
cement, clean sharp sand and clean broken stone or gravel. No cinders or
ashes shall be used in concrete. No concrete shall be used that does not
contain at least one part portland cement, two parts dry sand, three parts
dry stone, 1/2 part water. The parts are in terms of weight – not volume. Any
sand used shall be mortar or brick, sand washed and filtered, and all stone
shall be washed. All materials utilized shall be free of organic materials. All
concrete shall be air entrained. Air-entrainment shall be obtained by the use
of an approved air-entraining agent, added in the proper proportions so that
the percentage of air in the resultant concrete shall be not less than 3% nor
more than 6%. The percentage of air will be measured by the Director of
Public Works with an approved air meter. The minimum fc of the laid mat
shall be 3,000 psi.
§ 238-57. Expansion joint.315
Sidewalks shall be laid in sections containing not more than 25 square feet,
with open joints to provide against damage from expansion or contraction.
A one-half-inch expansion joint filler with nonextruding joint material
conforming to the American Society of Testing Materials specifications in
preformed expansion joint fillers in concrete shall be provided between all
new sidewalks and adjoining backs of curbs and adjoining old sidewalks and
between all new sidewalks and adjoining driveways and every 20 feet along
the length of all new sidewalks. New sidewalks in business districts shall be
separated from abutting buildings by a similar joint.
§ 238-58. Width and thickness; surface and slope.
A. All sidewalks hereafter laid, unless otherwise permitted by resolution of
the City Council for good cause shown, shall be of the best quality
bluestone flagging or of concrete.
B. The flagstones of every sidewalk of such construction shall be not less
than four feet by 2 1/2 feet in size and not less than two inches thick,
the four feet to be measured in the direction of the width of the walk.
The joints between the stones shall not be more than 3/8 of an inch in
width. The flags shall be laid on a bed not less than two inches in depth
of clean sharp sand and the joints filled with a mortar composed of one
part portland cement and two parts clean sharp sand.
A. All concrete walks shall be at least four feet wide and four inches in
thickness, except that portion of a sidewalk used as a driveway and the
driveway itself within the sidewalk area, which shall be at least six
314. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
315. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-55 CHARTER § 238-58
C:1221
§ 238-58.1. Permit required. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983;
amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
No person shall construct or reset sidewalks or driveways in any way for
any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining from the Director of Public
Works a permit therefor. (See § 238-76 for violation and penalty hereof.)
§ 238-58.2. Application for permit. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
Any person desiring a permit required by § 238-58.1 shall file with the
Director of Public Works of the City an application therefor, signed by the
owner of the premises affected, upon which will be stated the name and
address of the owner, a description of the premises sufficient to identify the
same, and specifications of plans showing, as nearly as possible, the exact
point where it is desired that the sidewalk or driveway shall be constructed
or reset.
§ 238-58.3. Issuance of permit; fee. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
32-1983; amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
All permits under this article shall be issued by the Director of Public Works,
who is hereby authorized to charge a nonrefundable permit fee of $0.25 for
each square foot of sidewalk or driveway to be constructed or reset for the
issuance of the same.
§ 238-58.4. Performance of work. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
32-1983; amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The construction or resetting of sidewalks or driveways shall be performed
in accordance with regulations to be presented by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 238-58.5. Deposit requirement. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
32-1983]
Upon the filing of any application for a permit under this article, the
applicant shall deposit with the Collector of Taxes the sum of $1 for each
square foot of sidewalk or driveway to be constructed or reset, provided
that no permit shall be issued upon a deposit of less than $20.
inches in thickness. All concrete walks shall have a rough surface finish,
and each section thereof shall be laid complete before any part of it has
set.
B. Every sidewalk shall have a slope toward the middle of the street not
exceeding 1/2 inch to one foot horizontal.
§ 238-58 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-58.6
C:1222
§ 238-58.6. Return of deposit. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
32-1983; amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
Upon the certificate of the Director of Public Works that the work of
constructing or resetting the sidewalk or driveway as aforesaid has been
performed in a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the regulations
adopted by the Director of Public Works and this chapter and other
ordinances of the City, the Collector of Taxes shall return the amount of
the deposit to the applicant upon demand. In case the party to whom the
permit has been granted fails to perform the work in the manner as stated
above, the Director of Public Works may perform or cause to be performed
such work as may be necessary to make the same satisfactory and in
accordance with the regulation as aforesaid, and the cost thereof shall be
charged against the deposit, and the balance, if any, shall be returned to the
applicant upon demand.
§ 238-58.7. Bond in lieu of deposit. [Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
32-1983; amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Director of Public Works may accept from an applicant for a permit
under this chapter, in lieu of the deposit required by this chapter, a bond
in amount and with surety satisfactory to the Director of Public Works,
conditioned for the payment by the applicant to the City, upon the written
demand of the Director of Public Works, of a sum sufficient to cover the cost
and expense to the City of supplying the necessary material and labor or of
otherwise providing for constructing or resetting or otherwise restoring, as
aforesaid, such sidewalk or driveway and of the cost of repairing any future
subsidence thereof in the event of such work being caused to be done, in
whole or in part, by the Director of Public Works. In the case of persons
who, in the ordinary course of their business, require permits from time to
time during a stated period, the Director of Public Works may accept, in lieu
of the deposit or bond required by this chapter for such permit, a general
bond in amount and with surety satisfactory to the Director of Public Works,
covering the work, in whole or in part, to be done under any and all permits
issued during such stated period and conditioned as aforesaid.
§ 238-58.8. Guarding and safety lights required. [Added 9-12-1983
by Ord. No. 32-1983]
All sidewalks shall be properly guarded or caused to be so guarded by the
permittee under this chapter and shall be provided with safety lights at
night from the time when the work shall be commenced until the work is
completed.
§ 238-58.6 CHARTER § 238-58.8
C:1223

ARTICLE X
Street Numbers
§ 238-59. Basis of numbering system.
All lands abutting on any public street shall be numbered on a basis of one
number for each 25 feet of street frontage.
§ 238-60. Streets running easterly and westerly.
The numbering on every public street running easterly and westerly shall
begin at the dividing line between the City of Newark and this City or at
the easterly terminus of such street. The northerly side of every such street
shall be numbered with even numbers and the southerly side thereof with
odd numbers.
§ 238-61. Streets running northerly and southerly to or across Main
Street.
The numbering on every public street running northerly and southerly to
or across Main Street shall begin at Main Street, and the easterly side of
every such street shall be numbered with even numbers and the westerly
side thereof with odd numbers. The section of every such street crossing
Main Street lying to the north thereof shall be designated by the name of
such street preceded by the word "north," and the section of such street
crossing Main Street lying to the south of Main Street shall be designated
by the name of such street preceded by the word "south."
§ 238-62. Streets running northerly and southerly not extending to
or across Main Street.
The numbering on every public street running northerly and southerly and
not extending to or across Main Street shall begin at the southerly terminus
of such street if it lies north of Main Street, and at the northerly terminus
of such street if it lies south of Main Street. The easterly side of every such
street shall be numbered with even numbers and the westerly side thereof
shall be numbered with odd numbers.
§ 238-63. Conspicuous display of numbers.
The owner of every building fronting on any street shall at all times keep
conspicuously displayed on the front thereof a street number, determined in
accordance with the provisions of this article, of such size as to be plainly
visible from the street.
§ 238-64. Numbers furnished by Director of Public Works.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Director of Public Works shall furnish to any person applying therefor
the correct numbers of any lands.
§ 238-59 CHARTER § 238-65
C:1225
§ 238-65. Temporary suspension of provisions.
The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, temporarily suspend
the operation of this article as to any street and for the period therein
specified.
§ 238-65 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-65
C:1226
ARTICLE XI
Use of Public Sidewalks for Sale or Display of Goods
[Added 6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 14-1984316]
§ 238-66. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEVERAGE — Includes all potable liquids.[Added 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
1-2018]
CITY — The City of East Orange.
FOOD — Includes raw, cooked, or processed edible substances, ice,
beverages, or ingredients used or intended for use or for sale in whole or
in part for human consumption, and chewing gum.[Added 2-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 1-2018]
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale or display regulated hereunder.
PERSONS — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations, their officers, agents and/or employees.
SALE — Includes, but is not limited to, sidewalk sales or a sale of property
which is advertised by a means whereby the public at large is or can be
made aware of the sale.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way, including but not limited
to the area from the curb of the street to the property line, as defined in the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Code, N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq.
§ 238-67. Use of public sidewalk for sale or display of goods.
[Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
1-2018]
A. With respect to goods, public sidewalks may be used for sales, art
displays or similar events, provided that persons sponsoring the event
submit to the Director of Public Works an application not less than 45
days prior to the sale, display or event for review and recommendation
prior to submission to the City Council for its approval, provided that
the person or persons submitting the application satisfy all criteria of
this chapter.
B. No person shall use any portion of any sidewalk or part of any public
street within the City of East Orange for the display and/or sale of food
and/or beverages, and no person shall permit any food and beverage
display to be or remain upon any portion of any sidewalk or part of any
public street in the City, save temporarily as set forth in the timespecific
display for mobile trucks.
316. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Art. XI, Penalties, as Art. XII.
§ 238-66 CHARTER § 238-68
C:1227
§ 238-68. Issuance and display of permit.
§ 238-69. Information to be filed. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
The following information shall be filed as part of the permit application
with the Director of Public Works pursuant to this article:
A. Permits shall be issued to any one person or persons only three times
within a twelve-month period, and no such permit shall be issued for
more than six consecutive calendar days.
B. Each permit or a certified copy issued under this article shall be
prominently displayed on the premises on which the sale or display is
conducted throughout the entire period of permitted sales.
C. A permit for the sale or display of goods on a public sidewalk shall be
issued only in areas zoned for business as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.317
D. No permit for the sale or display of goods on a public sidewalk shall be
issued where the usable width of the pedestrian sidewalk is less than
eight feet.
E. No permit for the sale or display of goods on a public sidewalk shall be
issued for the use of the pedestrian sidewalk adjoining a bus stop or a
pedestrian loading area where the usable pedestrian sidewalk is less
than 12 feet in width.
F. A clear passageway of no less than four feet for pedestrian traffic must
be maintained at all times.
G. At no time is the display of goods to be placed or located within five feet
of the curb.
H. The utilization of any curbside street hardware, such as streetlight or
traffic signal poles, sign poles, parking meters, trees, etc., for hanging
or display of pennants, goods, etc., is prohibited.
I. The size and placing of advertising signs shall be in conformance with
all applicable City ordinances and not in violation of the New Jersey
Motor Vehicle Code, N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq.
J. The use of any electrical or rotating advertising devices or flashing
lights is prohibited.
A. The name of the person conducting the sale or display and his address.
B. The name of the owner of the property on which the sale or display is to
be conducted and the consent, in writing, of the owner if other than the
applicant.
317. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 51, Land Use, Part 3, Zoning.
§ 238-68 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-69
C:1228
§ 238-70. Responsibilities of permit holder and owner of premises.
The person or persons to whom such permit is issued and the owner or
tenant of the premises on which such sale or display is conducted shall be
jointly and severally liable for the maintenance of good order and decorum
on the premises during all hours of the sale or display. No such person or
persons shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor
permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets or
interfere with the orderly passage of pedestrian traffic on sidewalks in the
area of such premises or cause any condition which would be hazardous
to pedestrians. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any
member of the Police Department or authorized agent of the City of East
Orange in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare and shall
return and restore the designated sidewalk area to its proper appearance,
free from litter and refuse, not later than one day after the sale or display.
§ 238-71. Hours of sale.
All sales or displays of goods shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. only.
C. The location at which the sale or display of goods is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of the sale or display.
E. The date and nature of any past sales or displays.
F. Any relationship or connection the applicant may have or had with any
other person or persons conducting a sale or display within the last 12
months prior to the application date.
G. Whether or not the applicant has been issued a vendor's license by any
governmental agency.
H. A sworn statement affirming the applicant's knowledge, understanding
and responsibilities as outlined in § 238-70.
I. The sponsoring organization shall include with its application the
following information:
(1) A list of its principal officers and their addresses.
(2) A list of members participating in the sale or display and their
addresses.
(3) A list of nonmembers participating in the sale or display and their
addresses.
(4) A list of the goods or merchandise to be offered for sale or display.
J. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information supplied is accurate and true to the best of his knowledge.
§ 238-69 CHARTER § 238-72
C:1229
§ 238-72. Fees.
The following nonrefundable fees are to be submitted prior to issuance of
the approved permit. Fees are to be in cash or certified check made payable
to the City of East Orange.
§ 238-73. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 238-74. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 1-2018318]
A. Sponsoring organization: $100.
B. Participating in a sponsoring organization sale, but nonmember of the
organization: $50.
C. Individual: $50.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale of an item or items of personal
property.
D. Merchants placing goods, wares and merchandise on sidewalks while
loading or unloading the same, provided that a passageway at least four
feet wide shall be maintained at all times, and that such goods, wares
and merchandise shall be removed from the sidewalk without
unreasonable delay.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to conduct a sale or display
of goods on a public sidewalk in the City of East Orange without first
obtaining an approved permit from the City and the payment of the
required fee.
B. Any person, association, corporation or organization conducting any
such sale or display of goods or similar activity without obtaining a
permit therefor or who shall violate any of the other terms and
regulations of this article shall have the merchandise or goods
immediately removed from the sidewalk and, upon conviction, be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, or imprisoned for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or both, for each violation of this article. Each day
that such sale shall continue without being duly licensed shall be
considered a separate violation.
318. Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this § 238-74 from "Unlawful act" to
its current title.
§ 238-72 EAST ORANGE CODE § 238-75
C:1230
§ 238-75. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the City of East
Orange. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his designated deputy
to investigate any violation of this article.
§ 238-75 CHARTER § 238-75
C:1231

ARTICLE XII
Penalties
§ 238-76. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980; amended 6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 14-1984; 2-22-1999 by
Ord. No. 4-1999]
A. Any violator of any of the provisions of this chapter, except as provided
in § 238-76B, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $1,000 or
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each
violation of this chapter.
B. Payment through Violations Bureau. If you wish to plead guilty of
violating or refusing to comply with § 238-29 or 238-58.1, respectively,
and give up your rights to have a lawyer and a trial, you may pay a fine
of $200 by bringing or mailing the summons together with payment
within 14 days of notice of violation to the Violations Bureau located at:
Violations Bureau
Municipal Court - East Orange
221 Freeway Drive
East Orange, New Jersey 07018
§ 238-76 CHARTER § 238-76
C:1233
Chapter 246
SWIMMING POOLS: FENCING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 246-1. Fencing of certain pools required.
Any swimming or wading pool, either permanently installed or portable or
collapsible, with the height of any sidewall more than 50% below grade,
which is or may hereafter be constructed, installed, placed, established or
maintained on any premises in the City, shall be surrounded by a fence,
wall or other enclosure with a height of no less than 48 inches and shall be
provided with a gate, which shall be kept latched or locked when such pool
contains water and is unattended for the purpose of effectively excluding
children or trespassers.
§ 246-2. Permit required. [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980]
No owner, operator or occupant of any premises shall maintain, operate,
use or permit the operation or use of any pool governed by the provisions
of § 246-1 without first securing a permit from the Public Officer, indicating
therein compliance with § 246-1. Applications for such permit shall be made
on forms supplied by the Public Officer and shall be accompanied by a
permit fee as provided for in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees.
Chapter 247
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rent control and conversions — See Ch. 218. Tenants' property tax rebate — See Ch. 251.
§ 238-76 EAST ORANGE CODE § 246-2
C:1234
ARTICLE I
Five-Year Tax Exemptions and Abatements
[Adopted 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 20-2008;319 amended in its
entirety 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 13-2011]
§ 247-1. Purpose.
The Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., was
enacted to consolidate the various five-year tax exemption and abatement
statutes enacted pursuant to Article VIII, Section 1, Paragraph 6 of the New
Jersey Constitution. The purpose of this article sets forth the procedures to
be followed by the City in consideration of all applications for the exemption
from or abatement of property taxes, and in the administration of all tax
exemption and/or abatement agreements as are authorized by the City
Council consistent with and pursuant to the Five-Year Exemption and
Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented
from time to time. The intent of said property tax exemptions and
abatements is to induce construction and rehabilitation of residential,
industrial and commercial facilities and to stabilize the economic base of
the City.
§ 247-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning
is intended:
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building
or structure thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to
applicable state law.
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — A portion or all of a
municipality which has been determined to be an area in need of
rehabilitation or redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
ASSESSOR — The officer of a taxing district charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part
thereof used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of
material or manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial,
commercial, retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or
warehousing purposes, or for any combination thereof. The governing
body must determine that said structure will tend to maintain or
provide gainful employment within the municipality, assist in the
economic development of the municipality, maintain or increase the tax
319. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 247, Tax Exemptions and
Abatements, adopted 6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995, which ordinance was originally
adopted as Ch. 247A, but was renumbered as Ch. 247, Art. I, to fit into the organizational
structure of the Code.
§ 247-1 CHARTER § 247-2
C:1235
base of the municipality, and maintain or diversify or expand commerce
within the municipality. It shall not include any structure, or part
thereof, used or to be used by any business relocated from another
qualifying municipality.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONDOMINIUM — A property created or recorded as a condominium
pursuant to the Condominium Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a commercial or industrial
structure, a new dwelling or multiple dwelling, or the enlargement of
the volume of any such structures by more than 30%. However, it shall
not mean the conversion of an existing building or structure to another
use.
CONVERSION — The alteration or renovation of a nonresidential
building or structure, hotel or motel, or motor hotel or guesthouse in
such a manner as to convert the building or structure from its previous
use to use as a dwelling or multiple dwelling.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the
holder of a share or membership interest thereof is entitled to possess
and occupy for dwelling purposes a house, apartment or other unit of
housing owned by the corporation or association, or to purchase a unit
of housing owned by the corporation or association.
COST — When used with respect to abatement for dwellings or multiple
dwellings, only the cost or fair market value of direct labor and
materials used in improving a multiple dwelling, or of converting
another building or structure to a multiple dwelling, or of constructing
a dwelling, or of converting another building or structure to a dwelling.
The cost shall include any architectural, engineering and contractors'
fees associated therewith, as the owner of the property shall cause
to be certified to the governing body by an independent and qualified
architect after completion of the project.
DWELLING — A building or part of a building used, to be used, or held
for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located
on the same premises together with the land upon which such buildings
are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment of the
property, but it shall not mean any building or part of a building defined
as a multiple dwelling pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement, conversion or construction not regarded as increasing
the taxable value of a property pursuant to applicable state law.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — A property submitted to a
horizontal property regime pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act,
N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.
§ 247-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-2
C:1236
§ 247-3. Exemptions or abatements for improvements to dwellings,
construction of new dwellings and conversions to dwellings.
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration or repair which produces a physical change in an existing
building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation or
attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for human
habitation or work and which does not change its permanent use. In the
case of a multiple dwelling, it includes only improvements which affect
common areas or elements or three or more dwelling units within the
multiple dwelling. In the case of a multiple dwelling or commercial or
industrial structure, it shall not include ordinary painting, repairs and
replacement of maintenance items or an enlargement of the volume of
an existing structure by more than 30%. In no case shall it include the
repair of fire or other damage to a property for which payment of a
claim was received by any person from an insurance company at any
time during the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of
an application for tax exemption and abatement.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building or structure meeting the definition
of multiple dwelling set forth in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. It means, for the purpose of improvement or
construction, the general common elements and common elements of a
condominium, a cooperative or a horizontal property regime.
B. Any other words and phrases used in this article and not defined above
shall have the meanings set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3.
A. Improvements to dwellings.
(1) In determining the value of real property for purposes of an
exemption from taxation of improvements to dwellings, the first
$15,000 in assessor's full and true value of improvements for each
dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by the improvement in
any dwelling more than 20 years old shall be regarded as not
increasing the value of the property for a period of five years,
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
improvements are made is increased thereby. During the
exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less
than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements, unless an abatement is granted pursuant to
Subsection A(2) of this section or there is damage to the dwelling
through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
(2) Abatements for improvements to dwellings. In addition to providing
for an exemption for improvements to dwellings, an abatement may
also be provided of some portion of the assessed value of property
receiving the exemption as it existed immediately prior to the
improvements, as follows:
§ 247-2 CHARTER § 247-3
C:1237
§ 247-4. Exemptions or abatements for improvements to or
conversion to multiple dwellings.
(a) The annual amount of the abatement granted to any single
property shall be up to 30% of the annual amount of the
exemption granted for a total period of up to five years.
B. Construction of new dwellings and conversion to dwellings.
(1) In determining the value of real property for purposes of an
exemption from taxation of some portion of the assessed valuation
of construction of new dwellings or conversions of buildings and
structures, including unutilized public buildings to dwelling use, up
to 25% of the Assessor's full and true value for each new
construction or conversion alteration unit made shall be regarded
as not increasing the value of the property for a total period of up to
five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property upon
which the new construction or conversion occurs is increased
thereby.
(2) Abatements for construction of new dwellings and conversion to
dwellings. In addition to providing for an exemption of some
portion of the assessed valuation of construction of new dwellings
or conversions of buildings and structures, an abatement may also
be provided of some portion of the assessed value of the property
receiving the exemption as it existed immediately prior to the
construction or conversion alteration as follows:
(a) The annual amount of the abatement granted to any single
property shall be up to 30% of the total cost of the construction
or conversion alteration for a total period of up to five years.
A. In determining the value of real property for purposes of an exemption
from taxation of improvements to multiple dwellings or of conversions
of other buildings and structures, including unutilized public buildings,
to multiple-dwelling use, or both, up to the Assessor's full and true
value of the improvements or conversion alterations shall not be
regarded as increasing the value of the property for a period of five
years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
improvements or conversion alterations are made is increased thereby.
During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not
be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements or conversion alterations, unless an abatement is
granted pursuant to Subsection B of this section or there is damage to
the multiple dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to
warrant a reduction.
B. Abatements for improvements to or conversion to multiple dwellings. In
addition to providing an exemption of some portion of the assessed
value of improvement or conversion alteration to a multiple dwelling as
it existed immediately prior to the improvement or conversion
§ 247-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-4
C:1238
§ 247-5. Exemptions or abatements for improvements to
commercial or industrial structures.
§ 247-6. Application procedure; contents of applications and
financial agreements.
alteration, an abatement may also be provided of some portion of
the assessed value of property receiving the exemption as it existed
immediately prior to the improvement or conversion alteration, as
follows:
(1) The annual amount of the abatement granted shall be up to 20% of
the total cost of the improvement or conversion alteration, and the
total number of abatements granted to any single property shall not
exceed the total cost of the improvement or conversion alteration.
The abatement shall be for a total period of up to five years.
A. Exemptions for improvements to commercial or industrial structures. In
determining the value of real property for purposes of an exemption
from taxation of improvements to commercial or industrial structures,
up to the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements shall not be
regarded as increasing the value of the property for a period of five
years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
improvements or conversion alterations are made is increased thereby.
During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not
be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements or conversion alterations, unless there is damage to the
multiple dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction.
B. Authorization of exemptions on a case-by-case basis. Exemptions for
improvements to commercial or industrial structures shall only be
authorized on a case-by-case basis after review, evaluation and
approval of each application by the City Council.
A. Application procedure for Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law.
(1) No exemption or abatement shall be granted pursuant to the Five-
Year Exemption and Abatement Law except upon written
application filed with and approved by the Assessor. Every
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of the
Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury of the State
of New Jersey. Such form shall be on file in the City of East Orange
Tax Assessor's office. The form shall be filed with the Assessor
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the
completion of the improvement, conversion, alteration or
construction. The Assessor shall provide a copy of any completed
and approved application for new construction or conversion
alteration to the Tax Collector.
§ 247-4 CHARTER § 247-6
C:1239
(2) Every application for exemption for existing structures which does
not increase the volume of the structure by more than 30% and
which is filed within the time specified shall be approved and
allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the application is
consistent with the provisions of this article, and provided that the
improvements for which the application is made qualifies as an
improvement pursuant to the provision of this article. Each such
determination by the Assessor shall be made no later than 60 days
of the filing of the application. The granting of such exemption shall
be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records
of the City, which record shall contain a notice of the termination
date thereof.
(3) Each application for new construction or conversion alteration
shall also contain the items set forth in § 247-6B.
B. Applications for exemptions and abatements on new construction of
dwellings, commercial or industrial structures or multiple dwellings
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9.
(1) Applicants for tax exemption and abatement for new construction
of commercial or industrial structures or multiple dwellings shall
provide the Assessor with 12 copies of an application setting forth:
(a) A general description of a project for which exemption and
abatement is sought.
(b) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
(c) Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by
the City to demonstrate the structure and design of the project.
(d) A description of the number, classes and type of employees to
be employed at the project site within two years of completion
of the project.
(e) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and
abatement on the project, and a description of the benefits to
be realized by the applicant if a tax agreement is granted.
(f) Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
(g) A statement showing the real property taxes currently being
assessed at the project site; estimated tax payments that would
be made annually by the applicant on the project during the
period of the agreement; and estimated tax payments that
would be made by the applicant on the project during the first
full year following the termination of the tax agreement.
(h) If the project is a commercial or industrial structure, a
description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of
the users' businesses.
§ 247-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-6
C:1240
§ 247-7. Tax agreements for exemptions and abatements on new
construction of dwellings, commercial or industrial structures or
multiple dwellings.
Upon review, evaluation and approval of an application submitted in
accordance with § 247-6B, the City shall enter into written agreements with
the applicants for the exemption or exemption and abatement of local real
property taxes for construction of commercial or industrial structures or
multiple dwellings, or both. The agreement shall provide for the applicant
to pay to the City in lieu of full property tax payments an amount annually
to be computed by one, but in no case a combination, of the formulas set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10 and shall comply with the conditions set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-11.
§ 247-8. Termination of agreements.
(i) If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the
number and types of dwelling units to be provided, a
description of the common elements or general common
elements, and a statement of the proposed initial rentals or
sales prices of the dwelling units according to type and of any
rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the dwellings
units respecting low- or moderate-income housing.
(j) Such other pertinent information as the governing body may
require.
(2) The application shall be distributed to and reviewed by the Mayor's
Tax Exemption and Abatement Committee, consisting of the City
Council Finance Committee, City Administrator, Tax Assessor, Tax
Collector, Director of Finance, Director of Policy, Planning and
Development, Director of Public Works, Director of Property
Maintenance and Corporation Counsel or their designees, within
45 days of receipt thereof.
A. Failure to meet qualifying conditions. If during any tax year prior to the
termination of the tax agreement the property owner ceases to operate
or disposes of the property, or fails to meet the conditions for qualifying,
then the tax which would have otherwise been payable for each tax year
shall become due and payable from the property owner as if no
exemption and abatement had been granted. The City through the
Assessor shall notify the property owner and Tax Collector forthwith,
and the Tax Collector shall, within 15 days thereof, notify the owner of
the property of the amount of taxes due. However, with respect to the
disposal of the property, where it is determined that the new owner of
the property will continue to use the property pursuant to the
conditions which qualified the property, no tax shall be due, the
exemption and the abatement shall continue, and the agreement shall
remain in effect.
§ 247-6 CHARTER § 247-8
C:1241
§ 247-9. Assessment of true taxable value and determination of tax
due.
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, conversion or construction, the true
taxable value thereof. Except for projects subject to tax agreement,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9 through 40A:21-12, the amount of tax to be
paid for the first full tax year in which the project is completed shall be
based on the assessed valuation of the property for the current tax year,
minus the amount of the abatement, if any, allowed pursuant to the Five-
Year Exemption and Abatement Law and prorated, plus any portion of
the assessed valuation of the improvement, conversion or construction not
allowed an exemption pursuant to the Five-Year Exemption and Abatement
Law, also prorated. Subject to the provisions of this article, the property
shall continue to be treated in the appropriate manner for each of the four
tax years subsequent to the original determination by the Assessor and shall
be prorated for the final tax year in which the exemption or abatement
expires.
§ 247-10. Additional improvement, conversion or construction.
This article provides that an additional improvement, conversion or
construction completed on a property granted a previous exemption or
abatement pursuant to this article and the Five-Year Exemption and
Abatement Law during the period in which such previous exemption or
abatement is in effect shall be qualified for an exemption, or exemption and
abatement, just as if such property had not received a previous exemption
or abatement. In such case, the additional improvement, conversion or
construction shall be considered as separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements, pursuant to the Five-Year Exemption and
Abatement Law, except that the assessed value of any previous
improvement, conversion or construction shall be added to the assessed
valuation as it was prior to that improvement, conversion, alteration or
construction for the purpose of determining the assessed valuation of the
property from which any additional abatement is to be subtracted.
§ 247-11. Ineligibility of property for which property taxes are due.
No exemption or abatement shall be granted or tax agreement entered into
pursuant to this article and the Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law
with respect to any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
remain unpaid or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due. For
purposes of this section, the existence of a tax installment agreement shall
B. Termination. At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be
subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by state law
and regulations and local ordinances, but nothing herein shall prohibit
a project, at the termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and
receiving the full benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 247-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-11
C:1242
not be considered. All taxes, penalties and interest due and owing must be
paid in full upon application.
§ 247-12. Applicability of exemption or abatement.
The exemption and abatement of real property taxes provided by the City
pursuant to this article and the Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law
shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal purposes, school
purposes, county government purposes and for the purposes of funding any
other property tax exemptions or abatements.
§ 247-13. Payment of fee.
No application for tax exemption or abatement shall be accepted by the
municipality unless accompanied by full payment of the required
application fee as designated by the City.
§ 247-14. Conformance with construction, statutory and regulatory
requirements.
§ 247-15. Effective date of applications.
Applications for exemptions and abatements from taxation may be filed to
take initial effect for the first full tax year commencing after the tax year
in which this article is adopted and for the tax years thereafter as set forth
herein. No application for exemptions or exemptions and abatements shall
be filed to take initial effect for the 11th full tax year or thereafter, unless
this article is readopted by ordinance of the governing body.
§ 247-16. Amendments; effect.
The Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law and this article may be
amended from time to time. Amendments to same shall not affect any
exemption, abatement or tax agreement previously granted and in force
prior to the amendment.
A. All projects subject to tax agreements as provided herein shall be
subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on
pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing
provision, zoning, planning and building code requirements.
B. All improvements, conversions or construction contemplated by this
article shall, during construction and at completion, conform with all
statutory and municipal requirements relating to construction, land,
buildings and the use thereof.
C. Failure to comply with Subsections A or B above may be cause for
termination of the abatement agreement.
§ 247-11 CHARTER § 247-17
C:1243
§ 247-17. Report of exemptions and abatements.
The City, with the assistance of the Mayor and the Assessor, shall report,
on or before October 1 of each year, to the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs and to the
Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury the
total amount of real property taxes exempted and the total amount abated
within the City in the current tax year for each of the following:
§ 247-18. Notice to property owners in eligible areas.
A. Improvements of dwellings;
B. Construction of dwellings;
C. Improvements and conversions of multiple dwellings;
D. Improvements of commercial or industrial structures;
E. Construction of multiple dwellings under tax agreements; and
F. Construction of commercial or industrial structures under tax
agreements.
A. The Tax Collector shall include the appropriate notice in the mailing of
annual property tax bills to each owner of a dwelling located in an area
in which exemptions, or exemptions and abatements, may be allowed
pursuant to this article during the first year following the adoption of
this article.
B. In the case of § 247-17E and F as set forth above, the report shall state
instead the total amount of payments made in lieu of taxes according to
each formula utilized by the City, and the difference between that total
amount and the total amount of real property taxes which would have
been paid on the project had the tax agreement not been in effect, for
the current tax year.
§ 247-17 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-18
C:1244
ARTICLE II
Long-Term Tax Exemptions and Payments in Lieu of Taxes
[Adopted 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008320]
§ 247-19. Purpose. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
The purpose of this article is:
§ 247-20. Definitions.
A. To undertake a detailed, critical and consistent evaluation of all
applications for tax exemptions submitted by a qualified urban renewal
entity in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., or a qualified
housing sponsor in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.
B. To ensure that, before an application receives an affirmative
recommendation from the Mayor's Tax Exemption Review Committee,
the applicant will have demonstrated that the project will secure clear
social and/or economic benefits for the residents of the City, all in
accordance with the Long-Term Tax Exemption Law, as amended
(N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq.), or the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency Law of 1983, as amended (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.),
the rules promulgated thereunder (N.J.A.C. 5:80-1 et seq.), and all
applicable guidelines.
C. To set forth the minimal requirements that must be satisfied to obtain
an affirmative recommendation from the Mayor's Tax Exemption
Review Committee. It also sets forth the procedures to be followed by
City officials to evaluate applications and to administer financial
agreements after they are approved.
A. The definitions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. are incorporated
herein by reference and shall have the same meaning.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing affordable to persons of low- or
moderate-low-income as defined pursuant to the Fair Housing Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.[Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE — The total annual gross rental or carrying
charge and other income, including but not limited to state and federal
rental subsidies of a housing sponsor from a housing project owned
by the applicant seeking a tax exemption pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:14K-37.[Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
APPLICANT — The developer seeking a tax exemption for the
construction of a project or, with respect to HMFA-financed housing
projects, the improvement thereof.
320. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 248, but was renumbered as
Ch. 247, Art. II, to fit onto the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 247-19 CHARTER § 247-20
C:1245
APPLICATION — All information as the governing body may require to
be submitted by an applicant seeking a tax exemption.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Any certificate issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133, whether temporary or permanent.
CERTIFIED AUDIT — A complete set of certified financial statements
sufficient for the governing body to render an opinion on the applicant's
annual financial statements and applicant's ability to complete the
project. All audits shall be prepared in a manner consistent with the
current standards of the Financial Accounting Standards Board and
fully detail all items as required by any applicable law and regulation.
The audit shall be certified as conforming with the standards of a
certified public accountant who is licensed to practice in the State of
New Jersey.
CITY — The Municipal Council of the City of East Orange.
DEVELOPER or SPONSOR or APPLICANT — The person or entity and
principals or partners thereof who is seeking or receiving a long-term
tax exemption, including an assignment or modification of an existing
tax exemption or other modification of tax payment to the City, if any.
FINANCIAL AGREEMENT — The contract between the developer and
the City, including all amendments and supplements thereto, by which
a tax exemption is conferred and which is consistent with all applicable
law and regulation.
GROSS INCOME — Total annual revenue from the project before
operating and nonoperating expenses are deducted.
GROSS REVENUE — Annual gross revenue or gross shelter rent or
annual gross rents, as appropriate, and other income, for each urban
renewal entity designated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq.[Added
4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
INCOME — All revenues as determined in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
LAW — The Long-Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., or
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency Law of 1983, as
amended, N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.[Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No.
4-2010]
PILOT PAYMENTS — Payments in lieu of taxes on improvements which
have been granted after application to the City. Such pilot payments
shall run with the land, similar to real estate taxes. Any application
for a tax exemption on a project with an existing exemption shall
constitute a second term tax exemption.[Added 11-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 32-2012]
PROJECT — The real property and the improvements thereon which are
the subject of the financial agreement.
PROPERTY — The real property and any improvements thereon which
existed prior to the approval of the tax exemption.
§ 247-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-20
C:1246
§ 247-21. Mayor's Tax Exemption Review Committee. [Amended
4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
There is hereby established the Mayor's Tax Exemption Review Committee,
consisting of the City Council Finance Committee, City Administrator, Tax
Assessor, Tax Collector, Chief Financial Officer, Director of Policy, Planning
and Development, Director of Public Works, Director of Property
Maintenance, Corporation Counsel and Manager of Abatements and Special
Taxes, or their designees, and any other person the Mayor or the governing
body may deem appropriate. The purpose of the Committee is to meet
as required to provide review of applications and information to make
a recommendation to the Municipal Council as to whether or not an
application should be approved or denied in accordance with the standards
set forth hereinbelow.
§ 247-22. Application. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
SECOND TERM ABATEMENT — A real property or improvement with
an existing abatement in which an applicant is seeking to create
abatement and shall be considered a "second term tax exemption"
for the purposes of this article.[Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No.
32-2012]
TAX EXEMPTION — The substitution of an annual payment for the
amount of taxes which would otherwise be due for improvements made
to property under conventional property tax law under the provisions
of the Long-Term Tax Exemption Law, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1
et seq.), or the provisions of the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency Law of 1983, as amended (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
Conventional property taxes levied on the value of land shall continue
to be levied and due, except that the financial agreement may provide
for a land tax exemption for residential projects in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-12.[Amended 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
TOTAL PROJECT COST — A detailed statement of hard and soft costs
associated with the project, certified by the developer and presented
with the application for tax exemption, that shall include, but not be
limited to, any and all estimated and/or actual costs disclosed or to
be disclosed to the City's Department of Property Maintenance for the
purpose of obtaining permits and/or other approvals. Such statement of
total project cost shall be subject to certified audits as set forth herein.
A. Form of application. All qualified applicants, before proceeding with
any project, shall provide the City with an application in the manner
and form as required by all applicable law and regulation, as may be
amended from time to time, and such application shall include, at
minimum, the following:
(1) An ALTA/ACSM Land Title Survey for the property for which the tax
exemption is sought that shall be in accordance with the thencurrent
"Accuracy Standards for Land Title Surveys" ("accuracy
§ 247-20 CHARTER § 247-22
C:1247
standards"), as adopted from time to time by the National Society
of Professional Surveyors and the American Land Title Association,
and incorporated herein by reference, including, but not limited to,
the following:
(a) A record description of the property to be surveyed or, in the
case of an original survey, the record description of the parent
parcel that contains the property to be surveyed. Complete
copies of the record description of the property (or, in the case
of an original survey, the parent parcel), any record easements
benefiting the property; the record easements or servitudes
and covenants burdening the property ("record documents");
documents of record referred to in the record documents; and
any other documents containing desired appropriate
information affecting the property being surveyed and to which
the survey shall make reference shall be provided to the
surveyor for notation on the plat or map of survey;
(b) The name, address, telephone number, and signature of the
professional land surveyor who performed the survey, his or
her official seal and registration number, the date the survey
was completed, the dates of all of the surveyor's revisions and
the caption "ALTA/ACSM Land Title Survey";
(c) A survey boundary drawn to a convenient scale, with that scale
clearly indicated. A graphic scale, shown in feet or meters, or
both, shall be included. A North arrow shall be shown and,
when practicable, the plat or map of survey shall be oriented so
that North is at the top of the drawing. Symbols or
abbreviations used shall be identified on the face of the plat or
map by use of a legend or other means. If necessary for clarity,
supplementary or exaggerated diagrams shall be presented
accurately on the plat or map. The plat or map shall be a
minimum size of 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches;
(d) All data necessary to indicate the mathematical dimensions
and relationships of the boundary represented, with angles
given directly or by bearings, and with the length and radius of
each curve, together with elements necessary to
mathematically define each curve. The point of beginning of
the surveyor's description shall be shown as well as the remote
point of beginning if different. A bearing base shall refer to
some well-fixed line so that the bearings may be easily
reestablished. The North arrow shall be referenced to its
bearing base and, should that bearing base differ from record
title, that difference shall be noted;
(e) Both the record and measured bearings, angles and distances
shall be clearly indicated. If the record description fails to form
a mathematically closed figure, the surveyor shall so indicate;
§ 247-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-22
C:1248
(f) Tax Map block and lot numbers, adjoining lot owners, a vicinity
map, corresponding street addresses and all current Tax Map
information; and
(g) Any such other information the governing body shall require.
(2) A general statement of the nature of the project, e.g., affordable
housing, market rate, commercial, industrial, residential, senior
housing, single-family, multiple dwelling, etc.
(a) If the project contains commercial or industrial structures, a
description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
past, present and proposed occupants and a rent roll listing
such occupants; or
(b) If the project contains dwelling structures, a description
detailing the number and types of dwelling units; common
elements or general common elements, and a statement of the
proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the dwelling units
according to type.
(3) A statement of the reasons for seeking a tax exemption, and a
description of the benefits to be realized by the City if a tax
exemption is granted;
(4) A statement justifying the requested term or duration of the tax
exemption being sought;
(5) A detailed description of the improvements to be made to the
property, including architectural and site plans, and an estimate of
the total cost of the project certified by a qualified architect or
engineer;
(6) A statement disclosing the uses and sources of capital to be utilized
in funding the project, which shall set forth, among other things,
pecuniary and ownership interests and obligations associated with
such funding sources, certified by the applicant;
(7) A fiscal plan and cash flow statement for the project outlining,
among other things, purchase price of the site and improvements,
detailed mortgage payouts, construction loan payouts, and any
other payout associated with the sale and prior owner, the schedule
of annual gross revenue, the estimated expenditures for operation
and maintenance, payments for interest, amortization of debt and
reserves, and payments to the municipality, each such item
certified by the applicant; [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No.
32-2012]
(8) A detailed construction and/or improvement schedule indicating
the date of project commencement and completion and significant
milestones;
§ 247-22 CHARTER § 247-22
C:1249
(9) A statement as to the fair market value of the property as of the
date of the filing of the application and a statement of estimated
fair market value after completion of the project;
(10) A statement of the tax levy on the property for the year in which the
application is filed. In the case of tax-exempt property, the
projected tax levy shall be stated as if the property had not been
tax-exempt;
(11) The status of all municipal taxes, fees and charges due and payable
to the City arising from or imposed on the property or any other
property within the City that is owned by the developer or any
principal of the developer or anyone with a pecuniary, ownership or
other interest in the project;
(12) Disclosure statements as to all parties, including parent and
subsidiary companies, having any interest in the property or the
project or any other contracts or financial agreements then in force
and effect in which any of those parties have any interest;
(13) A certification by the developer that construction and/or
improvement of the project has not and will not commence prior to
the final approval and full execution of the financial agreement, and
for projects commencing prior to November 1, 2012, a certification
that the developer before proceeding with the project has made a
written application to the municipality in compliance with the
Long-Term Tax Exemption Law, including N.J.S.A. 40A:20-8;
[Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
(14) The developer's estimate of the number, classes and type of
temporary jobs to be created by the project during the term of its
construction and the number, classes and type of permanent jobs to
be created by the project within one year after its completion. The
application shall set forth the project employment plan of the
developer and a certification by the developer that such plan
complies with the City's employment policy as delineated;
(15) A certification by the developer that the project meets the
requirements of the laws of this state for consideration for tax
exemption. Where those laws require the property to have been
declared blighted by the City and a redevelopment plan to have
been adopted by the City or to be an area in need of rehabilitation,
the developer shall further certify that the proposed project
complies with the redevelopment plan as adopted;
(16) A certification by the developer that he or she has made diligent
inquiry to confirm the accuracy of all information contained in the
application and that the information is true and correct to the
developer's knowledge. The certification shall contain the original
signature of the developer notarized or witnessed. In the case of a
corporation, the developer shall submit a notarized corporate
§ 247-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-22
C:1250
§ 247-23. Consideration and recommendation.
resolution, with the seal of the corporation and the signature of
the secretary of the corporation, authorizing the signatory to bind
the corporation, or similar bona fide evidence of authorization. In
the case of a partnership, the developer shall submit a copy of
the partnership agreement, certified to be in full force and effect,
authorizing the signatory to bind the partnership, or other similar
bona fide evidence of authorization;
(17) A financial agreement, prepared by the applicant, which shall be
presented in such form as required by applicable law and
regulation and as approved by the Corporation Counsel;
(18) Payment of the applicable nonrefundable fee as set forth in
§ 247-22C of this article for review of such application; and
(19) Such other documents or pertinent information as the Committee
deems necessary or appropriate.
B. Submission of application. One original and 15 copies of the application
shall be submitted to the Director of Policy, Planning and Development,
either in person or by certified mail, at his or her office.
C. Fee schedule.
(1) The review fee shall be equal to:
(a) Up to $50,000: 1% of the total cost of improvement.
(b) From $50,001 to $150,000: 1.2% of the total cost of
improvement.
(c) From $150,001 to $300,000: 1.4% of the total cost of
improvement.
(d) From $300,001 to $500,000: 1.6% of the total cost of
improvement.
(e) For projects where the total estimated cost of improvement is
$500,001 and above: $10,000.
(2) As it pertains to § 247-23F(2) and § 247-31, the resubmission fee
for conditionally rejected applications shall be 50% of the initial
review fee set forth in § 247-22C.
(3) The review fee for a second application shall be as set forth in
§ 247-22C.
A. Distribution of application. Upon receipt of the application and payment
of all applicable fees, the Director of Policy, Planning and Development
shall forward one copy of the application to each member of the
Finance Committee, one copy to the City Administrator, Chief Financial
Officer, Director of Public Works, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector and
§ 247-22 CHARTER § 247-23
C:1251
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes, two copies to the
Corporation Counsel and a copy to any other person the Mayor or the
governing body may deem appropriate. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 4-2010; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
B. Legal review. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010;
11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
(1) Within 30 days of receipt of the application from the Director of
Policy, Planning and Development, the Corporation Counsel and
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall jointly make a
determination as to the completeness and properness of the
application. An application shall be deemed complete and proper if
it is presented in the proper form and satisfies the requirements of
applicable statutes, regulations and ordinances.
(2) In those cases where an application is deemed improper, the
Corporation Counsel, in coordination with the Manager of
Abatements and Special Taxes, shall note the deficiencies to the
Mayor's Tax Exemption Review Committee for its consideration.
C. General review (Mayor's Tax Exemption Review Committee). Upon
receipt of an application, the Director of Policy, Planning and
Development shall schedule a meeting of the Mayor's Tax Exemption
Review Committee to conduct a complete review of the project
application. At his or her discretion, the Director may invite the
developer and direct such other City employees or persons deemed
necessary or appropriate to assist the Committee in the discharge of its
duties. The Director may enlist a professional consultant, in accordance
with the applicable law for awarding public contracts, to assist the
Committee in its review of the application to determine what annual
service charge or escalation is appropriate. In its review, the Committee
shall consider the following: [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No.
4-2010; 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
(1) Whether the project will result in the construction of housing (on
all new constructions, the maximum allowable affordable units is
20% and will be determined based on the project financials) or jobgenerating
commercial development on site or off site;
(2) Whether the payment of contribution to the City of East Orange is
in accordance with the purpose of this article;
(3) The taxes and other relevant expenses in other alternative and
comparable markets likely to be considered by the developer;
(4) A comparison of the estimated amount of the service charge
payment due under the tax exemption with the conventional taxes
that the City would net, assuming that a project of similar quality
and size would likely be constructed by the developer;
§ 247-23 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-23
C:1252
(5) An estimate of the cost of providing municipal services to the
project;
(6) The extent to which the project complies with the City's
developmental goals as expressed in its zoning ordinances, its
master plan and applicable redevelopment plans; and the degree of
economic necessity for tax exemption or the extent to which the
improvements to the project will enhance the health and welfare of
the residents of the City of East Orange;
(7) The relative benefits of the project, including the inherent benefit
of a project that will construct housing that will improve the
customer base for East Orange's business districts and the number
of jobs both temporary and permanent likely to be created by the
project;
(8) The importance of the tax exemption in achieving the timely
development of the project and influencing probable occupants to
locate to the project;
(9) The property assessment and the amount of taxes levied on each
block and lot of the real property included within the project in
both the year in which the application was filed and the
immediately preceding year. In the case of property which is or had
been tax-exempt, a calculation will be made of the assessed value
and the amount of taxes which would have been levied had the
property not been tax-exempt;
(10) The current status of payments due for property taxes and/or
municipal charges or liens of any type arising from real property
included within the project or from any other property owned by
the developer;
(11) The current status of any financial agreement then in effect to
which the developer is a party or a principal thereof is a party;
(12) The current status of any fines or payments due from the developer
in Municipal Court; payments due for water and/or sewer services
provided to the real property included within the project or any
other real property owned by the developer or the principals
thereof; and payments due for any activity conducted on the real
property within the project and on any other property owned by the
developer;
(13) Whether the developer is a qualified urban renewal entity pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-5 et seq.; and
(14) Whether there are any outstanding property maintenance
violations; the amount of all violations of any property owned by
either the developer or principal and length of time for the
remediation of such violations.
§ 247-23 CHARTER § 247-23
C:1253
D. Application evaluation report. The Mayor's Tax Exemption Review
Committee, through the Director of Policy, Planning and Development
and Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes, shall submit a report
setting forth its recommendation as to approval or disapproval to the
Mayor within 90 days from the date of receipt. The report shall also
include a detailed explanation as to the analysis conducted in arriving
at the recommendation. [Amended 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
E. Mayoral review.
(1) Upon receipt of the report from the Mayor's Tax Exemption Review
Committee, the Mayor shall review the recommended action to be
taken in regard to that application. The Mayor shall determine
whether to recommend the approval of the application and its
attachments to the Municipal Council or to recommend the
rejection of the application as not being in the best interests of the
City. Where the application has been deemed improper by the
Corporation Counsel and/or Manager of Abatements and Special
Taxes, the Mayor shall determine whether the deficiencies can be
remedied and, if so, may direct the developer and/or the
appropriate municipal official as to the actions required. If the
deficiencies cannot be remedied or if the application is deemed not
in the best interests of the City, the Mayor may recommend the
rejection of the application without condition. [Amended
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
(2) In those cases where the Mayor recommends that the developer be
afforded the opportunity to correct specific deficiencies, the
application may be reconsidered by resubmitting a corrected
application to the Director of Policy, Planning and Development,
along with any applicable resubmission fees, after which the
approval process outlined herein in this section shall be conducted.
(3) In those cases where the Mayor recommends rejection of an
application without condition and that recommendation has been
ratified by the Municipal Council, the rejected application will not
be reconsidered and the developer, if so desired, shall reapply to
the Director of Policy, Planning and Development by filing a new
application and making payment of any applicable fee.
(4) The recommendation of the Mayor to the Municipal Council,
whether for acceptance or rejection, shall occur within a maximum
of 60 calendar days after the date of the receipt of the report.
[Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
F. Municipal Council consideration.
(1) No tax exemption shall be approved or financial agreement
executed unless the Municipal Council has determined that the tax
exemption is in the City's best interest.
§ 247-23 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-23
C:1254
§ 247-24. Enabling legislation. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No.
4-2010; 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
If deemed proper and following review by the Mayor's Tax Exemption
Review Committee and the Mayor, the Corporation Counsel shall prepare
a resolution or ordinance in the form necessary to authorize the long-term
tax exemption and attach the form of the proposed financial agreement,
subject to such modification as the Corporation Counsel deems appropriate
or necessary; and in the case of affordable or senior or special housing
projects, approval of the financial agreement and its additional modification
is also subject to the approval the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency. The resolution or ordinance shall be signed by the
Corporation Counsel as to form and legality and submitted, together with
the form of the financial agreement, the original application, the
recommendation of the Mayor's Tax Exemption Review Committee and the
recommendation of the Mayor, to the Municipal Council for consideration.
§ 247-25. Form of financial agreement. [Amended 4-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-2010]
A financial agreement shall be in the form appropriate to the nature of
the tax exemption and the nature of the development as submitted to the
Mayor's Tax Exemption Review Committee and, with respect to eligible
housing projects financed by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency ("HMFA"), in such form acceptable to the City and HMFA.
Such financial agreement shall, at a minimum:
(2) The Municipal Council may approve, reject or direct the application
be returned to the developer for correction or change. An
application rejected conditionally may be resubmitted to the
Director of Policy, Planning and Development with a resubmission
fee. An application rejected unconditionally may only be
resubmitted as a new application, with payment of the applicable
review fee. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
A. Identify the property by block, lot and metes and bounds.
B. Describe the nature and size of the improvements to be constructed.
C. Include a detailed construction schedule which must require the
commencement of construction no later than one year from the date the
tax exemption is approved. For multi-phased projects undertaken under
one or more financial agreements entered into simultaneously,
commencement of construction for only Phase I must occur no later
than one year from the date the tax exemption is approved; provided,
however, under no circumstance shall the term of the financial
agreement(s) exceed the maximum term permitted by law. [Amended
4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
D. Establish a schedule incorporating the annual service or escalation
charge in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:20-12 et seq., to be paid to the
§ 247-23 CHARTER § 247-25
C:1255
City over the term of the exemption period with a proviso that during
the term of the tax exemption, the charge shall not be less than the
annual service charge payable in the prior year of operation following
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. With respect to eligible
housing projects financed by HMFA, such charge may equal an amount
not more than 20% of the annual gross revenue from each housing
project situated on such real property for each year of operation thereof
following the substantial completion thereof. [Amended 4-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 9-2019]
E. State the duration or term of the financial agreement:
(1) The term of the tax exemption for eligible housing projects financed
by the HMFA shall not extend beyond the date on which the initial
HMFA mortgage is paid in full, which may not exceed 50 years;
(2) The term for other tax exemptions shall not be more than 30 years
from the completion of the project or each phase thereof.
F. Identify the following grounds for termination:
(1) With respect to all tax exemptions approved pursuant to this
article:
(a) Failure to commence or complete construction on schedule;
(b) Failure to pay any municipal charges due, including, but not
limited to, the service charge;
(c) Failure to timely submit certified audits of total project cost or
gross revenue and the financial operations of the project;
(d) Any other breach of a material condition, in the sole and
absolute discretion of the City;
(e) Refinancing of a project that fails to comply with the
requirements of § 247-25T, below; [Amended 4-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 9-2019]
(f) Failure to disclose a change in use of the project during the
term of the tax exemption;
(g) Failure to disclose additional income derived from any source
related to the project;
(h) Failure to maintain the habitability of the property in
accordance with applicable laws of the City of East Orange and
the State of New Jersey;
(i) Failure to maintain safe and secured housing in accordance
with the City of East Orange regulations which impact the
quality-of-life issues;
§ 247-25 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-25
C:1256
(j) Failure to arange an annual inspection with the Director of
Policy, Planning and Development or Property Maintenance
Department to conduct interviews with the occupants as to the
maintenance of the project; [Amended 4-8-2019 by Ord. No.
9-2019]
(k) Failure to permit any and all inspections of the project by the
City's Property Maintenance Department, the State
Department of Community Affairs or the Housing, Mortgage
and Finance Agency; or
(l) Failure to pay the appropriate amounts due directly to the
County. [Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
(2) Additional grounds for termination with respect to tax exemptions
approved pursuant to this article for eligible housing projects
financed by the HMFA:
(a) Failure of the applicant or its successors and assigns and the
project to remain subject to the provisions of the N.J.S.A.
55:14K-1 et seq., as amended from time to time;
(b) Failure of any successor or assign to the developer in the event
of a sale, transfer or conveyance of the project by the
developer or a change in the organizational structure of the
developer to qualify under N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq., or any
other state law applicable at the time of the assignment of the
financial agreement, and to be obligated under the HMFA
mortgage.
G. Require that any change in the ownership of the project that would
materially change the terms of the financial agreement shall be void
unless disclosed to and approved by the Municipal Council in advance
of such change. A request or notification for a change in ownership
shall be accompanied by the payment of 2% of the annual service
charge, which shall be in addition to any annual administrative fee or
application fee otherwise due. [Amended 4-8-2019 by Ord. No.
9-2019]
H. Require the developer to submit certified audits of total project cost by
the project architect and a certified public accountant, an annual audit
of gross revenues and the annual financial operations of the project. In
addition, if deemed necessary by the City, require the developer to pay
the City costs to reaudit total project cost, annual gross revenue, or
financial operations of the project.
I. Require the timely submission of certified audits of total project cost or
gross revenue and of the annual financial operations of the project.
J. Require timely payment of all municipal taxes, administrative fees and
other charges arising out of the financial agreement or in any way
connected to the affected property.
§ 247-25 CHARTER § 247-25
C:1257
K. Require the developer to execute a project labor agreement which
compels the developer to work with the Mayor's Office of Employment
and Training in an effort to hire City residents, minorities and women.
The form of the project labor agreement, which shall be placed on file in
the office of the City Clerk, may be amended from time to time.
[Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
L. State that the term of the tax exemption for the entire project shall
commence upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any part
or the whole of the project and that the obligation to pay the service
charge as estimated in the application, including interest, commences
on such date, whether or not the developer receives a bill therefor,
M. State that the service charge shall be billed and collected in the same
manner as taxes and that any arrearage shall accrue at that rate of
interest charged for delinquent real estate taxes.
N. State that an annual administrative fee equal to 2% of the service
charge shall be levied by the City and collected in the same manner as
the service charge.
O. Require the payment of a new application fee for any future
modifications to the tax exemption or the financial agreement, except
as provided for in Subsection R.
P. Require that the developer, together with the payment in lieu of taxes,
make payment of the maximum annual County fee, whatever it may be
during the exemption period. [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No.
32-2012; 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
Q. State that the City, through the Office of the Tax Assessor, shall conduct
a mandatory annual review (during the exemption period) of the
financial agreement and other financial documents, including but not
limited to certified audit reports and income pro forma. [Amended
4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
R. (Reserved)321
S. Include such other terms and conditions as the City or HMFA shall
deem appropriate or necessary.
T. Require that prior to refinancing, the developer shall seek the City's
approval by providing the City with notification of the refinancing
accompanied by a capital needs assessment conducted by an
independent third-party consultant approved by the City determining
that the project has no material capital needs and/or that the project
reserves are adequately funded. City approval of the refinancing shall
321. Former Subsection R was repealed 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019. Said subsection read:
“State that the parties agree to modify the financial agreement to increase the amount of
the payment in lieu of taxes if it is determined upon review pursuant to Subsection Q that
the project can remain financially feasible.”
§ 247-25 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-25
C:1258
§ 247-26. Execution and distribution of financial agreement.
§ 247-27. Oversight and billing. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No.
4-2010; 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012; 4-8-2019 by Ord. No.
9-2019; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
During the construction period, the Chief Financial Officer, Tax Collector,
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes, Compliance Officer and
Construction Official shall each be responsible to oversee some aspect of
the financial agreement as outlined below.
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. [Added 4-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 9-2019]
A. Execution of financial agreements. Upon authorization by the Municipal
Council, the City Clerk shall circulate five original copies of the
financial agreement for execution by all parties. No financial
agreement, including financial agreements for HMFA-financed housing
projects, shall be considered to be in force and effect unless and until it
has been fully executed by the developer and the Mayor and City Clerk.
[Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
B. Distribution of executed financial agreements. Once a financial
agreement has been fully executed, the City Clerk shall retain an
original and distribute two originals to the developer, one original to the
Corporation Counsel, one original to the City Administrator and to the
Tax Assessor, Tax Collector, Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes
and Director of Policy, Planning and Development. The City Clerk's
executed copy shall be placed on permanent file within that office,
where it shall be available for examination by the public during regular
business hours. [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012;
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
A. Permits and inspection. Upon receipt of an executed financial
agreement, the Construction Official shall cause permits to be issued
upon application by the developer and shall cause inspections of all
work activity to be conducted in the manner provided by the City
ordinances. The Construction Official shall notify the Tax Assessor,
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes and Chief Financial Officer
of any failure by the developer to properly apply for permits, begin
construction or complete construction within the period set forth in the
financial agreement. The Construction Official shall send the Tax
Assessor, Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes and Chief
Financial Officer a copy of each permit as it is issued.
B. Quarterly report to Tax Assessor. From the date of the execution of a
financial agreement until the issuance of the permanent certificate of
occupancy for the entire project, the Construction Official shall report
to the Tax Assessor, Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes and
Chief Financial Officer each quarter as to the status of permit and
construction activity on the project. Upon the total or partial
§ 247-25 CHARTER § 247-27
C:1259
completion of construction, the Construction Official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy in the appropriate form, and shall send a copy
of each such certificate to the Tax Assessor, Manager of Abatements
and Special Taxes and Chief Financial Officer. The Construction Official
in the quarterly reports will incorporate the term "substantially
complete" on the certificates of occupancy when the event occurs. In
the event the certificate of occupancy is issued for part of a building,
the Construction Code Official shall specifically identify that portion of
the building affected.
C. Assessments and taxes. Upon receipt of a certificate of occupancy for
the project or a part thereof, the Tax Assessor shall adjust the
assessment status to "exempt" for as much or all of the improvements
as are reflected in the certificate. Upon receipt of the certificate of
occupancy for the entire project or a part thereof, the Tax Assessor shall
exempt the assessment for all improvements covered by the certificate
during such time as the financial agreement remains in effect. Land
shall remain conventionally taxed throughout the entire term of the
financial agreement, except that the financial agreement may provide
for a land tax exemption for residential projects in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-12. At any time that the Tax Assessor causes the
assessment on the project to be moved, in whole or in part, from taxable
to exempt status, he or she shall immediately and directly notify the
Chief Financial Officer, Tax Collector and Manager of Abatements and
Special Taxes, in writing, to ensure the prompt commencement of the
service charge billing.
D. Billing, collection and audit.
(1) Upon receipt of a fully executed financial agreement, the Chief
Financial Officer, Tax Collector and Manager of Abatements and
Special Taxes shall note in their records the execution of the
financial agreement and those dates by which construction is to
commence and be completed. The Director of the Department of
Finance shall thereafter continue to levy conventional taxes and
collect payment therefor on the property until the occurrence of
the following:
(a) In the event that a certificate of occupancy is issued for the
entire project or any part thereof, the Tax Collector and
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall immediately
cease to levy or collect taxes on the portion of the assessed
value covered by the certificate. The Chief Financial Officer
and Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall instead
bill the developer for the estimated amount of payment in lieu
of taxes due as indicated in the application and financial
agreement. Taxes on the value of the land shall continue to be
levied and collected.
(2) Upon the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the
entire project or any part thereof, the developer shall submit within
§ 247-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-27
C:1260
30 days to the Chief Financial Officer and Manager of Abatements
and Special Taxes two copies of total project costs certified by the
project architect and two copies of an audited statement of total
project cost certified by a certified public accountant.
(3) The Chief Financial Officer and Manager of Abatements and
Special Taxes shall review the certified audit of total project cost
and make a determination as to the acceptability of the audit. If the
audit is deemed unacceptable by the City, it shall be reaudited by
the City with all fees to be paid by the developer. The Chief
Financial Officer and Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes
shall bill the developer for the cost of the audit. Once the audit is
accepted, if its findings cause any change in the basis to be used in
the determination of the payment in lieu of taxes, the Chief
Financial Officer shall file a notice of final certified project cost
("notice") with the City Clerk and send a copy to the Corporation
Counsel, Tax Assessor, Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes
and developer as an addendum to the financial agreement.
(4) Upon the filing of the notice, the Chief Financial Officer and
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall bill the developer
for the cost of the audit and for any adjustments necessitated by
the audit. Failure to file the notice, however, shall not bar the
collection of the audited service charge.
E. Project labor agreement, local contractors and vendors. The
Compliance Officer shall monitor compliance with the project labor
agreement and establish reasonable procedures with the developer to
effectuate the project labor agreement. The City shall maintain a list of
local licensed contractors and suppliers, which shall be provided to the
developer by the Department of Planning, Policy and Development. The
developers shall, in conjunction with other vendors as appropriate,
utilize the aforementioned list to engage local vendors and suppliers in
their projects.
F. Violation of financial agreement. In the event that the developer fails to
commence construction or to complete construction within the time
required by the financial agreement, or fails to make payments due to
the City as required by the financial agreement, or otherwise fails to
meet any other material condition of the financial agreement, the Chief
Financial Officer shall notify the Corporation Counsel and Manager of
Abatements and Special Taxes. The Corporation Counsel and Manager
of Abatements and Special Taxes shall undertake those steps necessary
to terminate the financial agreement and shall advise the Tax Assessor,
the Tax Collector and the Director of Policy, Planning and Development
of the actions to be taken in regard to the levying and collection of taxes
and payments in lieu of taxes. The Corporation Counsel and/or Manager
of Abatements and Special Taxes shall prepare such notices or
resolutions as are necessary or appropriate to authorize the
termination of the financial agreement.
§ 247-27 CHARTER § 247-28
C:1261
§ 247-28. Administration of agreements after project completion.
[Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010; 4-8-2019 by Ord. No.
9-2019; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
After the completion of construction and issuance of the final certificate
of occupancy, the project shall continue to operate within the terms of the
financial agreement until its termination. The Chief Financial Officer and
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall administer the financial
agreement throughout this period, according to the following procedures:
A. Billing and payment.
(1) The Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall bill the
developer each quarter. If the service charge is calculated as a
percentage of project cost, the bill shall reflect both the taxes due
on the value of all land included within the project and the service
charge payments due on the improvements required by the
financial agreement. If the service charge is calculated as a
percentage of annual gross revenue, the quarterly bills shall be
estimated in an amount equal to the actual amounts due in the
previous year. In such case, the developer shall make an additional
payment within 90 days after the close of the fiscal year, and such
payment shall be the difference between the estimated billing and
the adjusted annual service charge, based upon the actual financial
performance of the project, including any excess profits due and
owing in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. The additional
payment by the developer shall be submitted, along with a certified
audit of annual gross revenue calculated under the law and the
financial agreement.
(2) Regardless of the date of a bill or whether the bill is sent or
received, a bill for a service charge shall be deemed to have been
issued on the first day of each calendar quarter following the
substantial completion of the project and to be due and payable
within 30 calendar days thereafter. All payments which are not paid
as of the date due shall be subject to the same charges for penalties
and interest then in effect for delinquent property taxes.
(3) In the event the estimate of the annual service charge exceeds the
actual service charge due based upon final total project cost or
actual annual gross revenue, the developer shall not be entitled to
any credit against any past service charges due and owing, but only
a credit, without interest, against subsequent service charges.
(4) The Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall accept all
payments and maintain books of account as to each financial
agreement. Except where otherwise required by law, the Manager
of Abatements and Special Taxes, in coordination with the Tax
Collector and Chief Financial Officer, if appropriate, shall apply
payments received to amounts due in the following order: amounts
due for penalties and interest on taxes; amounts due for payments
§ 247-28 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-28
C:1262
of taxes; amounts due for penalties and interest for service charge
payments; and amounts due for service charge payments. The
developer shall make timely payments of taxes and annual service
charges directly to the Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes,
as instructed.
(5) In addition to the payment of the annual service charge, all
developers shall pay an annual administrative fee to the City. The
annual administrative fee shall be 2% of the annual service charge
and shall be due no later than December 31 of each year and paid
and collected in the same manner as the service charge.
B. Annual audits.
(1) As required by law or the financial agreement, the developer shall
submit an annual certified audit prepared by a certified public
accountant of the financial performance of the project. The audit
shall be submitted each year within 90 days after the end of the
fiscal year of the project to the Chief Financial Officer, with a copy
to the City Clerk, Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes and
Director of Policy, Planning and Development. In addition to the
submission of the annual certified audit, the developer shall submit
a statement by a certified public accountant attesting to the
percentage of excess profits, if any, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-15 and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-16. The Chief Financial
Officer, in coordination with the Manager of Abatements and
Special Taxes, shall review the audit and make a determination as
to any required increase in the service charge payment and the
payment of the excess profit, if any. The developer shall utilize the
City's figures in calculating excess profits.
(2) The audit and the determination of the Chief Financial Officer and
the Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes shall be submitted to
the City's designated auditors for their review. If the determination
of the Chief Financial Officer and Manager of Abatements and
Special Taxes is acceptable, it shall be used as the basis to bill for
any increases due and owing. If the determination or the audit is
not acceptable, the Chief Financial Officer, in coordination with the
Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes, shall notify the
developer, and the developer shall be responsible to remedy the
deficiencies noted and to resubmit a corrected audit for review. As
part of this annual audit process, the developer shall be responsible
for the payment of all costs incurred by the City to re-audit or
review the audit. Such costs will be the actual amount incurred by
the City. The cost shall be billed by the Manager of Abatements and
Special Taxes as part of the annual service charge and shall be paid
and collected in the same manner as the service charge.
C. Noncompliance.
§ 247-28 CHARTER § 247-28
C:1263
(1) During the term of the financial agreement, if the developer fails to
comply with the requirements for the submission of audits and/or
timely payments of amounts due, the Chief Financial Officer, in
coordination with the Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes,
shall enforce the terms of the financial agreement. The
enforcement procedures which follow shall not constitute the City's
sole or exclusive remedies, but rather shall be used in addition to
such other remedies as may be permitted under any law and by the
terms of the financial agreement.
(a) In the case where any payment due to the City pursuant to the
financial agreement, whether arising from real property taxes
or service charge payments, audit or administrative fees or
water or sewer charges, is in arrears for a period of three
months or more, the Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes
shall notify the developer that unless the total amount due,
including penalties and interest and subsequent charges, is
paid in full within a period of 30 days from the date of the
notification, the financial agreement shall be terminated. If the
developer fails to comply with such notice, the Manager of
Abatements and Special Taxes shall notify the Corporation
Counsel and recommend that a resolution be prepared, if
necessary, terminating the financial agreement. The Manager
of Abatements and Special Taxes shall also notify the Chief
Financial Officer, Tax Collector and Tax Assessor.
(b) If a financial agreement is terminated in this manner, the
developer shall have 30 calendar days to seek reinstatement of
the financial agreement. Reinstatement shall be permitted only
if all amounts due and owing have been paid in full within 30
calendar days. In that case, the Manager of Abatements and
Special Taxes shall recommend that the Corporation Counsel
prepare a resolution to restore the financial agreement for the
remainder of its original term. It shall be the responsibility of
the developer to pay a restoration fee to the City.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the City Clerk to file and distribute
approved copies of all resolutions or ordinances adopted to rescind
or restore financial agreements which arise pursuant to this
subsection, doing so in the same manner as set forth in § 247-26B
for the original executed financial agreements.
(3) In the event of any nonpayment, in addition to the above remedies,
the developer, in signing the financial agreement, agrees that the
City shall have the same rights to place liens and foreclose against
the project as though the nonpayment of the service charges were
delinquent property taxes.
(4) If an audit required to be submitted pursuant to the financial
agreement is not submitted when due or is incomplete for three
months or more from the date due, the Chief Financial Officer, in
§ 247-28 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-28
C:1264
§ 247-29. Termination of long-term tax exemptions. [Amended
4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
All exemptions granted pursuant to the provisions of this article, N.J.S.A.
55:14K-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. shall terminate at the time
prescribed and in accordance with the terms set forth in the financial
agreement. Upon the termination of the exemption granted pursuant to the
provisions of this article, N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1
et seq., the project, all affected parcels, land and all improvements made
thereto shall be assessed and subject to taxation as are other taxable
properties in the City. After the date of termination, all restrictions and
limitations upon the sponsor or the urban renewal entity shall terminate and
be at an end upon the entity's rendering of its final accounting to the City.
§ 247-30. Second term tax exemption. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 4-2010; 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
coordination with the Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes,
shall notify the developer that, unless the audit is submitted in
proper form within 30 days from the date of notification, the
financial agreement shall be terminated. If the developer fails to
comply with the requirements of the notice, the Manager of
Abatements and Special Taxes shall request the Corporation
Counsel to prepare a resolution terminating the financial
agreement and, after its adoption, shall thereafter treat the
property as conventionally taxed.
(a) If the financial agreement is terminated in this manner, the
remaining procedure shall be the same as set forth in
Subsection C(1)(a) and (3) above. The City may, however, at its
option, choose not to exercise its rights of termination of the
financial agreement for failure to submit an audit. Instead, the
City may cause an audit to be conducted by qualified personnel
under the City's direction and use that audit as the basis for
billing as if it had been submitted by the developer. The cost of
the audit shall be paid by the developer and billed and
collected in the same manner as the service charges. Should
the City invoke this option, the City shall not in any way be
barred or limited from exercising any other right to terminate
the financial agreement at any subsequent time.
(5) If the developer fails to comply with any other material provision of
the financial agreement, the Manager of Abatements and Special
Taxes shall notify the Corporation Counsel of the defect in the
performance of the developer. The Corporation Counsel, in
coordination with the Manager of Abatements and Special Taxes,
shall thereupon take those steps necessary to enforce the terms of
the financial agreement.
§ 247-28 CHARTER § 247-30
C:1265
A. A second term tax exemption is possible only for affordable housing
projects with an existing exemption at the time of adoption of this
article, to enable the continued maintenance of existing affordable
housing stock in East Orange.
B. A second term tax exemption may be granted if necessary for
refinancing of an existing affordable housing project, where such an
exemption is required by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency (HMFA) or its successor agency in order for the
refinancing to occur. Additionally, a second term tax exemption may be
granted if necessary for refinancing of an existing affordable housing
project funded with low-income housing tax credits, where such an
exemption is required by the lender.
C. A second term tax exemption may only be granted with an annual
payment structure that is greater than the annual payment structure
provided in the first-term tax exemption and if the terms in the
aggregate do not exceed the maximum allowed by statute. The term of
the exemption shall not exceed the length of the first mortgage created
by the second term tax exemption.
D. Applications for a second term tax exemption shall be subject to the
following criteria:
(1) The application must be filed in the same manner as set forth in
§ 247-22 of this article; with the applicable second term application
fee;
(2) Applicant must provide an in-depth analysis to the City of East
Orange supporting the benefit of granting second term tax
exemption;
(3) The applicant must prove granting the second term tax exemption
will improve the quality of life for the occupants of the project and
the quality of life for the City of East Orange;
(4) Applicant must not have any building violations during the initial
term of the tax exemption; if so, such violation(s) must have been
corrected within a reasonable time frame of the occurrence; failure
to do so will automatically terminate the request for a second term
tax exemption. Reasonable time frame for remediation of building
violations shall be determined by the applicable public officer;
(5) Applicant must continue to meet the requirements of all applicable
state laws, rules and regulations;
(6) The application must be submitted before the end of the term of the
first tax exemption;
(7) Applicant's history of late payments during the initial term of the
tax exemption shall be evaluated and may constitute a bar
regarding the new application.
§ 247-30 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-31
C:1266
§ 247-31. Review of second term tax exemption request. [Amended
4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
§ 247-32. Form of financial agreement for second term tax
exemption.
The financial agreement shall be in the appropriate form as provided in
§ 247-25 of this article.
§ 247-33. Term of second term tax exemption. [Amended
11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 32-2012]
With respect to tax exemptions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., the
developer may be eligible for a second term tax exemption which shall not
be more than 50 years in aggregate from the date of approval of the first
term tax exemption with respect to eligible housing projects financed by the
New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency ("HMFA"), or another
lender.
§ 247-34. Filing. [Amended 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
This article shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, with the
Director of the Department of Finance and in the office of the Tax Collector.
Copies will be made available to the public and to all municipal employees,
upon request, for the appropriate fee, if applicable.
A. Upon receipt of the application, the Director of Policy, Planning and
Development shall distribute copies in the same manner as set forth in
§ 247-23A. The Corporation Counsel shall then review the application
and make a determination pursuant to § 247-23B. Subsequent to the
Corporation Counsel's review, the Mayor's Tax Exemption Review
Committee shall have 60 days to review the application in accordance
with § 247-23C of this article and, upon arriving at a recommendation,
forward a report to the Mayor and governing body. Thereafter, the
Mayor shall have a maximum of 60 days to review the report pursuant
to § 247-23E. Upon receipt of recommendation from the Mayor, the
Municipal Council shall have 45 days to approve or reject the second
term tax exemption request or direct that the application be returned to
the developer for correction or change. Rejection may be conditional or
unconditional. An application that is conditionally rejected may be
resubmitted with the applicable resubmission fee. An application that is
unconditionally rejected may only be submitted as a new application
with payment of the applicable fee.
B. The applicant shall not be eligible for additional tax exemptions beyond
approval of a second term tax exemption.
§ 247-31 CHARTER § 247-34
C:1267

ARTICLE III
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 46-2016]
§ 247-35. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provision of P.L. 2003, c.
114 (N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq.), which authorizes the governing body of a
municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage
rate not to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after
July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges
of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms
in a hotel, motel or similar establishment subject to taxation pursuant to
Subsection (d) Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax),
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 247-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOTEL — Any establishment, public or private, engaged in the business
of furnishing or providing rooms and overnight camping facilities intended
or designed for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes to transient guests,
which establishment consists of two or more guest rooms but does not
include any hospital, convalescent or nursing home or sanitarium or any
hotel-like facility operated by or in connection with a hospital or medical
clinic providing rooms exclusively for patients and their families.
MOTEL — A "hotel" with individual entrances from the exterior of the
building to each room or unit.
PURCHASER — A transient guest of a hotel or motel.
§ 247-37. Establishment of tax; amount.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
City of East Orange, which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of 3%
on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel in the City of East
Orange in a hotel or motel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of
Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 247-38. Effect on other taxes.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 247-35 CHARTER § 247-39
C:1269
§ 247-39. Regulations, requirements and penalties.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be administered in conformity
with the statutory requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114 (N.J.S.A. 40:48F-2):
§ 247-40. Collection.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the City
of East Orange by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel
customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be
personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected
hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to
collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and
payable at the same time, provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the
City of East Orange shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding
brought to collect the tax.
§ 247-41. Disposition of collected funds.
§ 247-42. Exemption.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized shall not be imposed
on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user, or consumer is an entity
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A hotel or motel establishment ("vendor") shall not assume or absorb
any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be a minimum
of $1,000.
A. Every person required to collect the tax shall, on or before the 28th day
of each month, make and file a return for the preceding month with the
Director of the Division of Taxation ("Director") in the New Jersey
Department of the Treasury and submit all collected funds to the
Director in accordance with the general reporting requirements of
N.J.S.A. 54:32B-17.
B. The State Treasurer shall pay and distribute to each municipality the
amount of revenues certified by the director of the Division of Taxation.
§ 247-39 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-42
C:1270
exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the Sales and Use
Tax Act pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 9, P.L. 1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A.
54:32B-9).
§ 247-42 CHARTER § 247-42
C:1271
Chapter 249
TAXICABS AND LIVERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 247-42 EAST ORANGE CODE § 247-42
C:1272
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 249-1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police for the City of East Orange or his
designee.
DIRECTOR OF LICENSING — The Tax Collector for the City of East Orange
or her designee.
LIVERY — Any automobile, limousine or motorcar, other than a bus or
taxicab, which is engaged in the business of transporting passengers for
hire, other than in the conduct of a funeral, and operates out of closed
premises, and which is hired by charter or for a particular contract or by
the day or hour or other fixed period, or charges a fare or price agreed upon
in advance between the operator and the passenger.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motorcar, other than a bus, livery or
limousine, which is engaged in the business of transporting passengers for
hire.
§ 249-1 CHARTER § 249-1
C:1273

ARTICLE II
Powers of Director of Licensing
§ 249-2. Enumeration of powers.
A. The Director of Licensing shall have charge of and shall control the
examination of applicants for licenses for taxicabs, liveries, limousines
and drivers thereof; the licensing, regulation and inspection of taxicabs,
limousines and liveries; the licensing of drivers; and the enforcement of
all the provisions of this chapter. The Director shall have the power to
approve, deny, suspend or revoke any taxicab, limousine or livery
license or the licenses of drivers of taxicabs, limousines or liveries, for
cause, as hereinafter provided. The powers conferred on the Chief of
Police by this chapter shall be exercised under the control of the
Director.
B. The Director of Licensing shall promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations to implement this chapter and to carry out its intentions.
The Director shall cause the rules and regulations as promulgated,
together with this chapter, and any amendments or additions thereto, to
be printed and distributed to the holders of taxicab, limousine and/or
livery licenses and to all those who in the future shall obtain such
license or licenses.
§ 249-2 CHARTER § 249-2
C:1275

ARTICLE III
Licensing of Vehicles
§ 249-3. License required.
No person shall hire out or keep or use for hire or pay, or cause to be
kept or used for hire or pay, any taxicab, limousine or livery without first
having obtained a license for that purpose from the Director of Licensing. A
separate license shall be required for each taxicab, limousine or livery.
§ 249-4. Application for license.
§ 249-5. Insurance.
A. Each application for a taxicab, limousine or livery license shall be in
writing and filed with the Director of Licensing, in duplicate, on forms
provided. The application shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner.
(2) The name and address of the lessee, if any.
(3) The business or trade name, if any, under which the owner or lessee
will operate the taxicab, limousine or livery.
(4) The serial number, make, model, year and color of the taxicab,
limousine or livery.
(5) The automobile registration number issued for said vehicle by the
New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
(6) The maximum number of persons it is to carry.
B. In the event that, after the filing of said application and before the
expiration of the license issued thereunder, any change in
circumstances shall occur with respect to any information submitted on
the application, the applicant shall, no later than 10 days following the
occurrence of such change, give written notice thereof to the Director
of Licensing, indicating the nature thereof and the manner in which the
information set forth on the original application should be amended,
modified or corrected to conform to such change in circumstances.
A. No taxicab, livery or limousine shall be licensed until a policy of
insurance has been filed with the Director of Licensing. The policy must
be issued by an insurance company that is licensed to do business and
regulated by the State of New Jersey. Insurance companies that are
only subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of other states or foreign
jurisdictions do not qualify as compliant. The policy for taxicabs shall be
in the minimum sum of $150,000, and for livery and limousines, as
provided by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 in minimum sum of $1,500,000, against
any loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon every taxicab
owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered by any
§ 249-3 CHARTER § 249-5
C:1277
§ 249-6. Inspection before licensing; emergency equipment.
No taxicab, limousine or livery license shall be approved or issued until
the vehicle has been thoroughly inspected and found to be in a clean
and sanitary condition and mechanically safe for the transportation of
passengers, to be evidenced by a current inspection sticker issued by the
New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles. Each vehicle shall also contain a
first aid kit, fire extinguisher and some sort of equipment allowing for an
emergency contact.
§ 249-7. Identification on taxicabs.
No taxicab license shall be approved or issued until the taxicab has been
inspected in the manner provided in § 249-6 and is found to meet the
following requirements:
§ 249-8. Principal place of business.
No person shall operate or permit a livery owned or controlled by him/her to
be operated as a livery upon the streets of East Orange unless the principal
place of his or her business is in the City of East Orange. Said principal
place of business must be a lawful occupancy and within all municipal rules
and regulations. No vehicles can be stored on the streets of the City of East
Orange. A certificate of occupancy or continued use where required must
be presented to the Licensing Division.
§ 249-9. Taxicab business operation rules and regulations.
person as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the taxicab, livery, limousine upon any public
street.
B. Such policy shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Licensing
and the City Corporation Counsel.
A. There shall be displayed on the exterior of the two front doors of each
taxicab the name or trade name of the owner. The height of the lettering
shall be at least three inches. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a
dome light on the roof of each vehicle, and said light shall be in working
order. No taxicab shall bear a name, monogram, insignia or color
scheme in conflict with the name, monogram, insignia or color scheme
used by any other person licensed hereunder in such a manner as to
mislead or deceive the public. Taxicabs operated by one owner must be
identical in color.
B. Taxi fare rates are conspicuously posted on the inside of each vehicle.
C. The vehicle license, driver's operating license, insurance card and rate
card with zone map must be conspicuously placed inside all vehicles,
pursuant to the provisions of the chapter.
§ 249-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 249-9
C:1278
§ 249-10. Issuance of licenses; form.
Licenses for taxicabs, limousines and liveries shall be issued by the Director
of Licensing and shall be signed by him or her in the name of the City.
§ 249-11. Taxicab license cards.
Upon issuance of a taxicab license, the Director of Licensing shall issue to
the licensee a card containing the name of the owner, the license number
A. All taxicab companies operating in the City of East Orange must be
licensed pursuant to the rules and regulations contained herein.
B. They must maintain office space within the City that includes a hardwired
phone line for incoming requests for services and other business
operations. The office must have regular and posted hours of operation
and must be staffed by at least one person during open hours.
C. A certificate of occupancy must be issued by the City.
D. Every company must own at least five taxicab licenses entitling it to
operate at least five vehicles within the City. Those companies
operating at the time of the adoption of this chapter that don't meet this
requirement are deemed lawful.
E. All taxicabs operating within the City of East Orange must be affiliated
with a licensed taxicab company. All taxicabs must be licensed pursuant
to this chapter.
F. All taxicab companies licensed by the City are responsible for the
meeting of all City and state requirements of the individual cabs
licensed under their authority.
G. All taxicabs operating under a specific company must have the same
color scheme as approved by the Director of Licensing.
H. All taxicab companies must maintain dispatch and trip records for all
vehicles licensed under their company. These records must be available
for inspection at any time upon the request of the Director of Licensing.
I. All taxicab companies must maintain up-to-date records of all affiliated
drivers to include name, residence address, and phone number. These
records must be accessible upon request by the Director of Licensing.
J. A lost-and-found must be maintained for any items belonging to
passengers that were left in a taxi. This must be made available to the
public during reasonable business hours at the principal place of
business of the company. Reasonable business hours are prescribed as
being from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
K. No vehicle shall be more than 10 years old. No vehicle shall be older
than seven years as of January 1, 2013, or an odometer reading of
250,000 miles.
§ 249-9 CHARTER § 249-11
C:1279
of the vehicle, year of issue and the rates of fare as provided in hereof. The
card shall be inserted in a card rack or frame provided by the owner and
attached on the inside of the taxicab on the front dashboard.
§ 249-12. Livery and limousine license cards.
Upon issuance of a livery or limousine license, the Director of Licensing
shall issue to the licensee a card containing the name of the owner or lessee,
the license number of the vehicle and year of issue. The card shall remain in
the livery or limousine for which issued. It shall be exhibited by the owner
or lessee or driver thereof upon request.
§ 249-13. Duration of license.
All taxicab licenses shall expire August 31 and must be renewed prior
thereto, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Any application filed for
renewal after September 15 will be subject to a renewal assessment of $500
per vehicle.
§ 249-14. Transfer of license restricted.
Each taxicab, limousine or livery license shall apply only to the person to
whom granted and shall not be transferable to any other persons. With the
approval of the Director of Licensing, the holder of a taxicab, limousine
or livery license applicable to a particular taxicab, limousine or livery may
transfer the same to another taxicab, limousine or livery owned or leased by
him or her upon payment of a transfer fee of $25.
§ 249-15. Number of taxicab, livery and limousine licenses.
§ 249-16. License fees.
A. The number of taxicab licenses outstanding shall not at any time exceed
130. Any license issued in excess of 100 will be issued at the discretion
of the Director of Licensing. The number of livery and limousine
licenses outstanding shall not at any time exceed 50 presently.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the renewal of licenses
in existence on the effective date of this section. For the purpose of this
section, any license for a new license term which is issued to replace a
license which expired on the last day of the license term immediately
preceding the commencement of the new license term, or which is
issued to replace a license which will expire on the last day of the
license term immediately preceding the commencement of said new
license term, shall be deemed to be a renewal of the expired or expiring
license; provided, however, that said new license is of the same type as
the expired or expiring license, is issued to the holder of the expired or
expiring license and is issued pursuant to an application therefor which
shall have been filed prior to the expiration of the expiring license.
Licenses issued otherwise than herein provided shall be deemed to be
new licenses.
§ 249-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 249-16
C:1280
A. The license fee for each taxicab shall be $250. All duplicate and
replacement licenses shall be $25. The license fee for limousines and
livery cars shall be $250. However, the fee of any license issued in
February or anytime thereafter before the expiration date of August 31
in any given year shall be $125.
B. The Director of Licensing shall charge a fee of $500 for all taxicab
business licenses per year and a late fee, where applicable, of $250. All
duplicate and replacement licenses shall be $25.
§ 249-16 CHARTER § 249-16
C:1281

ARTICLE IV
Licensing of Drivers
§ 249-17. License required.
No taxicab, limousine or livery licensed under this chapter shall be operated
on the streets of the City except by a driver who shall have first obtained a
license for that purpose from the Director of Licensing.
§ 249-18. License application; qualifications of applicant.
All applications for drivers' licenses shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the Director of Licensing, in duplicate, on forms provided by the Police
Department. No person shall be licensed as a driver under this chapter
unless he or she:
§ 249-19. Credential check.
Before issuance of a driver's license, an applicant shall be subject to a name
and credential check by the Police Department.
A. Furnishes with his or her application three copies of a recent
photograph of himself or herself, of a size not less than 1 3/4 inches in
length and 1 1/4 inches in width, and the certificate of a reputable
physician certifying that the applicant has been examined within the
preceding 60 days and that he or she has no infirmity of body or mind
which might render him or her unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab
or livery.
B. Is at least 21 years of age.
C. Is a holder of a New Jersey auto driver's license.
D. Is able to understand, read and write the English language.
E. Is possessed of a satisfactory knowledge of traffic regulations and of the
geography of the City.
F. Is of good character and must always have a neat and clean
appearance.
G. Is not addicted to the use of drugs or intoxicating liquors.
H. Is not a habitual violator of the Motor Vehicle Act and must produce a
five-year driver's abstract so that a determination can be made as to
these criteria.
I. Has not been convicted of an indictable offense or any criminal offense
involving moral turpitude.
J. Pays all required fees required by this chapter.
K. Must be a resident of New Jersey for at least one year.
§ 249-17 CHARTER § 249-20
C:1283
§ 249-20. Driver licenses.
Licenses issued to drivers shall be of one type. They shall permit the
operation by the licensed driver of a taxicab, limousine or livery.
§ 249-21. Issuance of license and card.
Upon approval of the application for license and payment of the license
fee hereinafter provided, the Director of Licensing shall issue a license in
the name of the City. The Director of Licensing shall issue to the licensee
an identification card. The card shall contain the name of the licensee, a
straight-view photograph of the licensee and the City license number of the
licensee.
§ 249-22. Display of card.
While engaged as a taxicab driver, the licensee shall insert his or her
license identification in a card rack or frame provided by the owners and
attached on the back of the front seat in a place readily visible to a
passenger. The driver of any taxicab shall be responsible for keeping his or
her identification card in the taxicab operated by him or her at the time.
While engaged as a livery or limousine driver, the licensee shall have his
or her identification card in his or her possession and shall exhibit it upon
request.
§ 249-23. Duration of license.
All drivers' licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire August 1
next succeeding the date thereof, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
§ 249-24. License fee.
The fee for a driver's license shall be $50.
§ 249-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 249-24
C:1284
ARTICLE V
Regulation of Vehicles and Drivers
§ 249-25. Sanitation and safety of vehicles; inspections.
Licensed taxicabs, limousines and liveries may be inspected and
reinspected at any time for cleanliness, sanitary condition, and mechanical
safety for the transportation of passengers and general safety and fitness
for public patronage. Such inspections shall be made and records thereof
shall be kept by the Police Department.
§ 249-26. Alteration of name, insignia or color of taxicab.
The name, monogram, insignia or color scheme of a licensed taxicab shall
not be changed after the issuance of a license therefor so as to be in conflict
with the name, monogram, insignia or color scheme used by any other
licensee.
§ 249-27. Change of address of owners and drivers.
Any change of address of the owner of any taxicab, limousine or livery or of
any driver occurring after the issuance of a license under this chapter shall
be reported by said licensee to the Director of Licensing, in writing, within
three days after such change. The Director of Licensing shall immediately
report such change of address to the Chief of Police.
§ 249-28. Taxicab rates of fare.
§ 249-29. Record of taxicab passenger trips.
Every licensed taxicab driver shall record in writing the time and place each
passenger is accepted and the time and place of discharge of the passenger.
A. The City of East Orange will be divided into six zones. The fare will be
$7 if the pickup and dropoff is within the same zone, and $1 additional
to carry passengers between zones, with a maximum charge of $12.
There is no fee for children five years of age and under.
B. When there are three or more passengers, a two-dollar fee will be
added to the fare.
C. There will be a charge of $1 for all luggage beyond the first bag, a flat
fee for groceries of $2 and laundry for $2, only if driver assists in
handling these items.
D. Flat rate to Newark Airport not to exceed $35; flat rate to Penn Station,
Newark, $20; to LaGuardia Airport, $100 (plus tolls); and Kennedy
Airport, $120 (plus tolls).
E. Fares outside of the City of East Orange within a one- to three-mile
radius may not exceed $16. Rates outside this provision will be
determined between the passenger and driver prior to departure.
§ 249-25 CHARTER § 249-29
C:1285
Such records shall be kept intact for one year from the date thereof. Such
records shall be kept open for inspection at all times during the one-year
period by a duly authorized representative of the Police Department.
§ 249-30. Cruising of taxicabs.
No driver of any licensed taxicab in soliciting employment shall so operate a
taxicab as to interfere with or impede unnecessarily the movement of other
vehicles or pedestrians. Employment may be solicited by driving through
any public street or place at a rate of speed that will not interfere with or
impede traffic. No passenger shall be solicited unless within six feet of a
taxicab.
§ 249-31. Loading and discharge of taxicab passengers.
No taxicab passenger shall be accepted or discharged on a public street
except at the curb.
§ 249-32. Parking and taxicab stand regulations.
The Director of Licensing along with the Director of Public Works are
hereby empowered to establish open stands in such places upon the streets
of the City of East Orange as they deem necessary for the use of taxicabs
operating in the City. Both Directors shall create such open stands after
taking into consideration the need for such stands, convenience to the
general public and with the recommendation of the Police and Fire
Departments of the City and approval of the City Council by resolution. No
licensed taxicab may park or stand in any public street or public place in
the City except in such place or places as may be designated by ordinance,
resolution or regulation adopted in accordance with law. There shall be a
metal sign attached to a stanchion on the curb or other conspicuous place
prescribed by the Chief of Police or the Director of Public Works designating
a taxi parking space. Only such taxicabs as are for hire may remain at
designated taxicab stands while waiting for employment and shall position
their vehicles in a single line. After the first taxicab in line leaves the stand,
those behind shall move up. Any other taxicab seeking parking space in
such stand shall approach it only from the rear thereof.
A. No taxi in public or private use may park on public streets or in public
places in the City of East Orange unless the driver is waiting to pick up
or discharge passengers. No such taxi shall stand at the curb within 15
feet of the entrance of any public building, and no parking stand will be
within 10 feet of any crosswalk. This provision shall not apply to
taxicabs parked at a taxi stand.
B. The Director of Licensing shall prescribe the maximum number of
taxicabs occupying a stand at one time.
C. Nothing in this section shall prevent any passenger from boarding the
taxicab of his/her choice at any stand.
§ 249-29 EAST ORANGE CODE § 249-32
C:1286
§ 249-33. Acceptance of passengers; collection of fares; shared
rides.
The driver of any licensed taxicab shall have the authority to demand
payment of legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless such
fare is so prepaid, but no driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse
employment by an orderly person for transportation anywhere in the City.
No driver of a taxicab shall carry any person other than the first passenger
employing him or her without the consent of the first passenger.
D. Taxicabs shall be permitted to stand, load and unload passengers at
locations identified by appropriate signage as "taxicab stands." The
locations and quantity of respective stands on each roadway is as
follows:
Street Number of Stands
Brick Church Plaza 12
Central Avenue (in front of EOGH) 3
City Hall Plaza (opposite to EO Train
Station)
5
Dr. MLK Boulevard (west of South
Harrison Street)
3
Tremont Avenue (opposite VA hospital) 3
Brookwood Street (north of South Orange
Avenue)
3
South Orange Avenue (east of Brookwood
Street)
3
Central Avenue (west of South Grove
Street)
3
Central Avenue (east of South Grove
Street)
3
Princeton Street (south of Central Avenue) 3
Park Avenue (east of North Clinton Street) 2
Total: 43
E. All taxicabs are required to follow all laws pertaining to public littering
and health. Taxicabs are to relocate in the event that they are impeding
the sweeping of streets, plowing of snow or under any circumstance
that the City deems exigent. No taxicabs are to be parked overnight in
taxicab stands.
F. Only vehicles licensed to operate within the City of East Orange as
taxicabs are permitted to stand in spaces marked for this use.
§ 249-32 CHARTER § 249-34
C:1287
§ 249-34. Misleading passengers; direct routes.
No owner or driver of any licensed taxicab, limousine or livery shall induce
any person to employ him or her by knowingly misinforming or misleading
such person. No driver shall convey any passenger to any place or by any
route other than the most direct route, unless otherwise directed by said
passenger.
§ 249-35. Solicitation of passengers by liveries and limousines.
No owner or driver of any licensed livery or limousine may solicit patronage
in any public street or public place in the City.
§ 249-36. Lost or abandoned property in vehicles.
The driver of any licensed taxicab, limousine or livery, immediately after the
termination of any hiring or employment, shall carefully search his or her
taxicab or livery for any property lost or abandoned therein. Such property,
unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner, shall be reported in writing
by the driver or by the owner of the taxicab, limousine or livery to the Police
Department, giving particulars and a brief description of said property,
within 24 hours after the finding of the same. All such property not claimed
within said twenty-four-hour period shall be turned over by such driver or
owner of a taxicab, limousine or livery to the Property Clerk of the Police
Department.
§ 249-37. Private use of licensed vehicles.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the use of a taxicab,
limousine or livery for private purposes, provided that there is no
solicitation of patronage.
§ 249-38. Illegal or immoral conduct.
A. No licensed driver shall commit an act or acts which would disqualify
him or her for a driver's license under § 249-18 (drug or liquor
addiction, habitual violation of the Motor Vehicle Act, conviction of an
indictable offense or conviction of any criminal offense involving moral
turpitude) or shall permit a taxicab or livery driven by him or her to be
used for any illegal or immoral purpose.
B. No owner of a licensed taxicab, limousine or livery shall permit the use
of such taxicab, limousine or livery for illegal or immoral purposes.
§ 249-34 EAST ORANGE CODE § 249-38
C:1288
ARTICLE VI
Suspension or Revocation of License
§ 249-39. Taxicabs.
The license of any taxicab issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended
or revoked by the Director of Licensing for any of the following causes:
§ 249-40. Livery and limousine vehicles.
The license of any livery or limousine may be suspended or revoked by the
Director of Licensing for any of the following causes:
§ 249-41. Driver's license.
The license of any driver may be suspended or revoked by the Director of
Licensing for any of the following causes:
§ 249-42. Procedure.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter, a violation of any provision
of any other ordinance of the City of East Orange or a violation of any of
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. The falsification of any information contained in the application for a
license.
C. Permitting or suffering any taxicab to be used for any illegal or immoral
purpose or purposes.
D. If the vehicle is found to be unsafe or unfit for public patronage.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter, a violation of any provision
of any other ordinance of the City of East Orange or a violation of any of
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. The falsification of any information contained in the application for a
license.
C. Permitting or suffering any livery or limousine to be used for any illegal
or immoral purpose or purposes.
D. If the vehicle is found to be unsafe or unfit for public patronage.
A. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, a violation of any
provisions of any other ordinance of the City of East Orange or a
violation of any of the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Falsification of any information contained in the application for a
driver's license under this chapter.
C. Permitting or suffering a taxicab, limousine or livery operated by him or
her to be used for any illegal or immoral purpose or purposes.
§ 249-39 CHARTER § 249-42
C:1289
A. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked except after
due notice and opportunity for a hearing. Pending such hearing,
licenses may be suspended.
B. Whenever any license issued pursuant to this chapter has been
suspended, it shall be forthwith surrendered to the Director of
Licensing and held by him or her until the expiration of the period of
suspension; and whenever any license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be revoked, said license shall be forthwith surrendered to the
Director of Licensing, who shall cancel the same.
§ 249-42 EAST ORANGE CODE § 249-42
C:1290
ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 249-43. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000,
imprisonment in the county/municipal jail for a term not exceeding 90
days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof as determined by the Municipal Court Judge. Each
day on which a violation of an ordinance exists shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation and shall be subject to imposition of a
separate penalty for each day of the violation as the Municipal Court
Judge may determine.
B. The penalty provided for in this section shall be deemed in addition to
the provisions for suspension and revocation of licenses set forth
herein.
C. Fine schedule:
Type Fine
Insurance requirements License revoked until
compliance
Safety requirements License revoked until
compliance
Clean and sanitary conditions $100 first offense, $200 for all
subsequent
Credentials not properly displayed $250 first offense, $500 all
subsequent
Front seat restrictions $50
Refusal to carry passengers $275
Overcharge or attempted overcharge $275
Unlicensed driver operating vehicle $1,500
Operation of unlicensed vehicle $1,500
Picking up passenger without consent
of first passenger
$125
Improper conduct $275
Failure to issue receipts $50
Illegal use of vehicle Immediate suspension, fine of
$1,000
Solicitation of passenger $100
Improper driver appearance $50
Failure to use direct route $100
Excessive horn blowing:
§ 249-43 CHARTER § 249-43
C:1291
§ 249-44. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof
which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 249-45. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with this
chapter are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such conflict or
inconsistency.
§ 249-46. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and upon expiration of 20
days following publication unless otherwise provided by resolution of this
City Council.
Type Fine
From 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. $275
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. $100
Failure to have vehicle inspected $1,500
§ 249-43 EAST ORANGE CODE § 249-46
C:1292
Chapter 251
TENANTS' PROPERTY TAX REBATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rent control and conversions — See Ch. 218. Tax exemptions and abatements — See Ch.
247.
§ 251-1. Owners of rental property to provide property tax rebate to
tenants.
An owner of qualified real rental property shall provide a property tax
rebate to the tenants thereof as provided in the Tenants' Property Tax
Rebate Act322 for each year in which the owner of such rental property
receives a property tax reduction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-6.4.
§ 251-2. Form of tax rebate.
The tax rebate shall be issued to the tenant in the form of a certified check
or money order or by cash that is accompanied by a receipt.
§ 251-3. Fine for failure to provide rebate.
Any property owner of qualified real rental property who fails to provide
a tenant or, in the case of a lease terminated pursuant to P.L. 1971, c.
318 (N.J.S.A. 46:8-9.1), the executor or administrator of the estate of the
tenant or the surviving spouse of the tenant so terminating the lease with
a property tax rebate in accordance with the provisions of the Tenants'
Property Tax Rebate Act shall be liable to the tenant or tenant executor,
administrator or surviving spouse for twice the amount of the property
tax rebate to which the tenant is entitled or $100, whichever is greater,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-6.11.
Chapter 252
THEATERS, MOVIES AND EXHIBITIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II. Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
322. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-6.2 et seq.
§ 249-46 CHARTER § 252-1
C:1293
§ 252-1. Exemptions from licensing requirements.
There shall be exempted from the licensing requirements of Chapter 170,
Licenses and Fees, all showings of motion pictures, theatrical dramatic
productions or exhibitions conducted by any school, college or religious
institution. There shall also be exempted from the application of Chapter
170, Licenses and Fees, any motion-picture show, legitimate theater,
dramatic production or exhibition conducted by:
§ 252-2. Obscene or indecent shows or performances.
No person shall present or cause to be presented any motion picture or
engage in any performance, entertainment or exhibition which is lewd,
obscene or indecent.
§ 252-3. Motion-picture theaters. [Added 3-27-1971 by Ord. No.
5-1971]
Regulations for motion-picture theaters as licensed under Chapter 170,
Licenses and Fees, of this Code, shall be as follows:
A. Any organization or group not for profit where such event is an isolated
or single activity and does not represent the regular conduct of a series
of performances which would otherwise require licensing.
B. Any other person or group where no charge is made.
A. Type of picture, recommended viewing public and age group
restrictions for viewing of any motion picture to be exhibited and made
available to the public shall comply with ratings or schedules adopted
by the motion-picture industry.
B. No motion picture shall be made available or exhibited to the public
unless the type of picture is clearly indicated in advertisement and the
classification of the film is posted conspicuously in front of the theater.
Said type and classification and the age group for which same is
recommended shall comply with the ratings and schedules of the
motion-picture industry.
C. Within 24 hours upon the booking of any motion picture for public
viewing, the licensee of a motion-picture theater shall file with the Chief
of Police the name of the motion picture, the date of showing and the
rating given the motion picture by the motion-picture industry.
D. Proof of age of anyone applying for admission shall be required if that
person's age is not physically apparent as being above the restricted
age.
E. Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall warrant the
suspension or revocation of the license issued by the City to the motionpicture
house, as the Judge of the Municipal Court shall deem proper
§ 252-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 252-3
C:1294
§ 252-4. Signs displayed in lobby; exits. [Amended 3-27-1971 by
Ord. No. 5-1971]
§ 252-5. Cleanliness of buildings.
Every building or other structure used for public entertainment shall be
kept clean and free from dirt and dust and shall be cleaned as directed by
the Board of Health of the City.
§ 252-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
15-1980323]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000, 90 days'
imprisonment and/or 90 days of community service.
Chapter 255
TOY GUNS
§ 255-1. Sale prohibited; exceptions.
and just, in addition to such fine or punishment as may be permitted
under law.
A. In the lobby of every theater there shall be displayed a sign or placard
not less than eight inches square, upon which there shall be legibly
printed the following: "The nearest fire alarm box is at (giving location).
Fire Headquarters, Telephone No. .............. ."
B. All locations for the showing or producing of motion pictures, theatrical
dramatic productions or exhibitions shall have all exits clearly marked
in accordance with rules and regulations of the Fire Department.
A. Sale of toy pistols. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose
of to a minor any toy pistol that can be loaded with powder and ball or
blank cartridges to be exploded by means of metal caps, but nothing
herein contained shall apply to the sale or disposal of what are known
as "firecracker pistols" or such pistols as are used for the explosion of
paper caps.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell, possess or use
or attempt to use or give away any toy or imitation firearm which
substantially duplicates or can reasonably be perceived to be an actual
firearm unless:
(1) The entire exterior surface of such toy or imitation firearm is
colored white, bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright blue,
323. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-3 CHARTER § 255-1
C:1295
bright pink or bright purple, either singly or as the predominant
color in combination with other colors in any pattern; or
(2) Such toy or imitation firearm is constructed entirely of transparent
or translucent materials, which permits unmistakable observation
of the imitation or toy firearm 's complete contents;
(3) The barrel of such toy or imitation firearm, other than the barrel of
any such toy or imitation firearm that is a water gun, is closed with
the same material of which the toy or imitation firearm is made for
a distance of not less than 1/2 inch from the front end of said barrel;
(4) Such toy or imitation firearm has legibly stamped thereon the name
of the manufacturer of such trade name, mark or brand by which
the manufacturer can be readily identified; and
(5) Such toy or imitation firearm does not have attached thereto a laser
pointer.
C. Subsection B of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The possession or display of toy or imitation firearms by a
manufacturer or dealer solely for purposes of sales that are
accompanied by delivery to a point without the City;
(2) Any toy or imitation firearm that will be used only for or in the
production of television programs or theatrical or motion picture
presentations; provided, however, that such use of any toy or
imitation firearm complies with all applicable laws, rules or
regulations concerning request and receipt of waivers authorizing
such use;
(3) Nonfiring collector replica antique firearms, which look authentic
and may be a scale model but are not intended as toys, molded on
real firearms designed, manufactured and produced prior to 1898.
D. Air pistols and air rifles, selling or possessing:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or have in
such person's possession any air pistol or air rifle or similar
instrument in which the propelling force is a spring or air, except
that the sale of such instruments, if accompanied by delivery to a
point within the City, and possession for such purpose, shall not be
unlawful if such person shall have secured an annual license from
the City authorizing such sale and possession. The sale and delivery
of such instruments within the City from one licensee to another
licensee, and the use of such instruments in connection with an
amusement licensed by the Division of Consumer Affairs or at rifle
or pistol ranges duly authorized by law, shall not be considered a
violation of this section.
(2) All persons dealing in such instruments referred to in this section
shall keep a record showing the name and address of each person
§ 255-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 255-1
C:1296
§ 255-2. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 260
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 56.
City-owned vehicles — See Ch. 84.
Motor vehicle repair garages — See Ch. 175.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 238.
Taxicabs and liveries — See Ch. 249.
Wreckers — See Ch. 264.
purchasing such instrument or instruments, together with place of
delivery, and said record shall be open to inspection during regular
business hours by the officers of the Police Department of the City.
(3) Every person to whom a license shall be granted to sell, possess
and deliver the instruments described in this section shall pay an
annual fee of $10.
A. Toy guns. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, any
person who shall willfully violate any provisions of § 255-1A and B shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. Air pistols and air rifles. Any person who shall violate § 255-1D shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
§ 255-1 CHARTER § 255-2
C:1297

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 260-1. Definitions.
§ 260-2. Installation of traffic control devices. [Amended 5-27-1986
by Ord. No. 25-1986]
The Director of Public Works, when an appropriation is provided therefor, is
hereby authorized to provide for the installation and maintenance of traffic
control signs, signals and devices, when and as required under the traffic
ordinances of this City, to make effective the provisions of said ordinances,
subject to the approval of the Director of Motor Vehicles. All traffic control
signs, signals and devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, and any
other specifications approved by the Director of Motor Vehicles. All signs
and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the City.
§ 260-2.1. Flashing traffic control signals.
Flashing traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the
intersections listed below. Such installation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of an Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations,
Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey,
and shall conform to the design of the State Department of Transportation,
and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by said Department.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEAD-END STREET — A street having but one outlet for vehicular
traffic without special provision for turning around.[Added 7-20-2015
by Ord. No. 39-2015]
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Martin Luther
King Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Columbus Day, General Election Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day.[Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter placed or erected
for the regulation of parking by authority of this chapter.[Added
7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 30-2015]
U-TURN — Turning the vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite
direction.
B. Other words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same
definitions as are provided in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
§ 260-1 CHARTER § 260-2.1
C:1299
Street Intersections
Elmwood Avenue and Freeman Avenue
Freeman Avenue and Rhode Island Avenue
§ 260-2.2. Traffic control signal monitoring system. [Added
6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 18-2011]
A. Purpose. This section is enacted to encourage drivers to strictly obey
traffic control devices at intersections, facilitating the flow of traffic and
protecting the safety and well-being of motor vehicle occupants and
pedestrians in the City of East Orange in full compliance and
accordance with the provisions of an act of legislature of the State of
New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning Traffic Control Signal
Monitoring" and supplementing Title 39 of the Motor Vehicle Statutes
of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.12 et seq., and in accordance
with any rules and regulations enacted thereto or be enacted by the
Commissioner of the State of New Jersey's Department of
Transportation, the Chief Administrator of the State of New Jersey's
Motor Vehicle Commission, the Superintendent of the Division of the
New Jersey State Police and any Rules of Court that may be adopted by
the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
B. Intent. It is the intent that all terms, conditions, requirements of the
program as established through N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.12 et seq., are
specifically incorporated herein.
C. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, words and phrases herein
shall have the same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.12 et seq., and any
rules and regulations of the Commissioner of the State of New Jersey's
Department of Transportation, the Chief Administrator of the State of
New Jersey's Motor Vehicle Commission, the Superintendent of the
Division of the New Jersey State Police and any Rules of Court that may
be adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey enacted pursuant
thereto.
D. Installation.
(1) The City of East Orange hereby determines to install and utilize a
traffic control signal monitoring system at various intersections
within the City of East Orange as approved by the Commissioner of
Transportation pursuant to the Act.
(2) The system to be installed shall be approved by resolution of the
City Council of the City of East Orange.
(3) The City of East Orange shall have the authority to enter into a
contract by resolution of the City Council of the City of East
Orange, following a lawful procurement process, for the
installation of the system. Any contract that contains provisions
§ 260-2.1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-2.2
C:1300
contrary to the Act shall be null and void. [Amended 2-23-2015
by Ord. No. 7-2015]
(4) The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be
approved by the City of East Orange's Department of Public Works
and shall be placed on each street converging into the affected
intersection as required by the Act. The sign shall be of a design
and placed in accordance with specifications determined and
approved by the Director of the City's Department of Public Works.
The specifications so approved shall conform with the uniform
system set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
(5) The City's Department of Public Works shall inspect and certify the
system at least once every six months from date of its installation.
E. Issuance of the summons. The City of East Orange's Police Department
shall review the recorded images produced by the system to determine
whether sufficient evidence exists demonstrating that a traffic signal
violation has occurred and shall issue a summons when appropriate in
accordance with Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes and the New Jersey
Rules of Court.
F. Use of recorded images.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the system shall be available for the exclusive use of
the sworn officers of the East Orange Police Department for the
purposes of discharging said officers' duties pursuant to P.L. 2007,
Chapter 348 (the "Act").
(2) Any recorded image or information produced in connection with
the system shall not be deemed a public record under N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq., or common law. The recorded images shall not be:
(a) Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity or
government agency except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or court order in a criminal matter; or
(b) Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding
not directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
(3) Any recorded images or information collected in connection with a
traffic control signal violation shall not be retained after 60 days
following the collection of any fine or penalty.
(4) If a summons is not issued within 90 business days following the
traffic control signal violation, all recorded images and all
information collected with respect to the traffic control signal
violation shall be removed by the East Orange Police Department
within three business days.
§ 260-2.2 CHARTER § 260-2.2
C:1301
(5) The City of East Orange shall certify compliance to this section by
filing a report with the Commissioner of the State of New Jersey's
Department of Transportation in accordance with the Act.
G. Locations.
(1) Upon approval by the State of New Jersey's Department of
Transportation, traffic control signal monitoring systems may be
utilized and operated at the following locations:
(a) Freeway Drive East and South Harrison Street.
(b) Freeway Drive East and South Clinton Street.
(c) Freeway Drive West and South Walnut Street.
(d) Freeway Drive East and South Arlington Avenue.
(e) Central Avenue and South Munn Avenue.
(f) Central Avenue and Shepard Avenue.
(g) Central Avenue and Halsted Street.
(h) Central Avenue and Steuben Street/South 18th Street.
(i) Sanford Street and Tremont Avenue.
(j) Park Avenue and Prospect Street.
(k) Park Avenue and Washington Street.
(l) Park Avenue and East Park Street.
(m) Park Avenue and North Clinton Street.
(n) Park Avenue and North Grove Street.
(o) South Grove Street and Winthrop Terrace.
(p) Dodd Street and Glenwood Avenue.
(q) Rhode Island Avenue and South Clinton Street.
(r) South Orange Avenue and South Clinton Street.
H. Amendments to list of locations. Any amendments, additions, deletions
or modifications to the list of locations shall be by amending ordinance
submitted to the City Council of the City of East Orange.
I. Liability. The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a
traffic control signal violation summons pursuant to the system shall be
joint, subject to provisions of the Act.
J. Repealer. Any ordinance or parts thereof inconsistent with this section
are hereby repealed.
§ 260-2.2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-2.2
C:1302
§ 260-3. Director of Public Works to designate crosswalks; establish
safety zones and mark lanes. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
25-1986]
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized:
K. Effective date; expiration date. This section shall take effect upon final
passage and publication and in accordance with the laws of the State of
New Jersey and shall expire upon the terms and conditions set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.18.
L. Statement. This section establishes a pilot program as authorized by
P.L. 2007, Chapter 348 (the Act), an act of the Legislature of the State of
New Jersey determining that the installation of a traffic control signal
monitoring system by municipalities complements local law
enforcement and could serve as an effective tool in encouraging drivers
to observe and obey traffic control devices at intersections, thereby
increasing traffic flow and occupant and pedestrian safety, and
establishes the various intersections within the City of East Orange to
install the system.
A. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
B. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places
as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians subject to
the approval of the Director of Motor Vehicles.
C. To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may
deem advisable, consistent with the traffic ordinances of this City.
§ 260-2.2 CHARTER § 260-3
C:1303

ARTICLE II
Traffic Control
§ 260-4. Turning markers.
A. The Director of Public Works is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. [Amended
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
B. No person shall make a right or left turn at the locations listed, and only
in the manner described: [Amended 8-18-1997 by Ord. No.
12-1997; 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 12-1998]
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel Hours
Turn
Prohibition
At Intersection
of/ Location
Ampere
Plaza
Both U-turn
Central
Avenue
Both U-turn Orange City line
and Newark City
line
Central
Avenue
East 4:00 p.m. to
6:30 p.m.
Left South Oraton
Parkway
City Hall
Plaza
Both U-turn
City Hall
Plaza
West Left Main Street
Lincoln
Street
North School hours/
days only, Mon.
to Fri. 7:30
a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 12:30
p.m. to 1:30
p.m., 2:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
Right Hamilton Street
Lincoln
Street
South School hours/
days only, Mon.
to Fri. 7:30
a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 12:30
p.m. to 1:30
p.m., 2:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
Left Hamilton Street
Main Street Both U-turn Orange City line
and Newark City
line
Main Street West Right City Hall Plaza
§ 260-4 CHARTER § 260-4
C:1305
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel Hours
Turn
Prohibition
At Intersection
of/ Location
North
Arlington
Avenue
North Right Parkway
entrance
North Grove
Street
Both Left Park Avenue
North
Harrison
Street
Both U-turn Main Street
North
Harrison
Street
North Right William Street
North Park
Street
South Right Washington
Street
North Ward
Place
North Right At underpass at
railroad
Park Avenue Both Left North Grove
Street
Park Avenue Both Left Prospect Street
Park Avenue Both Left Washington
Street
Park End
Place
East Left Sanford Street
Prospect
Place
North Right or
left
Main Street
Prospect
Street
Both Left Park Avenue
Prospect
Street
[Added
9-16-2002
by Ord. No.
13-2002]
West All Left Exiting all
driveways at
Campus High
School
Sanford
Street
North Left Park End Place
Washington
Street
Both Left William Street
Washington
Street
South Left North Park
Street
§ 260-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-5
C:1306
§ 260-5. No turn on red. [Amended 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 4-1998;
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 6-1998; 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998;
11-26-2001 by Ord. No. 8-2001; 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011324]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
Intersection Movement Prohibited Days/Hours
4th Avenue and North
Grove Street
All approaches Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Central Avenue and
Evergreen Place
Westbound Central
Avenue to northbound
Evergreen Place
All
Central Avenue and
South Burnett Street
All approaches All
Dr. Martin Luther King
Boulevard and Freeway
Drive West
Eastbound Dr. Martin
Luther King Boulevard
to Freeway Drive West
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King
Boulevard and Harrison
Street
Eastbound on Dr.
Martin Luther King
Boulevard to
southbound on
Harrison Street
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King
Boulevard and North
Arlington Avenue
Westbound Dr. Martin
Luther King Boulevard
to North Arlington
Avenue
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King
Boulevard and North
Clinton Street
Westbound on Dr.
Martin Luther King
Boulevard to
northbound on North
Clinton Street
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Dr. Martin Luther King
Boulevard and North
Munn Avenue
Eastbound Dr. Martin
Luther King Boulevard
to North Munn Avenue
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Elmwood Avenue and
South Clinton Street
All approaches Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Elmwood Avenue and
South Clinton Street
All approaches Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Hoffman Boulevard and
North Grove Street
All approaches All
North 19th Street and
William Street
All approaches Monday through Friday;
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
324. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-5 CHARTER § 260-5
C:1307
North Arlington Avenue
and Parkway Drive
Northbound North
Arlington Avenue to
Parkway Drive
Northbound
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
North Grove Street and
William Street
All approaches All
North Oraton Parkway
and Park Avenue
Northbound on North
Oraton Parkway to
eastbound on Park
Avenue
All
Park Avenue and
Lincoln Street
All approaches Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Park Avenue and North
Clinton Street
All approaches Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Park Avenue and North
Grove Street
All approaches All
Park Avenue and North
Oraton Parkway
All approaches All
Rhode Island Avenue
and South Clinton
Street
All approaches Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Sanford Street and
Elmwood Avenue
All approaches Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
South Arlington Avenue
and Central Avenue
Southbound South
Arlington Avenue to
Central Avenue
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
South Grove Street and
Central Avenue
All approaches All
South Grove Street and
Sussex Avenue
All approaches All
South Harrison Street
and Central Avenue
All approaches Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
South Maple Avenue
and Central Avenue
Southbound on South
Maple Avenue to
Central Avenue
All
South Munn Avenue
and Central Avenue
Southbound South
Munn Avenue to
Central Avenue
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
South Oraton Parkway
and Central Avenue
South Oraton Parkway
to Central Avenue
All
South Walnut Street
and Freeway Drive
West
Southbound South
Walnut Street to
Freeway Drive West
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 260-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-5
C:1308
Springdale Avenue and
Grove, all four corners
All approaches Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Springdale Avenue and
North Clinton Street
Eastbound Springdale
Avenue to North
Clinton Street
Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Telford Street and
Tremont Avenue
All approaches Monday through Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Winthrop Terrace and
South Grove Street
All approaches All
§ 260-6. Traffic control islands.
Traffic control islands shall be installed and operated at the intersections
listed below. Such installations shall be in accordance with the provisions
of "An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations," Subtitle
1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, and
shall conform to the design of the State of New Jersey Department of
Transportation and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by said
Department.
Intersection
Lawrence Street and North Walnut Street
§ 260-7. One-way streets.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall drive
only in the direction indicated on such signs on those streets designated as
one-way streets by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Bedford Street North From Newark City line to Tremont
Avenue
Birchwood Avenue North From Newark City line to Central
Avenue
Centerway South From Springdale Avenue to Crescent
Place
Crawford Street South From Tremont Avenue to Newark
City line
Crescent Place West From North 18th Street to North
19th Street
Fairmount Terrace
[Added 6-20-2011
by Ord. No.
16-2011]
South From Mountainview Avenue to South
Orange Avenue
§ 260-5 CHARTER § 260-7
C:1309
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Garfield Place West From Hawthorne Place to Birchwood
Avenue
Halsted Street North From Norwood Place to Tremont
Avenue
Hawthorne Place South From Central Avenue to Garfield
Place
Hillcrest Terrace
[Added 6-20-2011
by Ord. No.
16-2011]
South From Mountainview Avenue to South
Orange Avenue
Hollywood Plaza Counterclockwise
From Main Street to Main Street
North Clinton Street North From Bloomfield Town line to Ely
Place
North 18th Street South From Ampere Plaza to Whitney Place
North Oraton
Parkway
North From Main Street to 4th Avenue
North Oraton
Parkway
South From Park Avenue to Main Street
North Park Street North From Springdale Avenue to Dodd
Street
North Walnut Street North From Rutledge Avenue to Bloomfield
Town line
North Walnut Street
[Added 6-20-2011
by Ord. No.
16-2011; amended
7-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 39-2015]
North From Hamilton Street to Springdale
Avenue (dead end)
North Walnut Street
[Repealed
6-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 16-2011]
North Walnut Street
Bridge
East From Parkway Drive (west) to North
Walnut Street
Norwood Street
[Added 6-20-2011
by Ord. No.
16-2011]
South From Norwood Place to South
Orange Avenue
Olive Street West From Kennedy Drive (Bloomfield) to
Prospect Street
§ 260-7 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-7
C:1310
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Park Place West From Washington Street to Orange
City line
Parkway Drive (east) North From Park Avenue to North Walnut
Street Bridge
Parkway Drive
(west)
South From Ely Place to Park Avenue
Prospect Place North From Freeway Drive West to Main
Street
Ross Street [Added
7-16-2012 by Ord.
No. 20-2012;
repealed
10-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 28-2012]
Schuyler Terrace East From North Park Street to Burchard
Avenue
South Oraton
Parkway
North From Central Avenue to Main Street
South Oraton
Parkway
South From Main Street to Central Avenue
Sunnyside Terrace
[Added 6-20-2011
by Ord. No.
16-2011]
South From Mountainview Avenue to South
Orange Avenue
Washington Place South From Main Street to Freeway Drive
West
Washington Street North From Main Street to William Street
Whitney Place East From 4th Avenue to Ampere Plaza
Whittlesey Avenue South From Central Avenue to Newark City
line
Winans Street North From Main Street to William Street
Winthrop Terrace East From South Oraton Parkway to South
Grove Street
§ 260-8. Through streets.
On those streets designated by ordinance of the City Council as through
streets, stop signs shall be installed on the near right-hand side of each
intersecting street, and drivers of vehicles on such intersecting streets shall
bring their vehicles to a full stop and yield the right-of-way to vehicles on
such through streets before entering or crossing such through streets, as
listed below:
§ 260-7 CHARTER § 260-8
C:1311
Name of Street Limits
Ampere Parkway Between Springdale Avenue and Bloomfield
Town line
Brick Church Plaza Between South Harrison Street and Halsted
Street
Clifford Street Between Sanford Street and Halsted Street
Dodd Street Between Orange City line and Bloomfield Town
line
Elmwood Avenue Between Sanford Street and South Clinton
Street
Elmwood Avenue Between South Clinton Street and South Munn
Avenue
Fourth Avenue Between North Grove Street and Newark City
line
Fourth Avenue
[Amended 11-14-1988
by Ord. No. 35-1988]
Between Parkway Drive (east) and North Grove
Street
Glenwood Avenue Between Dodd Street and Bloomfield Town line
Glenwood Avenue Between Orange City line and Park Avenue
Glenwood Avenue Between Park Avenue and Dodd Street
Lincoln Street Between Park Avenue and Springdale Avenue
Lincoln Street Between William Street and Park Avenue
Main Street Between Orange City line and Newark City line
Midland Avenue Between Dodd Street and Glen Ridge line
Midland Avenue Between Springdale Avenue and Dodd Street
Ninth Avenue Between South Grove Street and Newark City
line
North Arlington Avenue Between Main Street and William Street
North Arlington Avenue Between Park Avenue and Bloomfield Town line
North Arlington Avenue Between William Street and Park Avenue
North Clinton Street Between Park Avenue and Springdale Avenue
North Clinton Street Between Springdale Avenue and Bloomfield
Town line
North Clinton Street Between William Street and Park Avenue
North Munn Avenue Between Main Street and William Street
North Munn Avenue Between William Street and Park Avenue
North Park Street Between Dodd Street and Fair Street
North Park Street Between Washington Street and Kearney Street
North Walnut Street Between Main Street and Park Avenue
§ 260-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-8
C:1312
Name of Street Limits
North Walnut Street Between Rutledge Avenue to Bloomfield Town
line
Prospect Street Between Dodd Street at Bloomfield Town line
Prospect Street Between Park Avenue and Springdale Avenue
Prospect Street Between Springdale Avenue and Dodd Street
Prospect Street Between William Street and Park Avenue
Rhode Island Avenue Between Sanford Street and South Clinton
Street
Rhode Island Avenue Between South Clinton Street and South Munn
Avenue
Rutledge Avenue Between Ampere Parkway at Newark City line
Rutledge Avenue Between Hoffman Boulevard and Ampere
Parkway
Rutledge Avenue Between North Arlington Avenue and North
Grove Street
Rutledge Avenue Between North Grove Street and Hoffman
Boulevard
South Arlington Avenue Between Central Avenue at Main Street
South Arlington Avenue Between Elmwood Avenue and Central Avenue
South Clinton Street Between Central Avenue and Main Street
South Clinton Street Between South Orange Avenue and Central
Avenue
South Harrison Street Between Central Avenue and Main Street
South Harrison Street Between Central Avenue and Orange City line
South Munn Avenue Between Central Avenue and Newark City line
Springdale Avenue Between Glenwood Avenue and North Arlington
Avenue
Springdale Avenue Between North Arlington Avenue and North
Grove Street
Springdale Avenue Between North Grove Street and Newark City
line
Springdale Avenue Between North Park Street and Glenwood
Avenue
Sussex Avenue Between South Grove Street and Newark City
line
Tremont Avenue Between Sanford Street and Orange City line
Tremont Avenue Between Sanford Street and South Clinton
Street
§ 260-8 CHARTER § 260-8
C:1313
Name of Street Limits
Tremont Avenue Between South Clinton Street and Newark City
line
William Street Between North Arlington Avenue and North
Grove Street
William Street Between North Grove Street and Newark City
line
William Street Between North Walnut Street and North
Arlington Avenue
William Street Between Orange City line and North Walnut
Street
§ 260-9. Stop intersections. [Amended 11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
35-1988; 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 14-1990; 8-18-1997 by Ord. No.
11-1997; 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 16-2000; 8-20-2001 by Ord. No.
3-2001; 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001; 9-30-2002 by Ord. No.
14-2002; 8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 22-2012]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections authorized
by City Council and described herein are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Amherst Street Both Amherst Street and Central
Avenue
Amherst Street Both Amherst Street and Elmwood
Avenue
Amherst Street Both Amherst Street and Rhode Island
Avenue
Amherst Street South Amherst Street and Tremont
Avenue
Ampere Parkway Both Ampere Parkway and Rutledge
Avenue
Ampere Plaza Both North 18th Street and Ampere
Plaza
Ampere Plaza South Ampere Plaza and 4th Avenue
Arsdale Terrace South Arsdale Terrace and Rutledge
Avenue
Arsdale Terrace South Arsdale Terrace and South Orange
Avenue
Ashland Avenue Both Ashland Avenue and William Street
Ashland Avenue South Ashland Avenue and Main Street
Baldwin Street North Baldwin Street and William Street
§ 260-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1314
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Baldwin Street South Baldwin Street and Main Street
Bedford Street Both Bedford Street and Rhode Island
Avenue
Bedford Street Both Bedford Street and Tremont
Avenue
Bedford Street North Bedford Street and Elmwood
Avenue
Beech Street Both South Burnett Street and Beach
Street
Beech Street North Beech Street and South Clinton
Street
Beech Street South Beech Street and South Arlington
Avenue
Beech Street South Beech Street and South Burnett
Street
Berwin Street South Berwin Street and South Harrison
Street
Boyden Street North Boyden Street and Glenwood
Avenue
Boyden Street South Boyden Street and Dodd Street
Brick Church Plaza East Halsted Street
Brick Church Plaza West South Harrison Street
Brighton Avenue Both Brighton Avenue and Dodd Street
Brighton Avenue Both Brighton Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
Brighton Avenue Both Fair Street and Brighton Avenue
Brighton Avenue South Burchard Avenue
Brookwood Street Both Brookwood Street and Tremont
Avenue
Brookwood Street North Brookwood Street and Rhode
Island Avenue
Brookwood Street South Brookwood Street and South
Orange Avenue
Burchard Avenue
[Added 11-21-2016
by Ord. No. 54-2016]
Both Burchard Avenue and Eastwood
Street
Burchard Avenue North Burchard Avenue and North Park
Street
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1315
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Burchard Avenue North Burchard Avenue and Schuyler
Terrace
Burchard Avenue South Burchard Avenue and Brighton
Avenue
Burchard Avenue South Burchard Avenue and Midland
Avenue
Burchard Avenue-
Eastwood Street
Both Midland Avenue-East Park Street
and Burchard Avenue-Eastwood
Street
Cambridge Street South Cambridge Street and Clifford
Street
Carlton Street Both Carlton Street and Ashland Avenue
Carlton Street North Carlton Street and Lincoln Street
Carlton Street North Carlton Street and Prospect Street
Carlton Street South Carlton Street and North Clinton
Street
Carnegie Avenue South Carnegie Avenue and South
Arlington Avenue
Charles Street Both Girard Avenue and Charles Street
Chauncey Avenue North Chauncey Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
Chelsea Avenue North Chelsea Avenue and Rhode Island
Avenue
Chelsea Place Both Washington Terrace and Chelsea
Place
Chelsea Place North Chelsea Place and Glenwood
Avenue
Chelsea Place North Chelsea Place and Washington
Street
Chelsea Place South Chelsea Place and Washington
Terrace
Chestnut Street Both Chestnut Street and South
Arlington Avenue
Chestnut Street Both Chestnut Street and South Clinton
Street
Chestnut Street Both Chestnut Street and South Munn
Avenue
Chestnut Street Both South Burnett Street and Chestnut
Street
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1316
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Chestnut Street Both South Oraton Parkway (west) and
Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street South Chestnut Street and South Bound
Service Road
City Hall Plaza Both City Hall Plaza and North
Arlington Avenue
City Hall Plaza South City Hall Plaza and North Munn
Avenue
Clay Street South Clay Street and South Harrison
Street
Cleveland Terrace Both Colonial Terrace and Cleveland
Terrace
Clifford Street Both Clifford Street and Sanford Street
Clifford Street Both Halsted Street and Clifford Street
Clifford Street South Clifford Street and Halsted Street
Colonial Terrace Both Fulton Street and Colonial Terrace
Colonial Terrace North Colonial Terrace and Fulton Street
Colonial Terrace South Colonial Terrace and Dodd Street
Cottage Place South Cottage Place and Dodd Street
Cottage Place West Cottage Place and North Park
Street
Crawford Street Both Crawford Street and Rhode Island
Avenue
Crawford Street North Crawford Street and Elmwood
Avenue
Crawford Street South Crawford Street and Tremont
Avenue
Crescent Road South Crescent Road and Glenwood
Avenue
Davis Avenue North Davis Avenue and North Oraton
Parkway
Davis Place Both North Oraton Parkway (east) and
Davis Place
Division Street South Division Street and Springdale
Avenue
Dodd Terrace North Dodd Terrace and Dodd Street
East Highland Avenue South East Highland Avenue and South
Harrison Street
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1317
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
East Park Street
[Added 11-21-2016
by Ord. No. 54-2016]
Both East Park Street and Midland
Avenue
East Park Street and
Park Street
Both Washington Street-East Park
Street-Park Street
Eastwood Street
[Added 11-21-2016
by Ord. No. 54-2016]
Both Eastwood Street and Burchard
Avenue
Eastwood Street Both Eastwood Street and Glenwood
Avenue
Eastwood Street North Eastwood Street and Midland
Avenue
Eaton Place Both Greenwood Avenue and Eaton
Place
Eaton Place Both North 19th Street and Eaton Place
Eaton Place North Eaton Place and North Grove
Street
Edgar Street North Edgar Street and Sanford Street
Edgar Street South Halsted Street and Edgar Street
Edgerton Terrace South Edgerton Terrace and North
Clinton Street
Edgerton Terrace South Edgerton Terrace and Prospect
Street
Edgewood Road South Edgewood Road and Glenwood
Avenue
Ellington Street Both Ellington Street and Rutledge
Avenue
Ellington Street South Ellington Street and Springdale
Avenue
Elliott Place North Elliott Place and Sanford Street
Elmwood Avenue
[Added 7-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 38-2015]
Both Freeman Avenue
Elmwood Avenue
[Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 35-2016]
Both Oak Street
Elmwood Avenue North Elmwood Avenue and South
Harrison Street
Ely Place North Ely Place and Prospect Street
Ely Place South Ely Place and North Clinton Street
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1318
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Emerson Street North Emerson Street and Clifford Street
Eppirt Street Both Eppirt Street and Elmwood Avenue
Eppirt Street Both Eppirt Street and Rhode Island
Avenue
Eppirt Street North Eppirt Street and Central Avenue
Essex Street Both Washington Street and Essex
Street
Essex Street North Essex Street and Glenwood Avenue
Essex Street South Essex Street and Washington
Street
Everett Street Both Everett Street and Midland Avenue
Fair Street Both Fair Street and Brighton Avenue
Fair Street North Fair Street and Girard Avenue
Fair Street South Fair Street and Midland Avenue
Fair Street West Fair Street and North Park Street
Fairmount Terrace South Fairmount Terrace and South
Orange Avenue
Fernwood Road North Fernwood Road and Glenwood
Avenue
First Avenue Both First Avenue and Ampere Parkway
First Avenue Both First Avenue and Leslie Street
First Avenue Both First Avenue and Warwick Street
First Avenue Both Hoffman Boulevard and First
Avenue
First Avenue North First Avenue and Hoffman
Boulevard
Fourth Avenue Both Parkway Drive (east) and 4th
Avenue
Franklin Street North Franklin Street and Glenwood
Avenue
Franklin Street South Franklin Street and Prospect
Street
Freeman Avenue
[Added 7-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 38-2015]
Both Elmwood Avenue
Freeway Drive East South Freeway Drive East and Steuben
Street
Fulton Street West Fulton Street and Midland Avenue
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1319
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Garfield Place Both Birchwood Avenue and Garfield
Place
Girard Avenue South Girard Avenue and Dodd Street
Glenwood Place North Glenwood Place and Glenwood
Avenue
Glenwood Place South Glenwood Place and Prospect
Street
Grand Avenue North Grand Avenue and Rhode Island
Avenue
Grand Avenue South Grand Avenue and Tremont
Avenue
Grant Avenue North Grant Avenue and North Arlington
Avenue
Greenwood Avenue Both Greenwood Avenue and William
Street
Grove Place Both Greenwood Avenue and Grove
Place
Grove Place North Grove Place and Grove Street
Grove Place South Grove Place and Greenwood
Avenue
Halsted Place Both Evergreen Place and Halsted Place
Halsted Place North Halsted Place and Halsted Street
Halsted Place South Halsted Place and Evergreen Place
Halsted Street Both Halsted Street and Tremont
Avenue
Hamilton Street
[Amended
11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 54-2016]
Both Hamilton Street and Lincoln Street
Hamilton Street
[Amended
11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 54-2016]
Both Hamilton Street and North Clinton
Street
Hamilton Street Both Hamilton Street and North Walnut
Street
Hamilton Street Both Parkway Drive (west) and
Hamilton Street
Hamilton Street North Hamilton Street and Prospect
Street
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1320
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hamilton Street South Hamilton Street and Parkway
Drive
Hampton Terrace South Hampton Terrace and South
Harrison Street
Harvard Place Both Halsted Street and Harvard Street
Harvard Street Both Amherst Street and Harvard Place
Harvard Street Both Evergreen Place and Harvard
Street
Harvard Street North Harvard Street and Evergreen
Place
Harvard Street South Harvard Street and South Clinton
Street
Hayward Street South Hayward Street and North Park
Street
Hawthorne Avenue Both Winthrop Terrace and Hawthorne
Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue North Hawthorne Avenue and Sussex
Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue North Hawthorne Avenue and Winthrop
Terrace
Hawthorne Avenue South Hawthorne Avenue and Central
Avenue
Hedden Place Both North 15th Street and Hedden
Place
Hedden Place North Hedden Place and South Ward
Hillyer Street Both Washington Street and Hillyer
Street
Hillyer Street North Hillyer Street and Washington
Terrace
Hilton Street Both Brighton Avenue and Hilton Street
Hilton Street Both Girard Avenue and Hilton Street
Hilton Street Both Hilton Street and Girard Avenue
Hilton Street Both Hilton Street and North Park
Street
Hilton Street South Hilton Street and Brighton Avenue
Hoffman Boulevard Both Hoffman Boulevard and Rutledge
Avenue
Hollywood Avenue Both Hollywood Avenue and 9th Avenue
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1321
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hollywood Avenue Both Hollywood Avenue and Central
Avenue
Hollywood Avenue North Hollywood Avenue and Winthrop
Terrace
Irving Street North Irving Street and Clifford Street
Kenmore Terrace Both Morse Avenue and Kenmore
Terrace
Kensington Place North Kensington Place and Dodd Street
Kenwood Place North Kenwood Place and Sanford Street
Kenwood Place North Kenwood Place and South Harrison
Street
Lafayette Avenue Both Lafayette Avenue and North Grove
Street
Lafayette Avenue Both Roosevelt Avenue and Lafayette
Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North Lafayette Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
Lake Street North Lake Street and Dodd Street
Laurel Avenue West Laurel Avenue and Midland
Avenue
Lawton Street Both Lawton Street and Rutledge
Avenue
Lenox Avenue Both Lenox Avenue and South Burnett
Street
Lenox Avenue Both South Burnett Street and Lenox
Avenue
Lenox Avenue North Lenox Avenue and South Clinton
Street
Lenox Avenue South Lenox Avenue and South Arlington
Avenue
Leslie Street Both First Avenue and Leslie Street
Leslie Street South Leslie Street and Rutledge Avenue
Lincoln Street [Added
11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 54-2016]
Both Lincoln Street and Hamilton Street
Lincoln Street North Lincoln Street and Springdale
Avenue
Linden Avenue Both Linden Avenue and Oak Street
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1322
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Linden Avenue Both Linden Avenue and South
Arlington Avenue
Linden Avenue Both Oak Street and Linden Avenue
Linden Avenue North Linden Avenue and Shepard
Avenue
Lindsley Place North Lindsley Place and Sanford Street
Lindsley Place West Ross Street
Linwood Place South Linwood Place an Springdale
Avenue
Long Street North Long Street and Hayward Avenue
Madison Avenue North Madison Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
Madonna Place Both Madonna Place and Rhode Island
Avenue
Madonna Place North Madonna Place and Elmwood
Avenue
Madonna Place South Madonna Place and Tremont
Avenue
Marcy Avenue North Marcy Avenue and Prospect Street
Marcy Avenue South Marcy Avenue and North Clinton
Street
McKay Avenue North McKay Avenue and Sanford Street
McKay Avenue West Ross Street
Meadow Street North Meadow Street and Dodd Street
Melmore Gardens Both Melmore Gardens and Lincoln
Street
Melmore Gardens North Melmore Gardens and Prospect
Street
Melmore Gardens South Melmore Gardens and North
Clinton Street
Melrose Avenue North Melrose Avenue and Sanford
Street
Melrose Avenue North Melrose Avenue and South
Harrison Street
Midland Avenue
[Added 11-21-2016
by Ord. No. 54-2016]
Both Midland Avenue and East Park
Street
Monroe Avenue North Monroe Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1323
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Morris Street North Morris Street and Springdale
Avenue
Morse Avenue Both Morse Avenue and Kenmore
Terrace
Morse Avenue Both Morse Avenue and Netherwood
Terrace
Morse Avenue [Added
6-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 20-2017]
Southwest Morse Avenue and Colonial
Terrace
Morton Place Both Washington Terrace and Morton
Place
Morton Place North Morton Place and Washington
Terrace
Morton Place South Morton Place and William Street
Nassau Place Both Carnegie Avenue and Nassau Place
Nassau Place North Nassau Place and Carnegie Avenue
Nassau Place South Nassau Place and Central Avenue
Netherwood Terrace Both Morse Avenue and Netherwood
Terrace
New Street Both New Street and North Munn
Avenue
New Street Both North Maple Avenue and New
Street
New Street Both North Oraton Parkway (west) and
New Street
New Street North New Street and North Arlington
Avenue
New Street South New Street and North Grove
Street
New Street South New Street and North Oraton
Parkway
Newfield Street Both Newfield Street and Rutledge
Avenue
Ninth Avenue South Ninth Avenue and South Grove
Street
Norman Street North Norman Street and Prospect
Street
Norman Street South Norman Street and North Clinton
Street
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1324
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
North 14th Street North North 14th Street and Park Avenue
North 14th Street South North 14th Street and William
Street
North 15th Street Both Eaton Place and North 15th Street
North 15th Street Both North 15th Street and Park Avenue
North 15th Street Both North 15th Street and William
Street
North 15th Street North North 15th Street and 4th Avenue
North 15th Street South North 15th Street and Main Street
North 16th Street Both North 16th Street and Park Avenue
North 16th Street Both North 16th Street and William
Street
North 16th Street North North 16th Street and 4th Avenue
North 17th Street Both Eaton Place and North 17th Street
North 17th Street Both North 17th Street and Park Avenue
North 17th Street Both North 17th Street and William
Street
North 17th Street North North 17th Street and 4th Avenue
North 18th Street Both North 18th Street and Park Avenue
North 18th Street Both North 18th Street and William
Street
North 18th Street North North 18th Street and 4th Avenue
North 19th Street Both Greenwood Avenue and North 19th
Street
North 19th Street Both North 19th Street and 4th Avenue
North 19th Street North North 19th Street and Springdale
Avenue
North 19th Street South North 19th Street and Greenwood
Avenue
North 20th Street North North 20th Street and Springdale
Avenue
North 20th Street South North 20th Street and 4th Avenue
North 21st Street North North 21st Street and Springdale
Avenue
North 21st Street South North 21st Street and 4th Avenue
North 22nd Street North North 22nd Street and Rutledge
Avenue
North 22nd Street South North 22nd Street and 4th Avenue
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1325
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
North 22nd Street South North 22nd Street and Springdale
Avenue
North 23rd Street North North 23rd Street and Rutledge
Avenue
North 23rd Street North North 23rd Street and Springdale
Avenue
North Arlington
Avenue [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 27-2019]
Both North Arlington Avenue and
Renshaw Avenue (4-way)
North Arlington
Avenue [Amended
8-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 27-2019]
Both North Arlington Avenue and
Rutledge Avenue (4-way)
North Burnett Street North North Burnett Street and William
Street
North Burnett Street South North Burnett Street and Main
Street
North Clinton Street
[Added 11-21-2016
by Ord. No. 54-2016]
Both North Clinton Street and Hamilton
Street
North Maple Avenue Both Lafayette Avenue and North Maple
Avenue
North Maple Avenue Both North Maple Avenue and 4th
Avenue
North Maple Avenue Both North Maple Avenue and Park
Avenue
North Maple Avenue Both North Maple Avenue and Rutledge
Avenue
North Maple Avenue Both North Maple Avenue and
Springdale Avenue
North Maple Avenue Both North Maple Avenue and William
Street
North Maple Avenue North North Maple Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
North Munn Avenue North North Munn Avenue and Park
Avenue
North Oraton Parkway Both 4th Avenue and North Oraton
Parkway
North Oraton Parkway Both North Oraton Parkway and 4th
Avenue
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1326
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
North Oraton Parkway North North Oraton Parkway and
Springdale Avenue
North Walnut Street Both Hamilton Street and North Walnut
Street
North Walnut Street Both North Walnut Street and Park
Avenue
North Walnut Street Both Parkway Drive (east side) — North
Walnut Street Bridge
North Walnut Street North North Walnut Street and Rutledge
Avenue
Norwood Place South Norwood Place and Norwood
Street
Norwood Place South Norwood Place and South Clinton
Street
Norwood Street Both Norwood Street and Norwood
Place
Norwood Street North Norwood Street and Tremont
Avenue
Norwood Street South Norwood Street and South Orange
Avenue
Oak Street Both Oak Street and Elmwood Avenue
Oak Street Both Oak Street and Rhode Island
Avenue
Oak Street [Amended
9-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 27-2017]
Both Oak Street and Tremont Avenue
Oak Street North Oak Street and Central Avenue
Olive Street North Olive Street and Prospect Street
Park End Place North Park End Place and Sanford Street
Park End Place North Park End Place and South Harrison
Street
Park Street Both Park Street and Park Avenue
Parkway Drive North Parkway Drive and 4th Avenue
Princeton Street North Princeton Street and Central
Avenue
Princeton Street South Princeton Street and Clifford
Street
Prospect Terrace Both Prospect Terrace and Lincoln
Street
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1327
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Prospect Terrace
[Added 6-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 17-2019]
East Prospect Terrace and Ashland
Avenue
Prospect Terrace North Prospect Terrace and Prospect
Street
Renshaw Avenue Both North Maple Avenue and Renshaw
Avenue
Renshaw Avenue Both Renshaw Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
Renshaw Avenue North Renshaw Avenue and Prospect
Street
Renshaw Avenue South Renshaw Avenue and North Maple
Avenue
Rhode Island Avenue
[Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 35-2016]
Both Freeman Avenue
Rhode Island Avenue
[Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 35-2016]
Both Halsted Street
Rhode Island Avenue
[Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 35-2016]
Both Oak Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both North Maple Avenue and Roosevelt
Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue Both Roosevelt Avenue and Rutledge
Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue North Roosevelt Avenue and North Maple
Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue South Roosevelt Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
Ross Street Both Ross Street and Tremont Avenue
Rowe Street North Rowe Street and Ampere Parkway
Rutledge Avenue Both Parkway Drive (west) and Rutledge
Avenue
Rutledge Avenue North Rutledge Avenue and North
Clinton Street
Rutledge Avenue South Rutledge Avenue and Parkway
Drive
Sawyer Avenue Both Sawyer Avenue and North Grove
Street
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1328
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Schuyler Terrace North Burchard Avenue
Shepard Avenue Both Carnegie Avenue and Shepard
Avenue
Shepard Avenue Both Shepard Avenue and Carnegie
Avenue
Shepard Avenue Both Shepard Avenue and Elmwood
Avenue
Shepard Avenue Both Shepard Avenue and Rhode Island
Avenue
Shepard Avenue Both Shepard Avenue and Tremont
Avenue
Shepard Avenue North Beech Street
Shepard Avenue South Hudson Avenue
Sherman Avenue North Sherman Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
South 15th Street North South 15th Street and Sussex
Avenue
South 16th Street North South 16th Street and 9th Avenue
South 17th Street North South 17th Street and 9th Avenue
South 17th Street North South 17th Street and Central
Avenue
South Arlington
Avenue [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 27-2019]
Both Chestnut Street (4-way)
South Arlington
Avenue
South South Arlington Avenue and
Elmwood Avenue
South Burnett Street North South Burnett Street and Main
Street
South Burnett Street South South Burnett Street and Elmwood
Avenue
South Burnett Street South South Burnett Street and Rhode
Island Avenue
South Maple Avenue Both Sussex Avenue and South Maple
Avenue
South Maple Avenue Both Winthrop Terrace and South Maple
Avenue
South Maple Avenue North South Maple Avenue and Winthrop
Terrace
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1329
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
South Maple Avenue South South Maple Avenue and Sussex
Avenue
South Munn Avenue
[Added 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 27-2019]
Both South Munn Avenue and Chestnut
Street (4-way)
South Munn Avenue South South Munn Avenue and Elmwood
Avenue
South Walnut Street Both Lenox Avenue and South Walnut
Street
South Walnut Street South South Walnut Street and Lenox
Avenue
Soveral Terrace South Soveral Terrace and Springdale
Avenue
Steuben Street South Steuben Street and Winthrop
Terrace
Stockton Place North Stockton Place and Park Avenue
Stockton Place South Stockton Place and William Street
Summit Street Both Summit Street and North Arlington
Avenue
Summit Street Both Summit Street and North Clinton
Street
Summit Street Both Summit Street and North Walnut
Street
Summit Street South Summit Street and North Munn
Avenue
Sunnyside Terrace South Sunnyside Terrace and South
Orange Avenue
Telford Street Both Telford Street and Rhode Island
Avenue
Telford Street North Telford Street and Elmwood
Avenue
Tremont Avenue
[Added 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 27-2019]
Both Tremont Avenue and Eppirt Street
(4-way)
Tremont Avenue
[Added 9-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 27-2017]
Both Tremont Avenue and Oak Street
University Place South University Place and Halsted
Street
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-9
C:1330
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Vanderbilt Place
[Added 9-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 27-2017]
Both Vanderbilt Place and Park End
Place
Vernon Place North Vernon Place and North Grove
Street
Vernon Terrace North Vernon Terrace and Park Avenue
Vernon Terrace South Vernon Terrace and William Street
Warrington Place North Warrington Place and North Grove
Street
Warrington Place South Warrington Place and North
Nineteenth Street
Warwick Street Both First Avenue and Warwick Street
Warwick Street Both Hoffman Boulevard and Warwick
Street
Warwick Street South Warwick Street and Hoffman
Boulevard
Washington Terrace Both Washington Street and Washington
Terrace
Washington Terrace North Washington Terrace and Park
Avenue
Washington Terrace West Washington Terrace and
Washington Street
Watson Avenue North Watson Avenue and Central
Avenue
Wayne Avenue North Wayne Avenue and Sanford Street
Wayne Avenue North Wayne Avenue and South Harrison
Street
Webster Place East Webster Place and South Harrison
Street
Westcott Street South Westcott Street and Dodd Street
Whitman Avenue North Whitman Avenue and North Grove
Street
Whitney Place Both Ampere Plaza and Whitney Place
Whitney Place East Whitney Place and Ampere Plaza
Whittier Street North Whittier Street and Clifford Street
Wilcox Avenue Both Watson Avenue and Wilcox Avenue
Wilcox Avenue Both Whittlesey Avenue and Wilcox
Avenue
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-9
C:1331
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Wilcox Avenue North Wilcox Avenue and South Munn
Avenue
Winans Street North Winans Street and William Street
Woodland Avenue Both Woodland Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
Woodland Avenue North Woodland Avenue and Fernwood
Road
Woodland Avenue South Woodland Avenue and Park Avenue
§ 260-10. Yield right-of-way intersections.
At those intersections designated by ordinance of the City Council as yield
right-of-way intersections, yield right-of-way signs shall be installed on
those streets designated by the City Council, and drivers of vehicles
approaching such signs shall slow down and prepare to stop, if necessary,
and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles before proceeding past
such signs, as listed below:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hoffman Boulevard Both Ampere Parkway and
Hoffman Boulevard
§ 260-10.1. Routes for trucks over four tons. [Added 5-24-2004 by
Ord. No. 15-2004; amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 30-2004;
5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 14-2005]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
herein are hereby designated as routes for vehicles over four tons. All
trucks having a total combined registered gross vehicle weight (GVW) load
in excess of four tons shall be excluded from all municipal streets, except
from those municipal streets listed and state and county roadways which
form a part of the truck route. Vehicles will be permitted on all streets for
the pickup and delivery of materials.
Name of Street(s) Location
4th Avenue From the City of East Orange - City of
Newark corporate line to North Oraton
Parkway
Dodd Street Entire length within the corporate
limits of the City of East Orange
Evergreen Place From Central Avenue (CR 508) to I-280
service roads east and west (Freeway
Drive East and West)
§ 260-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-10.1
C:1332
Name of Street(s) Location
Glenwood Avenue Entire length within the corporate
limits of the City of East Orange
Main Street Entire length within the corporate
limits of the City of East Orange
North Clinton Street-Clinton
Street-South Clinton Street
Entire length within the corporate
limits of the City of East Orange
North and South Oraton Parkway
(northbound)
From Springdale Avenue to Central
Avenue (CR 508)
North and South Oraton Parkway
(southbound)
From North Clinton Street to Central
Avenue (CR 508)
Springdale Avenue Entire length within the corporate
limits of the City of East Orange
South Munn From Main Street to the City of East
Orange - City of Newark corporate line
Steuben Street From Central Avenue (CR 508) to Main
Street
Sussex Avenue-South Maple
Avenue-Main Street
From South Munn to the City of East
Orange-City of Newark corporate line
Tremont Avenue Entire length within the corporate
limits of the City of East Orange
Washington Street-North
Harrison Street-South Harrison
Street
Entire length within the corporate
limits of the City of East Orange
§ 260-10.2. Pedestrian crossing; violations and penalties. [Added
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 16-2006]
A. The purpose of this section is to promote pedestrian safety (including
those of minors), avoid life-threatening situations, and coordinate
traffic control through the joint coordinated effort of the City's Police
Department, Public Works Department and Board of Education. While
there is a need to promote and protect child safety, the goal is not to
punish children by subjecting them to a penalty of a fine, imprisonment
or both, but to educate them so that they may become responsible
citizens conducting themselves in a safe and orderly manner. This
section is declared to be remedial and essential to the public interest,
and it is intended that this section be liberally construed to effectuate
the purposes as stated in this section.
B. Crossing streets, avenues and other roadways within the City. On
streets, avenues and other roadways within the City where traffic is
controlled by a traffic control signal or by police officers, traffic officers
or school traffic guards, pedestrians shall not cross the roadway against
the red or stop signal unless otherwise specifically directed to go by a
police officer, traffic officer or school traffic guard or other traffic
§ 260-10.1 CHARTER § 260-10.2
C:1333
§ 260-11. Obedience to chapter.
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to do any act forbidden or fail
to perform any act required in this chapter.
§ 260-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 22-2010]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $54 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
control device. Where traffic is not controlled and directed by either
a police officer, traffic officer or school traffic guard, pedestrians shall
cross the street, avenue or roadway within a crosswalk or, in the
absence of a crosswalk, and where not otherwise prohibited, at right
angles to the roadway. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street,
avenue and roadway.
C. Use of designated crosswalk. At intersections where traffic is directed
by a police officer, traffic officer or school crossing guard, no pedestrian
shall enter upon or cross the roadway at a point other than the
crosswalk.
D. Driver to yield to pedestrians at crosswalk; exceptions. The operator of
a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within a marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk
at an intersection, except at crosswalks when the movement of traffic is
being regulated by police officers, traffic officers, school traffic guards
or other traffic control signals, or where otherwise prohibited by state,
county or other municipal regulations and codes. No pedestrian shall
suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the
path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for an operator to
yield. Nothing contained within the provisions of this chapter shall
relieve a pedestrian from using due care and caution for his safety.
Every pedestrian upon a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within a unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
E. Penalties under this section shall be controlled by the provisions as
provided for under § 260-12.
§ 260-10.2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-12.1
C:1334
§ 260-12.1. Surcharges and costs. [Added 2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1-1993]
Surcharges and Costs Amount
Emergency Medical Technical Training Fund
(EMTTF)
$50
Court costs $50
§ 260-12.1 CHARTER § 260-12.1
C:1335

ARTICLE III
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 260-13. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 260-14. All-night parking prohibited; exceptions. [Amended
10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 30-2006; 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 8-2007;
7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 20-2007; 11-6-2009 by Ord. No. 15-2009]
A. No person shall park a vehicle on any street between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day except as may be provided herein. Signs
shall be posted by the Department of Public Works indicating overnight
parking is authorized by permit on those streets. Overnight parking is
not authorized on the streets listed in Subsection J hereunder.
B. The East Orange Parking Authority and the Tax Collector for the City of
East Orange shall assume the responsibilities of the issuing officer for
overnight parking permits. Parking permits for overnight parking may
be issued to an applicant who has provided the City of East Orange Tax
Collector with proof of residency and a written certification pursuant to
the following: [Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 11-2012; 5-19-2014
by Ord. No. 9-2014; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 52-2015; 11-19-2018
by Ord. No. 41-2018]
(1) Proof of residency shall be confirmed by submitting one of the
following items: a valid New Jersey driver's license, a valid New
Jersey motor vehicle registration, valid proof of automobile
insurance, a valid lease agreement, or a property tax bill and/or
deed. In addition to the foregoing, applicants can also submit two
of the following secondary documents to establish residency:
correspondence from the Internal Revenue Service, bank
statements, utility bills and credit card statements. Items on the
secondary list must be dated within 90 days of the application date.
(a) In the case of a vehicle which is registered to a company or
corporation, the items listed above shall be required to confirm
residency, and a letter from the registered owner showing that
the resident has control over the vehicle after business hours
shall be presented.
(b) In the case of a vehicle registered, owned and/or insured in
another person's name, the resident must provide a notarized
letter from the owner stating that they are authorized to
operate the vehicle and park it overnight in East Orange. In
addition, the certification must state that they understand that
the vehicle may receive tickets for which they are responsible.
§ 260-13 CHARTER § 260-14
C:1337
(c) In the case of a vehicle registered out of state and in the
possession of a college student residing in the City of East
Orange, residency may be established by providing a copy of
his or her current school transcript and student identification
card.
(2) The written certification shall state that the applicant resides in a
property on a street within the City of East Orange and that there is
insufficient space on such property for the overnight parking of his
or her vehicle. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the
applicant shall obtain a certification from the building manager or
the property owner verifying that there is insufficient space.
Certifications shall be on the designated East Orange Parking
Authority form.
(3) The East Orange Tax Collector shall establish the permit
application process.
(4) A permit issued pursuant to this section shall entitle the holder
thereof to park overnight on any municipal street, unless otherwise
prohibited to do so. The East Orange Parking Authority may revoke
a permit upon proof that the certification made on issuance is no
longer valid.
(5) The resident parking permit or any temporary parking permit (see
Subsection H hereunder) or a parking permit granted under
special, extraordinary circumstance (see Subsection I hereunder)
is to be placed on the rear-view mirror holder facing the front
windshield of the vehicle.
C. Parking permits shall be issued on an annual calendar year basis
starting in January. The annual parking permit fee shall be $150 per
year for each vehicle. The amount shall be prorated on a quarterly
basis. The fee for residents over the age of 65 shall be capped at $75
per year. The fee for residents that have been deemed to be totally
disabled by the United States government or the State of New Jersey
shall be capped at $75. All parking permit fees are nonrefundable.
Permits shall be issued for year-long intervals starting from January 1
through December 31 of the year in which the permit application is
made. Payments must be made at the time of purchase for either a sixmonth
or twelve-month interval. Permits are only transferable to a
different vehicle owned by the same resident identified on the initial
application. [Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 11-2012; 5-19-2014
by Ord. No. 9-2014; 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 41-2018]
D. The permit issued pursuant to this section shall entitle the holder to
park on the streets, except in prohibited areas, in the manner set forth
in Subsection B, subject to snow removal. Snowfalls exceeding three
inches require that the vehicle be moved to allow for snow removal.
§ 260-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-14
C:1338
E. Any vehicle which is found by the East Orange Parking Authority or the
Police Department to be parked without a valid permit, contrary to the
provisions of this section, may be ticketed. Any such vehicle shall be
towed and removed by the East Orange Parking Authority or the police,
and all costs of such towing, removal and storage shall be paid by the
owner of the vehicle upon the issuance of the third consecutive ticket
for noncompliance with this section. [Amended 11-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 52-2015]
F. Overnight parking is not permitted for commercial vehicles, which shall
include those vehicles set forth in § 260-15 of the City Code.
G. Alternate side of the street parking shall be enforced to facilitate street
cleaning on streets where overnight parking is authorized.
H. Single night permits will be issued from the Tax Collector or her
designee. The fee for each single night permit shall be $4. Beginning
January 1, 2013, the fee for each single night permit shall increase by
$1 per year to a maximum amount not to exceed $6 per night.
[Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 11-2012]
I. Nonresident parking permits granted under special, extraordinary
circumstances.
(1) A parking permit for a period not to exceed 90 days from the date of
issuance may be granted to a nonresident owner of a vehicle under
the following special, extraordinary circumstances:
(a) A family medical emergency; or
(b) Other similar emergency requiring the presence of the vehicle
owner.
(2) Any applicant for such a permit allowed under this subsection must
demonstrate to the Tax Collector or her designee the necessity for
the issuance of such a permit by providing a statement outlining
the circumstances, along with other such documentation necessary
to substantiate the emergent need for parking. The permit parking
fee for such a permit shall be at a rate of $5 for each vehicle, per
week. In the event of an emergency such as bereavement, the
applicant may go to the Tax Collector or her designee and request
permission to park on a prohibited street. The applicant shall
complete the form designated and approved by the City. The
maximum that an applicant may seek shall be no more than two
cars for a period not to exceed five days. The permit parking fee for
such a permit shall be at a rate of $5. The applicant seeking said
permission shall submit either a copy of the death certificate or a
letter from the funeral director. [Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No.
11-2012; 5-19-2014 by Ord. No. 9-2014]
J. Overnight parking will be not be allowed on the following streets:
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-14
C:1339
Street From To Ward
Arlington Avenue
(North)
City Hall Plaza New Street 2, 4
Arlington Avenue
(North)
Main Street City Hall Plaza 2, 4
Arlington Avenue
(North)
New Street William Street 2, 4
Arlington Avenue
(North)
Park Avenue Parkway Drive 1, 2, 5
Arlington Avenue
(North)
Parkway Drive Parkway Drive 1, 5
Arlington Avenue
(North)
Parkway Drive Springdale
Avenue
1, 5
Arlington Avenue
(North)
Springdale Avenue Bloomfield
Township line
1, 5
Arlington Avenue
(North)
Summit Street Park Avenue 1, 2, 5
Arlington Avenue
(North)
William Street Summit Street 2, 5
Arlington Avenue
(South)
Central Avenue Main Street 2, 4
Arsdale Terrace Mountainview
Avenue
South Orange
Avenue
3
Ashland Avenue
[Repealed
5-19-2014 by
Ord. No. 9-2014]
Ashland Place South Grove Street Cul-de-sac 4
Beech Street South Clinton
Street
South Arlington
Avenue
2, 4
Birchwood Avenue Newark City line Central line 4
Burchard Avenue Midland Avenue North Park
Street
1
Burnett Street
(North)
Main Street William Street 2
Burnett Street
(South)
Elmwood Avenue Freeway Drive
East
2, 3
Burnett Street
(South)
Rhode Island
Avenue
Dead end 3
§ 260-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-14
C:1340
Street From To Ward
Cambridge Street
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Carlton Street Prospect Street North Clinton
Street
2
Central Avenue Amherst Street Halsted Street 2, 3
Central Avenue South Arlington
Avenue
Oak Street —
Nassau Place
4
Central Avenue Birchwood Avenue Oraton Parkway
(South)
4
Central Avenue Burnett Street
(South)
Burnett Street
(South)
2, 3
Central Avenue Burnett Street
(South)
Clinton Street
(South)
2, 3
Central Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Cambridge Street Evergreen Place 2, 3
Central Avenue Clinton Street
(South)
Amherst Street 2, 3
Central Avenue Eppirt Street Burnett Street
(South)
2, 3
Central Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Evergreen Place Sanford Street 2, 3
Central Avenue Freeman Avenue -
Agnes Lane South
South Arlington
Avenue
4
Central Avenue Grove Street
(South)
Maple Avenue
(South)
4
Central Avenue Halsted Street Princeton Street 2, 3
Central Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Harrison Street
(South)
Orange line 2, 3
Central Avenue Hawthorne Avenue Hawthorne Place 4
Central Avenue Hawthorne Place Birchwood
Avenue
4
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-14
C:1341
Street From To Ward
Central Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Hollywood Avenue Twentieth Street
(South)
4
Central Avenue Maple Avenue
(South)
Hawthorne
Avenue
4
Central Avenue Munn Avenue
(South)
Freeman Avenue
- Agnes Lane
(South)
4
Central Avenue Oak Street -
Nassau Place
Shepard Avenue 4
Central Avenue Oraton Parkway
(South)
Whittlesey
Avenue
4
Central Avenue Princeton Street Cambridge
Street
2, 3
Central Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Sanford Street Harrison Street
(South)
2, 3
Central Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Seventeenth Street
(South)
Steuben and
South 18th
Streets
4
Central Avenue Shepard Avenue Eppirt Street 4
Central Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Steuben and South
18th Streets
Hollywood
Avenue
4
Central Avenue Twentieth Street
(South)
Grove Street
(South)
4
Central Avenue Watson Avenue Munn Avenue
(South)
4
Central Avenue Whittlesey Avenue Watson Avenue 4
Centerway Crescent Place Springdale
Avenue
5
Chelsea Place Washington
Terrace
Glenwood
Avenue
2
Chestnut Street
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
§ 260-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-14
C:1342
Street From To Ward
Chauncey Avenue North Maple
Avenue
North Arlington
Avenue
5
Church Place Division Place North Maple
Avenue
4
Church Place North Grove Street Division Place 4
Clay Street Orange City line South Harrison
Street
3
Clifford Street Sanford Street Halsted Street 3
Clinton Street
(North)
Edgerton Terrace Springdale
Avenue
1, 5
Clinton Street
(North)
Ely Place Bloomfield
Township line
1, 5
Clinton Street
(North)
Ely Place William Street 1, 2, 5
Clinton Street
(North)
Main Street Springdale
Avenue
1, 2, 5
Clinton Street
(North)
Main Street William Street 2
Clinton Street
(South)
Central Avenue Freeway Drive
West
2
College Avenue Fernwood Road Woodland
Avenue
1
Crescent Place North Eighteenth
Street
North
Nineteenth
Street
5
Davis Avenue New Street Davis Place 4
Davis Place Davis Avenue North Oraton
Parkway
4
Davis Place North Maple
Avenue
Davis Avenue 4
Derby Street
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Division Place Church Place New Street 4
Dodd Street North Park Street Orange City line 1
Dodd Street Orange City line Bloomfield
Township line
1
Derby Street Cul-de-sac Newark line 3
Dodd Terrace Dodd Street Dead end 1
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-14
C:1343
Street From To Ward
East Highland
Avenue
Orange City line South Harrison
Street
3
East Park Street Washington Street Burchard Avenue 1
East Park Street Washington Street Orange City line 1, 2
Eastwood Street Midland Avenue Glenwood
Avenue
1
Edgerton Terrace Prospect Street North Clinton
Street
1
Elliott Place Orange City line Sanford Street 3
Ely Place Prospect Street North Clinton
Street
1
Eppirt Street Rhode Island
Avenue
Central Avenue 3
Emerson Street Clifford Street Edgar Street 3
Essex Street Washington Street Glenwood
Avenue
2
Evergreen Place Freeway Drive
West
Freeway Drive
East
2
Fairmount Terrace Hudson Avenue South Orange
Avenue
3
Fair Street Midland Avenue North Park
Street
1
Fifteenth Street
(North)
Park Avenue 4th Avenue 5
Fourteenth Street
(North)
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Park Avenue 4th Avenue 5
Freeway Drive
East
South Maple
Avenue
South Oraton
Parkway
4
Franklin Street Glenwood Avenue Prospect Street 1
Freeman Avenue Elmwood Avenue Rhode Island
Avenue
4
Freeway Drive
East
Amherst Street Halsted Street 2
Freeway Drive
East
South Arlington
Avenue
South Walnut
Street
2
Freeway Drive
East
South Burnett
Street
South Clinton
Street
2
§ 260-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-14
C:1344
Street From To Ward
Freeway Drive
East
South Clinton
Street
Amherst Street 2
Freeway Drive
East [Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Evergreen Place Harrison Street
(South)
2
Freeway Drive
East
Halsted Street Evergreen Place 2
Freeway Drive
East [Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Harrison Street
(South)
Orange City line 2
Freeway Drive
East
South Munn
Avenue
South Arlington
Avenue
4
Freeway Drive
East
South Oraton
Parkway
South Munn
Avenue
4
Freeway Drive
East
North Oraton
Parkway
South Oraton
Parkway
4
Freeway Drive
East
South Walnut
Street
South Burnett
Street
2
Freeway Drive
West [Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
North Arlington
Avenue
North Walnut
Street
2
Freeway Drive
West
North Burnett
Street
Lincoln Street 2
Freeway Drive
West [Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
North Burnett
Street
North Clinton
Street
2
Freeway Drive
West
North Clinton
Street
Prospect Place 2
Freeway Drive
West
Lincoln Street Washington Place 2
Freeway Drive
West
Prospect Street Halsted Street 2
Freeway Drive
West [Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
North Walnut
Street
North Burnett
Street
2
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-14
C:1345
Street From To Ward
Freeway Drive
West [Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Washington Place Orange City line 2
Fulton Street
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Midland Avenue Bloomfield
Township line
1
Garfield Place Birchwood Avenue Hawthorne Place 4
Glenwood Avenue Washington Street Chelsea Place 2
Grant Avenue Roosevelt Avenue North Arlington
Avenue
5
Halsted Street
[Amended
5-19-2014 by
Ord. No. 9-2014;
4-13-2015 by
Ord. No.
21-2015]
Central Avenue Main Street 2, 3
Hamilton Street Lincoln Street Prospect Street 1
Hamilton Street North Clinton
Street
Lincoln Street 1
Hampton Terrace
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
South Harrison
Street
Orange City line 2
Harrison Street
(South)
Brick Church Plaza Orange City line 2
Harvard Street Evergreen Place South Clinton
Street
2
Hawthorne Avenue Main Street Central Avenue 4
Hawthorne Place Garfield Place Central Avenue 4
Hayward Street Orange City line Long Street 1
Hedden Place North 15th Street Newark City line 4
Highland Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Harrison Street
(South)
Orange City line 3
Hillcrest Terrace South Orange
Avenue
Hudson Avenue 3
Hillyer Street Orange City line Washington
Street
2
§ 260-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-14
C:1346
Street From To Ward
Kearney Street Dodd Street Cul-de-sac 1
Lafayette Avenue North Grove Street North Arlington
Avenue
5
Laurel Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Midland Avenue Bloomfield
Township line
1
Lawrence Street
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
North Walnut
Street
Bloomfield
Township line
1, 5
Lenox Avenue South Clinton
Street
South Arlington
Avenue
2
Lincoln Street Main Street William Street 2
Lincoln Street Park Avenue Springdale
Avenue
1
Lindsley Place
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Long Street Hayward Street Dodd Street 1
Madison Avenue Roosevelt Avenue North Arlington
Avenue
5
Main Street
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Newark City line Orange City line 2, 4
Maple Avenue
(North)
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Maple Avenue
(North) [Added
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
4th Avenue North Arlington
Avenue
4, 5
Melrose Avenue Sanford Street South Harrison
Street
5
Midland Avenue Burchard Avenue Glen Ridge
Township line
1
Mitchell Place Sussex Avenue Cul-de-sac 4, 5
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-14
C:1347
Street From To Ward
Monroe Avenue Roosevelt Avenue North Arlington
Avenue
1
Morris Street Hamilton Street Dead end south 2
Morton Place William Street Washington
Terrace
5
Munn Avenue
(North)
Park Avenue Main Street 4
Munn Avenue
(South)
Newark City line Main Street 4
Nassau Place Central Avenue Carnegie Avenue 4
New Street Health Department
Building
North Munn
Avenue
4
New Street North Oraton
Parkway (west)
North Munn
Avenue
3
Nineteenth Street
(North)
Park Avenue Springdale
Avenue
4
Oak Street
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Tremont Avenue Newark City line 4, 5
Oraton Parkway
(North) - east of
GSP
MLK Boulevard Park Avenue 4
Oraton Parkway
(North) - west of
GSP
MLK Boulevard Park Avenue 4, 5
Oraton Parkway
(South) - east of
GSP
Central Avenue MLK Boulevard 5
Oraton Parkway
(South) - west of
GSP
Central Avenue MLK Boulevard 4
Park Avenue North Arlington
Avenue
North Walnut
Street
1, 2
Park Avenue North Clinton
Street
Lincoln Street 1, 2
Park Avenue Glenwood Avenue Washington
Street
1, 2
Park Avenue Lincoln Street Prospect Street 1, 2
Park Avenue North Maple
Avenue
North Maple
Avenue
1, 2
§ 260-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-14
C:1348
Street From To Ward
Park Avenue
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Park Street Orange City line 1, 2
Park Avenue
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Park Avenue North Walnut
Street
North Clinton
Street
1, 2
Park Avenue North Walnut
Street
North Walnut
Avenue
1, 2
Park Avenue Washington Street Park Street 1, 2
Park Avenue
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Park Avenue
[Repealed
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Park End Place South Harrison
Street
Sanford Street 3
Park Place Washington Street Orange City line 1
Park Street
(North)
Springdale Avenue Cul-de-sac 1
Park Street
(North)
Washington Street Schuyler Terrace 1
Parkway Drive -
east of GSP
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Park Avenue Bloomfield
Township line
5
Parkway Drive -
west of GSP
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Park Avenue Bloomfield
Township line
1, 5
Princeton Street Clifford Street Central Avenue 3
Prospect Street Main Street Dodd Street 1, 2
Prospect Terrace Ashland Avenue Lincoln Street 2
Prospect Terrace Lincoln Street Prospect Street 2
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-14
C:1349
Street From To Ward
Renshaw Avenue Prospect Street North Walnut
Street
1, 5
Ross Street
[Added 4-9-2012
by Ord. No.
11-2012]
Tremont Avenue Cul-de-sac 3
Sherman Avenue Roosevelt Avenue North Arlington
Avenue
5
Soveral Terrace Springdale Avenue Dead end 1
Springdale Avenue North Grove Street Newark City line 5
Springdale Avenue North Park Street Orange City line 1
Springdale Avenue Orange City line North Maple
Avenue
1, 5
Springdale Avenue Parkway Drive Parkway Drive 5
State Street Park Street Hillyer Street 2
Summit Street
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
North Arlington
Avenue
Ashland Avenue 2
Sunnyside Terrace South Orange
Avenue
Hudson Avenue 3
Thomas Boulevard Orange Road Orange City line 1
Thornton Street Fair Street Cul-de-sac 1
Tremont Avenue Orange City line Newark City line 3, 4
University Place Halsted Street Amherst Street 2
Upsala Court College Avenue Cul-de-sac 1
Walnut Street
(North)
Main Street Bloomfield
Township line
1, 2, 5
Walnut Street
(North)
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Freeway Drive
West
Main Street 2
Washington Street William Street Glenwood
Avenue
2
Watson Avenue
[Repealed
5-9-2014 by Ord.
No. 9-2014]
Wayne Avenue Sanford Street South Harrison
Street
3
§ 260-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-14
C:1350
§ 260-14.1. (Reserved)325
§ 260-15. Parking of trucks, trailers, etc., on streets between 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
It shall be unlawful for any truck, truck tractor, trailer, or combination
thereof, as defined in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to be
parked on any City street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 260-15.1. Parking of trucks weighing in excess of 20,000 pounds
prohibited. [Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 10-1999; amended
2-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1-2000; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 20-2012]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semitrailer or omnibus having
registered gross weights in excess of 20,000 pounds upon any street or
parts of streets within East Orange between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m. on any day.
§ 260-16. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
Street From To Ward
Webster Place Orange City line South Harrison
Street
2
Whitney Place 4th Avenue Ampere Plaza 5
Whittlesley Avenue Newark City line Central Avenue 4
Whittier Street Clifford Street Edgar Street 3
William Street
[Amended
4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-2012]
Newark City line Orange City line 2, 4, 5
Wilcox Avenue South Munn
Avenue
Whittlesley
Avenue
4
Winans Street Cicely Tyson
School
Main Street 2
Winans Street William Street Cicely Tyson
School
2
Woodland Avenue Park Avenue Springdale
Avenue
1
Woodland Avenue Springdale Avenue Franklin Street 1
A. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
325. Editor's Note: Former § 260-14.1, Expiration of provisions, was repealed 11-6-2009 by Ord.
No. 15-2009.
§ 260-14 CHARTER § 260-16
C:1351
§ 260-17. Angle parking.
Upon those streets or sections of streets designated by ordinance of the City
Council, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to
the curb or edge of the roadway as indicated below and designated by such
signs or markings on the pavement:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Ampere Plaza East 60 Between 4th Avenue and
railroad station
Ampere Plaza West 60 Between Whitney Place and
North 18th Street
Brick Church
Plaza
North 60 Between west curbline of
Washington Place and 75 feet
west
City Hall Plaza Center 45 Between North Arlington
Avenue and North Munn
Avenue
North 18th
Street
East 45 Between Ampere Plaza and
Whitney Place
Soverel Terrace East 90 Between Springdale Avenue
North to dead end
Whitney Place South 45 Between 4th Avenue and
Ampere Plaza
§ 260-18. Parking near hazardous or congested locations.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no driver of a vehicle shall
park a vehicle near any hazardous or congested place at any time specified
by the City Council, as such places may be designated by ordinance of the
City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Ampere Plaza Northwest From Whitney Place for 55 feet north
Ampere Plaza Southwest From North 18th Street for 46 feet
south
Arsdale Terrace Northwest From South Orange Avenue for 110
feet north
Ashland Avenue East From 117 feet south of William
Street for 110 feet south
Ashland Place Both From west of South Grove Street to
dead end west thereof
B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle.
§ 260-16 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-18
C:1352
Name of Street Side Location
Baldwin Street Southwest From William Street for 46 feet south
Brighton Avenue Southwest From Dodd Street for 74 feet south
Brookwood Street West From South Orange Avenue for 192
feet north
Cambridge Street Southeast From Central Avenue for 147 feet
south
Carlton Street South From Prospect Street for 163 feet
east
Central Avenue North From 320 feet east of South Harrison
Street for 180 feet west
Central Avenue Northeast From Evergreen Place for 250 feet
east
Central Avenue Northeast From South Clinton Street for 230
feet east
Central Avenue Northeast From South Harrison Street for 195
feet east
Central Avenue Northwest From Evergreen Place for 160 feet
west
Central Avenue Northwest From Halsted Street for 70 feet west
Central Avenue Northwest From South Clinton Street to Halsted
Street
Central Avenue Northwest From South Harrison Street for 230
feet west
Central Avenue South From 310 feet east of South Harrison
Street for 100 feet east
Central Avenue Southeast From Clinton Street for 190 feet east
Central Avenue Southeast From Cambridge Street to Princeton
Street
Central Avenue Southeast From Halsted Street to South Clinton
Street
Central Avenue Southeast From South Harrison Street for 190
feet east
Central Avenue Southwest From Cambridge Street for 270 feet
west
Central Avenue Southwest From South Harrison Street for 230
feet west
City Hall Plaza Northeast From Winans Street for 146 feet east
Clay Street Northwest From South Harrison Street for 55
feet west
§ 260-18 CHARTER § 260-18
C:1353
Name of Street Side Location
Crescent Road Northwest From Glenwood Avenue for 300 feet
west
Dodd Street North From 115 feet east of Brighton
Avenue for 54 feet east
Dodd Street North From Midland Avenue for 224 feet
east
East Park Street South At Eastwood Street, beginning 16
feet west of Midland Avenue for 95
feet east
Elmwood Avenue Northwest From South Clinton Street for 116
feet west
Elmwood Avenue Southeast From Eppirt Street for 86 feet east
Elmwood Avenue Southeast From Oak Street for 150 feet east
Elmwood Avenue Southeast From Shepard Avenue for 70 feet
east
Elmwood Avenue Southwest From Madonna Place for 77 feet west
Essex Street Northwest From Washington Street for 60 feet
west
Evergreen Place East From Central Avenue for 336 feet
north
Evergreen Place West From Central Avenue for 307 feet
north
Evergreen Place West From 687 feet north of Central
Avenue for 110 feet
Fairmount Terrace Northwest From South Orange Avenue for 110
feet north
Fair Street South From North Park Street for 85 feet
east
Fair Street South From 136 feet east of North Park
Street for 95 feet east
Fernwood Road Both From dead end for 88 feet west
Fourth Avenue North From North 18th Street for 79 feet
east
Fourth Avenue North From opposite North 17th Street for
33 feet west
Fourth Avenue North From opposite 17th Street east to
Ampere Plaza
Fourth Avenue Northeast From Ampere Plaza for 336 feet east
Fourth Avenue South From 210 feet east of North Grove
Street for 151 feet east
§ 260-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-18
C:1354
Name of Street Side Location
Fourth Avenue Southeast From North 18th Street for 74 feet
east
Fourth Avenue Southeast From North 15th Street for 285 feet
east
Freeway Drive East North From South Maple Avenue for 100
feet west
Glenwood Avenue East From Park Avenue for 156 feet south
Glenwood Avenue East From Park Avenue for 142 feet north
Glenwood Avenue Southeast From Washington Street for 189 feet
south
Glenwood Avenue Southwest From Washington Street for 94 feet
south
Glenwood Avenue West From Glenwood Place to Crescent
Road South
Glenwood Avenue West From Park Avenue for 83 feet south
Glenwood Avenue West From Park Avenue for 190 feet north
Glenwood Avenue West From Washington Street for 224 feet
north
Glenwood Place South From 172 feet east of Glenwood
Avenue for 80 feet
Grove Place Southeast From North Grove Street for 57 feet
east
Halsted Street Northeast From Central Avenue for 153 feet
north
Halsted Street Southeast From Main Street for 180 feet south
Halsted Street Southwest From Tremont Avenue for 129 feet
south
Halsted Street West From Central Avenue for 100 feet
south
Hamilton Street Northeast From Prospect Street for 180 feet
east
Hawthorne Avenue West From Sussex Avenue for 150 feet
north
Hillcrest Terrace Northwest From South Orange Avenue for 100
feet north
Hoffman Boulevard West From 252 feet north of Ampere
Parkway for 210 feet north
Hollywood Avenue East From 305 feet north of 11th Avenue
for 52 feet north
§ 260-18 CHARTER § 260-18
C:1355
Name of Street Side Location
Hollywood Plaza Both Within the cul-de-sac along outer and
inner curblines north of Main Street
Hudson Street
[Added 12-11-2006
by Ord. No.
26-2006]
North From Shepard Avenue for 100 feet
west
Lenox Avenue North From 465 feet east of South Walnut
Street for 44 feet east
Lincoln Street Northeast From Main Street for 51 feet north
Main Street Northeast From Ashland Avenue for 159 feet
east
Main Street Northeast From Prospect Street for 103 feet
north
Main Street Southwest From 127 feet west of South Clinton
Street for 171 feet west
Midland Avenue East From Springdale Avenue for 90 feet
south
Midland Avenue West From Springdale Avenue for 100 feet
north
Morton Place East From 322 feet north of William
Street for 60 feet north
Morton Place Northeast From William Street for 104 feet
north
Ninth Avenue Northeast From Steuben Street for 290 feet
east
Ninth Avenue Southwest From Steuben Street for 85 feet west
North Arlington
Avenue
Northeast From William Street for 150 feet
north
North Arlington
Avenue
Northwest From Park Avenue for 150 feet north
North Arlington
Avenue
Northwest From Parkway Drive (east) for 150
feet north
North Arlington
Avenue
Southeast From Park Avenue for 150 feet south
North Arlington
Avenue
Southeast From William Street for 150 feet
south
North Arlington
Avenue
Southwest From Parkway Drive (west) for 150
feet south
North Clinton Street East From 200 feet north of William
Street for 267 feet north
North Clinton Street Northeast From Park Avenue for 70 feet north
§ 260-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-18
C:1356
Name of Street Side Location
North Clinton Street Northwest From Main Street for 62 feet north
North Clinton Street Southeast From Park Avenue for 106 feet south
North Clinton Street West From 212 feet north of Main Street
for 55 feet north
North 18th Street East From 90 feet south of Ampere Plaza
for 50 feet south
North 18th Street West From 81 feet south of 4th Avenue for
40 feet south
North Grove Street Northeast From Grove Place for 50 feet north
North Grove Street Southeast From Rutledge Avenue for 100 feet
south
North Maple Avenue Cent At the railroad, from Davis Place to
Church Place
North Munn Avenue Northwest From William Street for 55 feet north
North Munn Avenue West From 177 feet north of William
Street for 101 feet north
North 19th Street East From Eaton Place for 230 feet north
North Oraton
Parkway
Northeast At Main Street 715 feet north
North Oraton
Parkway
Northwest From Main Street for 755 feet north
North Park Street East From opposite Hayward Street for 37
feet south of Hayward Street
North Park Street East From opposite Hayward Street for
217 feet north
North Park Street East From Springdale Avenue for 171 feet
south
North Park Street Northwest From Washington Street for 139 feet
north
North Park Street West From Springdale Avenue for 198 feet
south
North Walnut Street Northeast From Rutledge Avenue for 108 feet
north
Norwood Street Northeast From South Orange Avenue for 100
feet north
Norwood Street Northwest From South Orange Avenue for 100
feet north
Oak Street Northwest From Linden Avenue for 45 feet
north
§ 260-18 CHARTER § 260-18
C:1357
Name of Street Side Location
Oak Street Southeast From Elmwood Avenue for 150 feet
east
Park Avenue Northwest From Lincoln Street for 55 feet west
Prospect Street Northeast From Park Avenue for 73 feet north
Prospect Street Northeast From William Street for 165 feet
north
Prospect Street Northwest From Main Street for 70 feet north
Prospect Terrace
[Added 9-14-2015
by Ord. No.
45-2015]
North As designated by sign
Renshaw Avenue Northwest From North Arlington Avenue for 167
feet west
Rutledge Avenue North From 318 feet west of Hoffman
Boulevard for 170 feet west
Rutledge Avenue Northeast From North Grove Street for 90 feet
east
Rutledge Avenue Northwest From Hoffman Boulevard for 242 feet
west
Rutledge Avenue Northwest From North Grove Street for 50 feet
west
Rutledge Avenue Southwest From North Grove Street for 150 feet
west
Sanford Street East From 190 feet south of Central
Avenue for 230 feet south
Shepard Avenue Southwest From Central Avenue for 73 feet
south
South Arlington
[Added 12-11-2006
by Ord. No.
26-2006]
East From 165 feet north of Chestnut
Street for 37 feet north
South Arlington
Avenue
Northeast From Central Avenue for 70 feet
north
South Burnett Street West From Freeway Drive East from 140
feet south
South Burnett Street West From 367 feet south of Freeway
Drive East for 66 feet south
South Clinton Street East From south of Freeway Drive East
for 65 feet south
South Clinton Street East From 373 feet south of Freeway
Drive east for 64 feet south
§ 260-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-18
C:1358
Name of Street Side Location
South Clinton Street East From 206 feet south of Freeway
Drive East for 64 feet south
South Clinton Street East From Rhode Island Avenue for 125
feet north
South Clinton Street Northeast From Central Avenue for 139 feet
north
South 18th Street East From 426 feet south of Central
Avenue for 49 feet south
South 18th Street East From 207 feet south of Central
Avenue for 54 feet south
South Munn Avenue Northwest From Chestnut Street for 80 feet
north
South Munn Avenue Northwest From Elmwood Avenue for 38 feet
north
South Munn Avenue Southwest From Central Avenue for 137 feet
south
South Munn Avenue Southwest From Chestnut Street for 80 feet
south
South Munn Avenue West From Central Avenue for 422 feet
north
South Munn Avenue
[Added 12-11-2006
by Ord. No.
26-2006]
West From 184 feet north of Chestnut
Street for 40 feet north
South Orange Avenue Northeast From Norwood Street for 145 feet
east
South Orange Avenue Northeast From South Clinton Street for 103
feet east
South Orange Avenue Northwest From Fairmount Terrace for 35 feet
west
South Oraton
Parkway
Northwest From Central Avenue for 586 feet
north
South Oraton
Parkway
Southeast From Main Street for 1,065 feet
south
South 16th Street East From 140 feet north of Central
Avenue for 85 feet north
South 20th Street East From 120 feet south of Central
Avenue for 100 feet south
Springdale Avenue North From 95 feet east of Woodland
Avenue for 130 feet east
§ 260-18 CHARTER § 260-18
C:1359
Name of Street Side Location
Springdale Avenue North From North Clinton Street for 245
feet west
Springdale Avenue North From 112 feet east of North 20th
Street for 28 feet east
Springdale Avenue Northwest From Ampere Parkway for 250 feet
west from northerly curbline under
railroad
Springdale Avenue Southeast From North Arlington Avenue for 100
feet east
Springdale Avenue Southwest From Glenwood Avenue for 109 feet
west
Steuben Street Northwest From Central Avenue for 120 feet
north
Steuben Street Northwest From Ninth Avenue for 85 feet north
Steuben Street Southeast From Ninth Avenue for 85 feet south
Summit Street Southeast From North Arlington Avenue for 36
feet east
Summit Street Southeast From North Clinton Street for 106
feet east
Sunnyside Terrace Northwest From South Orange Avenue for 100
feet north
Sussex Avenue North From opposite South 15th Street for
230 feet west of Newark City line
Sussex Avenue Northeast From South Grove Street for 140 feet
east
Sussex Avenue South From South 15th Street for 325 feet
west of Newark City line
Telford Street Northeast From Tremont Avenue for 86 feet
north
Telford Street Northwest From Tremont Avenue for 86 feet
north
Telford Street Southeast From Tremont Avenue for 65 feet
south
Telford Street Southwest From Tremont Avenue for 75 feet
south
Tremont Avenue Southwest From Telford Street for 70 feet west
Warrington Place Northeast From North Grove Street for 300 feet
east
Washington Street Northwest From Park Place for 150 feet north
Washington Street Southwest From Park Place for 165 feet south
§ 260-18 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-18
C:1360
Name of Street Side Location
Whittlesey Avenue Southwest From Central Avenue for 230 feet
south
William Street North From 163 feet east of Lincoln Street
for 55 feet east
William Street Northeast From North Grove Street for 67 feet
east
William Street Northeast From North Walnut Street for 42 feet
east
William Street Northwest From North Arlington Avenue for 59
feet west
William Street Northwest From North Clinton Street for 85 feet
west
William Street Northwest From North Walnut Street for 64 feet
west
Winthrop Terrace South From South Oraton Parkway for 250
feet east
§ 260-19. Parking near hazardous or congested locations during
certain hours.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no driver of a vehicle shall
park a vehicle near any hazardous or congested place during the times
specified by the City Council, as such places and times may be designated
by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Kenwood Place Northwest
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Sanford Street for 880
feet west
North Walnut
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From 173 feet north of Main
Street for 550 feet
South Burnett
Street [Added
12-26-2007 by
Ord. No.
32-2007]
West 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon. to Fri.
From 330 feet south of
Freeway Drive East for 56
feet and from 409 feet south
of Freeway Drive East for
36 feet to Lenox Avenue
South Clinton
Street [Added
4-11-2005 by
Ord. No.
10-2005]
East 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon. to Fri.
From Freeway Drive East to
Lenox Avenue
§ 260-18 CHARTER § 260-20
C:1361
§ 260-20. Curb loading zones. [Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No.
49-2015]
The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain areas of streets as
curb loading zones. When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person
shall park any vehicle in any such zone except for the purpose of loading or
unloading such vehicle, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Baldwin Street East From 25 feet north of Main Street for 21
feet
Brick Church Plaza North From 140 feet east of South Harrison
Street for 40 feet
City Hall Plaza North From 146 feet east of Main Street for 22
feet
Crawford Street West From 59 feet north of Tremont Avenue
for 24 feet
Eaton Place North From 62 feet east of North Grove Street
for 50 feet
Fourth Avenue South From 73.5 feet west of North 19th Street
for 45.5 feet
Glenwood Avenue
[Added 6-12-2017
by Ord. No.
21-2017]
West From 318 feet south of Washington
Street for 25 feet
Hollywood Avenue East From 63 feet north of 11th Avenue for 60
feet
Hollywood Avenue West From 78 feet south of Central Avenue for
35 feet
Lincoln Street
[Added 6-12-2017
by Ord. No.
21-2017]
South From 153 feet east of Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. Boulevard for 35 feet
North Grove Street East From 35 feet north of William Street for
60 feet
North Harrison
Street [Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 21-2017]
West From 142 feet north of Main Street for
25 feet
North Maple Avenue East From 61 feet south of Springdale Avenue
for 37 feet
North Walnut Street East From 37 feet north of William Street for
93 feet
South 18th Street West From 225 feet south of Central Avenue
for 42 feet
§ 260-20 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-20
C:1362
Name of Street Side Location
Sunnyside Terrace East From 40 feet north of South Orange
Avenue for 25 feet
§ 260-21. Bus and taxi stations.
The City Council may from time to time by resolution designate bus stops,
stations and stands for omnibuses and taxis on sections of streets. The
driver of a bus shall not stop to unload or load passengers upon any street
at any place other than at a designated station or stand.
§ 260-22. Standing or parking in bus stops, taxi stands and loading
zones.
Bus stops, taxi stands and loading zones shall be subject to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.
§ 260-23. Parking prohibited at all times.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
in any location where the City Council, by ordinance, shall prohibit parking
at all times, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Amherst Street East Between Rhode Island Avenue and
Central Avenue
Amherst Street West Between Central Drive and Freeway
Drive East
Arsdale Terrace East Between South Orange Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
Ashland Avenue West Between Main Street and William Street
Beech Street South Between South Clinton Street and South
Arlington Avenue
Berwyn Street North Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
Birchwood Avenue West Between Newark City line and Central
Avenue
Cambridge Street West Between Clifford Street and Central
Avenue
Carlton Street North Between Prospect Street and North
Clinton Street
Carnegie Avenue South Between South Burnett Street and
South Arlington Avenue
Centerway East Between Crescent Place and Springdale
Avenue
§ 260-20 CHARTER § 260-23
C:1363
Name of Street Side Location
Central Avenue North Between Hawthorne Avenue and South
Oraton Parkway (east)
Central Avenue South Between Watson Avenue and Whittlesey
Avenue
Chelsea Place South Between Glenwood Avenue and
Washington Terrace
Chestnut Street South Between South Clinton Street and South
Arlington Avenue
Church Place Both Between North Maple Avenue and
Division Place
City Hall Plaza North Between North Arlington Avenue and
North Munn Avenue
Clay Street South Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
Clifford Street South Between Sanford Street and Halsted
Street
Division Place Both Between Church Place and New Street
Dodd Street North Between North Park Street and Orange
City line
Dodd Street South Between Orange City line and
Bloomfield Town line
Dodd Terrace East Between Dodd Street and dead end
East Highland
Avenue
South Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
East Park Street South Between Washington Street and
Burchard Avenue
Eastwood Street South Between Midland Avenue and Glenwood
Avenue
Edgerton Terrace South Between Prospect Street and North
Clinton Street
Elliott Place South Between Orange City line and Sanford
Street
Ely Place South Between Prospect Street and North
Clinton Street
Eppirt Street
[Added 3-28-1988
by Ord. No.
11-1988]
East Between Rhode Island Avenue and
Central Avenue
Essex Street South Between Glenwood Avenue and
Washington Street
§ 260-23 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-23
C:1364
Name of Street Side Location
Fairmont Terrace East Between South Orange Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
Fair Street North Between Midland Avenue and North
Park Street
Franklin Street South Between Glenwood Avenue and
Prospect Street
Freeman Avenue West Between Rhode Island Avenue and
Central Avenue
Garfield Place South Between Birchwood Avenue and
Hawthorne Place
Glenwood Avenue East Between Washington Street and Chelsea
Place
Glenwood Place North Between Glenwood Avenue and
Prospect Street
Halsted Street North Between Evergreen Place and Halsted
Street
Halsted Street West Between Tremont Avenue and Main
Street
Hamilton Street South Between North Clinton Street and
Lincoln Street
Hamilton Street South Between Prospect Street and Lincoln
Street
Hampton Terrace South Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
Harvard Street Both Between Halsted Street and Evergreen
Place
Harvard Street North Between Halsted Street and South
Clinton Street
Hawthorne Avenue East Between Main Street and Central
Avenue
Hawthorne Place East Between Garfield Place and Central
Avenue
Hayward Street North Between Orange City line and North
Park Street
Hayward Street South Between Orange City line and Long
Street
Hedden Place South Between North 15th Street and Newark
City line
Hillcrest Terrace East Between South Orange Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
§ 260-23 CHARTER § 260-23
C:1365
Name of Street Side Location
Hillyer Street West Between Orange City line and
Washington Street
Hoffman Boulevard East Between Ampere Parkway and North
Grove Street
Kearney Street Both Between Dodd Street and dead end
Lawrence Street East Between North Walnut Street and
Bloomfield Town line
Lawrence Street West Between North Walnut Street and
Bloomfield Town line
Lenox Avenue South Between South Clinton Street and South
Arlington Avenue
Lincoln Street West Between Main Street and William Street
Lincoln Street West Between Park Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
Long Street East Between Hayward Street and Dodd
Street
Main Street Both Between North Arlington Avenue and
South Arlington Avenue
Main Street North Between Washington Street and
Prospect Street
Main Street South Between Washington Place and Prospect
Place
Melrose Avenue North Between Sanford Street and South
Harrison Street
Morris Street West Between Hamilton Street and dead end
south
Morton Place West Between William Street and Washington
Terrace
Nassau Place East Between Central Avenue and Carnegie
Avenue
New Street Avenue Both Between North Oraton Parkway (west)
and North Arlington
New Street North Between North Oraton Parkway (east)
and North Grove Street
New Street South Between North Munn Avenue and North
Oraton Parkway (west)
North Arlington
Avenue
East Between Park Avenue and Bloomfield
Town line
North Arlington
Avenue
West Between Bloomfield Town line and
Renshaw Avenue
§ 260-23 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-23
C:1366
Name of Street Side Location
North Arlington
Avenue
West Between William Street and Park
Avenue
North Burnett Street West Between Main Street and William Street
North Clinton Street East Between Ely Place and Bloomfield Town
line
North Clinton Street East Between Main Street and William Street
North Clinton Street West Between Edgerton Terrace and
Springdale Avenue
North Clinton Street West Between Ely Place and William Street
North Clinton Street West Between Main Street and Springdale
Avenue
North 18th Street East Between 4th Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
North 15th Street East Between Park Avenue and 4th Avenue
North Grove Street West Between Bloomfield Town line and Main
Street
North Maple Avenue West Between Railroad Street and New
Street
North Munn Avenue West Between Newark City line and Park
Avenue
North Munn Avenue West Between William Street and Main Street
North 19th Street West Between Park Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
North Oraton
Parkway
East Between Park Avenue and Main Street
North Park Street West Between Springdale Avenue and the culde-
sac
North Walnut Street East Between Park Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
North Walnut Street West Between Main Street and Park Avenue
North Walnut Street West Between Rutledge Avenue and
Bloomfield Town line
Park End Place North Between South Harrison Street and
Sanford Street
Park Place Both Between Washington Street and Orange
City line
Park Street East Between Park Avenue and Washington
Street
Park Street West Between Orange City line and Park
Avenue
§ 260-23 CHARTER § 260-23
C:1367
Name of Street Side Location
Parkway Drive (east) West Between Park Avenue and North Walnut
Street
Parkway Drive
(west)
East Between North Clinton Street and Park
Avenue
Princeton Street West Between Clifford Street and Central
Avenue
Prospect Street East Between Springdale Avenue and Ely
Place
Prospect Street West Between William Street and Bloomfield
Town line
Prospect Terrace South Between Prospect Street and Ashland
Avenue
Renshaw Avenue South Between Prospect Street and North
Walnut Street
Ridgewood Avenue Both Between Glen Park Road and Glen
Ridge Town line
Ross Street Both Between McKay Avenue and dead end
south
Rutledge Avenue South Between North Grove Street and
Hoffman Boulevard
South Arlington
Avenue
East Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South Arlington
Avenue
West Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South Burnett Street Both Between Rhode Island Avenue North to
dead end
South Burnett Street East Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South Burnett Street West Between Elmwood Avenue and Central
Avenue
South Burnett Street West Between Freeway Drive West and Main
Street
South Clinton Street East Between Freeway Drive West and Main
Street
South Clinton Street West Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South Grove Street West Between Newark City line and Central
Avenue
South Harrison
Street
Both Between Orange City line and Main
Street
§ 260-23 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-23
C:1368
Name of Street Side Location
South Munn Avenue West Between Main Street and Newark City
line
South Munn Avenue West Between Newark City line and Park
Avenue
South Oraton
Parkway
East Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South Oraton
Parkway
West Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South Walnut Street Both Between Freeway Drive West and Main
Street
Soverel Terrace West Between Springdale Avenue to dead end
Springdale Avenue North Between North Arlington Avenue and
North Maple Avenue
Springdale Avenue North Between Orange City line and Glenwood
Avenue
Springdale Avenue South Between Glenwood Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
Springdale Avenue South Between North Grove Street and
Newark City line
Springdale Avenue South Between Orange City line and North
Park Street
State Street North Between Park Street and Hillyer Street
Summit Street North Between North Arlington Avenue and
Ashland Avenue
Sunnyside Terrace East Between South Orange Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
Thomas Boulevard Both Between Orange Road and Orange City
line
Tremont Avenue North Between Orange City line and Newark
City line
Tremont Avenue South Between Telford Street and Halsted
Street
University Place North Between Halsted Street and Amherst
Street
Washington Street East Between Hillyer Street and Orange City
line
Washington Street East Between William Street and Glenwood
Avenue
Washington Street West Between Glenwood Avenue and William
Street
§ 260-23 CHARTER § 260-23
C:1369
Name of Street Side Location
Watson Avenue West Between Wilcox Avenue and Central
Avenue
Wayne Avenue North Between Sanford Street and South
Harrison Street
Webster Place North Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
Whitney Place North Between 4th Avenue and Ampere Plaza
Whittlesey Avenue East Between Newark City line and Central
Avenue
Wilcox Avenue Both Between South Munn Avenue and
Whittlesey Avenue
William Street North Between Lincoln Street and Prospect
Street
William Street North Between Morton Place and Washington
Street
William Street South Between Orange City line and Newark
City line
Winans Street West Between Main Street and William Street
§ 260-24. Parking prohibited 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. of any day on any streets or sections of streets designated by ordinance
of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Halsted Street East Between Norwood Place and Tremont
Avenue
§ 260-25. Parking prohibited 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
of any day that school is in session on the following streets or sections of
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Grove Place South Between North Grove Street and
Greenwood Avenue
§ 260-25.1. Parking prohibited 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Added
8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 44-2015]
A. No person shall park a vehicle on New Street between North Arlington
Avenue and North Munn Avenue between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. from Monday through Friday unless such person is employed
§ 260-23 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-25.1
C:1370
§ 260-26. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle during the hours and in any location where the City Council, by
ordinance, has prohibited stopping or standing of vehicles during certain
hours, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Central Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Central Avenue North 4:30 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Central Avenue South 7:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Main Street North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Main Street North 4:30 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Main Street North 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Main Street South 7:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
North Grove
Street
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Main Street
and Bloomfield Town
line
North Harrison
Street
West 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between William
Street and Main Street
by the City of East Orange. Any vehicle found to be in violation of this
provision shall be subject to a fine of $75.
B. No person shall park a vehicle on University Place, south side, between
Amherst Street and Halsted Street between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. from Monday through Friday unless such person is employed
by the City of East Orange. Any vehicle found to be in violation of this
provision shall be subject to a fine of $75. [Added 9-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 28-2017]
§ 260-25.1 CHARTER § 260-26
C:1371
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Park Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Newark City
line and Orange City
line
Park Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Park Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
Park Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Newark City
line
South Grove
Street
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Central
Avenue and Main
Street
South Grove
Street
West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Central
Avenue and Newark
City line
South Harrison
Street
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Brick Church
Plaza and Main Street
South Harrison
Street
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Brick Church
Plaza and Main Street
South Harrison
Street
West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Main Street
and Freeway Drive
West
South Orange
Avenue
North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between the two
Newark City lines
Springdale
Avenue
North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between North Park
Street and Newark
City line
Springdale
Avenue
North 4:30 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between North Park
Street and Newark
City line
Washington
Street
East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through
Friday
Between Glenwood
Avenue and Hillyer
Street
Washington
Street
West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Orange City
line and Park Avenue
§ 260-26 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-26
C:1372
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Washington
Street
West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between Park Avenue
and Glenwood Avenue
§ 260-27. Stopping or standing prohibited at all times on certain
streets.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle at any time and in any location where the City Council ordinance
has prohibited stopping or standing of vehicles during certain hours as
listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street North From North 15th Street to North
Arlington Avenue
Main Street South From South Arlington Avenue to
Newark City line
North Arlington Avenue West From William Street to Main Street
Park End Place South From Sanford Street 95 feet west
Rhode Island Avenue North From Sanford Street 160 feet east
Rhode Island Avenue South From Sanford Street 105 feet east
Sanford Street East From Rhode Island Avenue 205 feet
south
Sanford Street West From 100 feet north of Park End
Place to Elliott Place
§ 260-28. Fifteen-minute parking.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for more than 15 minutes in any location which the City Council shall, by
ordinance, designate as a fifteen-minute parking zone, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
New Street South From the east curbline of North
Arlington Avenue 100 feet east
§ 260-29. Fifteen-minute parking only between certain hours of
certain days on certain streets.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for more than 15 minutes between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:30 a.m.
and also between 3:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., excluding Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, in any location where the City Council has, by ordinance,
prohibited such parking, as listed below:
§ 260-26 CHARTER § 260-29
C:1373
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 260-30. Two-hour parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sunday.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays upon any streets or sections of streets
designated by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Amherst Street West Between Central Avenue and Elmwood
Avenue
Ampere Parkway East Between Rowe Street and Rutledge
Avenue
Ampere Parkway West Between Hoffman Boulevard and
Rutledge Avenue
Ashland Avenue East Between Main Street and Summit Street
Ashland Avenue West Between William Street and Summit
Street
Berwyn Street South Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
Birchwood Avenue East Between Garfield Place and Central
Avenue
Brighton Avenue Both Between Glen Ridge Town line and Dodd
Street
Cambridge Street East Between Clifford Street and Central
Avenue
Carlton Street South Between Prospect Street and North
Clinton Street
Centerway West Between Crescent Place and Springdale
Avenue
Charles Street Both Between Girard Avenue and North Park
Street
Chauncey Avenue Both Between North Arlington Avenue and
North Maple Avenue
Chelsea Place North Between Washington Terrace and
Glenwood Avenue
Chestnut Street North Between South Oraton Parkway and
South Clinton Street
Chestnut Street South Between South Arlington Avenue and
South Oraton Parkway
Cottage Place Both Between Charles Street and Dodd Street
§ 260-29 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-30
C:1374
Name of Street Side Location
Division Street Both Between Springdale Avenue and Rowe
Street
Dodd Street North Between Glenwood Avenue and Westcott
Street
Dodd Street North Between Prospect Street and Bloomfield
Town line
East Highland
Avenue
North Between South Harrison Street and
Orange City line
Edgerton Terrace North Between Prospect Street and North
Clinton Street
Ely Place North Between Prospect Street and North
Clinton Street
Essex Street North Between Washington Street and
Glenwood Avenue
Fair Street South Between North Park Street and Midland
Avenue
Fourth Avenue Both Between North 15th Street and Newark
City line
Fourth Avenue North Between North 22nd Street and North
19th Street
Fourth Avenue South Between North 22nd Street and North
19th Street
Franklin Street North Between Prospect Street and Glenwood
Avenue
Girard Avenue Both Between Fair Street and Dodd Street
Glen Park Road Both Between Glen Ridge Town line and
Ridgewood Avenue
Glenwood Avenue Both Between Park Avenue and Eastwood
Street
Glenwood Avenue Both Between Washington Street and Orange
City line
Glenwood Place South Between Prospect Street and Glenwood
Avenue
Halsted Street East Between Central Avenue and Freeway
Drive East
Hamilton Street South Between North Clinton Street and
Parkway Drive (west)
Hampton Terrace North Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
Hayward Street South Between North Park Street and Long
Street
§ 260-30 CHARTER § 260-30
C:1375
Name of Street Side Location
Hilton Street Both Between Brighton Avenue and North
Park Street
Hoffman Boulevard West Between Ampere Parkway and North
Grove Street
Lincoln Street Both Between William Street and Carlton
Street
Lincoln Street Both Between William Street and Park Avenue
Lindsley Place Both Between Sanford Street and Ross Street
Long Street West Between Hayward Street and Dodd
Street
Main Street North Between Newark City line and North
15th Street
McKay Avenue Both Between Sanford Street and Ross Street
Meadow Street Both Between Marcy Avenue and Dodd Street
Melmore Gardens Both Between Lincoln Street and Prospect
Street
Morris Street
[Added 10-9-84 by
Ord. No 44-1984]
Both Between Springdale Avenue and dead
end south
Morton Place East Between William Street and Washington
Terrace
Norman Place Both Between Renshaw Avenue and dead end
North Arlington
Avenue
East Between New Street and Summit Street
North Burnett Street East Between Main Street and William Street
North Clinton Street West Between Main Street and William Street
North 18th Street Both Between Park Avenue and 4th Avenue
North 15th Street Both Between Main Street and South Ward
Place
North 15th Street West Between Park Avenue and 4th Avenue
North 14th Street East Between Newark City line and Park
Avenue
North 14th Street West Between Park Avenue and Eaton Place
North Maple Avenue Both Between 4th Avenue and Rutledge
Avenue
North Maple Avenue Both Between Renshaw Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
North 19th Street East Between Park Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
§ 260-30 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-30
C:1376
Name of Street Side Location
North Oraton
Parkway
East Between William Street and Park Avenue
North Oraton
Parkway
West Between Park Avenue and William Street
North Park Street East Between Washington Street and cul-desac
North Park Street West Between Washington Street and
Springdale Avenue
North 16th Street Both Between Park Avenue and 4th Avenue
North 17th Street Both Between Park Avenue and 4th Avenue
North 22nd Street Both Between Springdale Avenue and
Rutledge Avenue
North 23rd Street Both Between Springdale Avenue and
Rutledge Avenue
North Walnut Street East Between Main Street and Park Avenue
North Walnut Street East Between Renshaw Avenue and Norman
Street
Princeton Street East Between Clifford Street and Central
Avenue
Prospect Street East Between Carlton Street and Springdale
Avenue
Prospect Street East Between Dodd Street and Bloomfield
Town line
Prospect Street East Between Ely Place and Watchung
Railroad
Renshaw Avenue North Between Prospect Street and North
Clinton Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Between Rutledge Avenue and
Springdale Avenue
Ross Street Both Between Tremont Avenue north to culde-
sac
Ross Street Both Between Tremont Avenue south to dead
end
Rowe Street North Between Ampere Parkway and Newfield
Street
Rowe Street South Between Division Street and Newfield
Street
Rutledge Avenue North Between North Grove Street and
Hoffman Boulevard
§ 260-30 CHARTER § 260-30
C:1377
Name of Street Side Location
Sanford Street East Between Edgar Street and Central
Avenue
Sanford Street West Between Melrose Avenue and Central
Avenue
South Arlington
Avenue
East Between 370 feet north of Central
Avenue
South Arlington
Avenue
East Between Main Street and Chestnut
Street
South Clinton Street East Between Central Avenue and Freeway
Drive East
South Munn Avenue West Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South Oraton
Parkway
East Between 173 feet north of Central
Avenue
Springdale Avenue North Between Division Street and Ellington
Street
Springdale Avenue North Between Glenwood Avenue and North
Clinton Street
Springdale Avenue North Between North Grove Street and
Centerway
Steuben Street Both Between Sussex Avenue and Freeway
Drive East
Summit Street South Between Ashland Avenue and North
Arlington Avenue
Sussex Avenue Both Between South Grove Street and
Steuben Street (except Wednesdays)
Sussex Avenue Both Between Steuben Street and Newark
City line
Tremont Avenue South Between Sanford Street and Orange City
line
Washington Terrace North Between Washington Street and Park
Avenue
Webster Place South Between Orange City line and South
Harrison Street
Whittlesey Avenue West Between Newark City line and Central
Avenue
William Street North Between North Arlington Avenue and
Lincoln Street
William Street North Between North Arlington Avenue and
North Clinton Street
Winans Street East Between Main Street and William Street
§ 260-30 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-30
C:1378
Name of Street Side Location
Woodland Avenue Both Between Park Avenue and Springdale
Avenue
§ 260-31. Two-hour parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., each day.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. of any day, upon any streets or sections of streets designated by
ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 260-32. Two-hour parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, upon any streets or sections of streets
designated by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Arsdale Terrace West Between Hudson Avenue and South
Orange Avenue
Fairmount Terrace West Between Hudson Avenue and South
Orange Avenue
Hillcrest Terrace West Between Hudson Avenue and South
Orange Avenue
§ 260-33. Two-hour parking 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than two hours of any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, upon any streets or sections of streets
designated by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Central Avenue North Between Newark City line and Nassau
Place
South Orange
Avenue
North Between Newark City line and Arsdale
Terrace
§ 260-30 CHARTER § 260-34
C:1379
§ 260-34. Two-hour parking 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, upon any streets or sections of streets
designated by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Central Avenue South Between Birchwood Avenue and Newark
City line
Central Avenue South Between Oak Street and Watson Avenue
Freeway Drive East South Between South Oraton Parkway (east)
and South Maple Avenue
Warwick Street Both Between Hoffman Boulevard and Sawyer
Avenue
§ 260-34.1. One-hour parking 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. [Added 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 28-2011]
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than one hour at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, upon any streets or sections of streets
designated by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Ross Street
[Amended
5-19-2014 by Ord.
No. 10-2014]
Both Between dead end and cul-de-sac
§ 260-35. Two-hour parking 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m., any day.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
2:00 a.m. of any day upon any streets or sections of streets designated by
ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Halsted Street West Between Norwood Place and Tremont
Avenue
§ 260-36. Six-hour parking.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
longer than six hours any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
of any day except Sundays upon any of the streets or sections of streets
designated by ordinance of the City Council, as listed below:
§ 260-34 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-36
C:1380
Name of Street Side Location
Eaton Place North Between Greenwood Avenue and North
Grove Street
Hollywood Avenue Both Between 11th Avenue and Winthrop
Terrace
Lafayette Avenue Both Between North Grove Street and North
Maple Avenue
Lenox Avenue North Between South Arlington Avenue and
South Clinton Street
Marcy Avenue Both Between North Clinton Street and
Prospect Street
Ninth Avenue Both Between South Grove Street and Newark
City line
North Walnut Street East Between Rutledge Avenue and Renshaw
Avenue
Park Street West Between Park Avenue and Washington
Street
Rutledge Avenue Both Between North Arlington Avenue and
North Walnut Street
South Grove Street East Between Sussex Avenue and Main Street
South Oraton
Parkway
East Between Central Avenue and Main
Street
South 17th Street Both Between Central Avenue and Ninth
Avenue
South 16th Street Both Between Newark City line and Ninth
Avenue
Steuben Street Both Between Central Avenue and Sussex
Avenue
Sussex Avenue Both Between South Grove Street and
Steuben Street (Wednesdays only)
§ 260-37. Stopping, standing or parking during or after snow
storms; emergency routes.
A. Citywide snow emergency.
(1) A state of emergency is hereby declared to exist within the City of
East Orange whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is
such that it covers the street or highway, and a snow emergency
has been declared by the Mayor in conference with the Director of
Public Works. Upon such declaration of emergency, there shall be
no parking upon streets or sections of streets where temporary
"Emergency No Parking" signs are displayed. Notification that the
"Emergency No Parking" signs are being or will be posted shall be
§ 260-36 CHARTER § 260-37
C:1381
given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been
parked prior to the posting of the signs. [Amended 5-27-1986 by
Ord. No. 25-1986]
(2) In order to afford the municipality the opportunity to clear the
streets of snow and to open the highways of the City of East Orange
to traffic during the period of the emergency aforesaid, no vehicle,
however propelled, except as herein provided, shall be allowed to
stand, stop or park, whether attended or not, upon any highway of
the City of East Orange, except for picking up and discharging
passengers, or for picking up or delivering essential merchandise
or other commodities; provided, however, that such emergency
shall be terminated as to any highway when the snow, from curb to
curb, has been plowed therefrom.
(3) Such emergency shall be presumed to continue on those streets of
the City from which the snow has not been removed, and no vehicle
shall be allowed to stand, stop or park, whether attended or not, on
such street or highway until the snow shall have been cleared
therefrom, provided that signs have been placed or posted
indicating that parking is prohibited along such street or highway
while the City is engaged in or about to engage in the removal of
snow therefrom.
B. Snow emergency routes.
(1) Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on the
following streets or highways or portions thereof, and the following
are designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street Side Location
Ashland Avenue Both Between Main Street and
William Street
Dodd Street Both Between Orange City line and
Bloomfield Town line
Eaton Place Both Between North 19th Street and
North 14th Street
Greenwood Avenue Both Between Main Street and Park
Avenue
Hamilton Street Both Between Parkway Drive (west)
and Prospect Street
North Arlington
Avenue
Both Between Main Street and
Bloomfield Town line
North Clinton Street Both Between Springdale Avenue and
Main Street
North 18th Street Both Between Eaton Place and 4th
Avenue
§ 260-37 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-37
C:1382
Name of Street Side Location
North 15th Street Both Between Eaton Place and 4th
Avenue
North 14th Street Both Between Eaton Place and Park
Avenue
North Harrison
Street
Both Between William Street and
Main Street
North Munn Avenue Both Between Park Avenue and Main
Street
North 19th Street Both Between Eaton Place and
Springdale Avenue
North Park Street Both Between Washington Street and
cul-de-sac to the north
North 17th Street Both Between Eaton Place and 4th
Avenue
North 16th Street Both Between Eaton Place and 4th
Avenue
North Walnut Street Both Between Main Street and Park
Avenue
Norwood Street Both Between South Orange Avenue
and Tremont Avenue
Prospect Place Both Between Brick Church Plaza and
Main Street
Prospect Street Both Between Main Street and
Bloomfield Town line
South Arlington
Avenue
Both Between Main Street and
Elmwood Avenue
South Clinton Street Both Between South Orange Avenue
and Main Street
South 18th Street Both Between Central Avenue and
Newark City line
South Munn Avenue Both Between Newark City line and
Main Street
Springdale Avenue Both Between North Park Street and
Newark City line
Steuben Street Both Between Main Street and
Central Avenue
Stockton Place Both Between William Street and Park
Avenue
Tremont Avenue Both Between Newark City line and
Orange City line
§ 260-37 CHARTER § 260-37
C:1383
§ 260-38. Towing and impoundment of illegally parked or standing
vehicles; impoundment of vehicles subject to outstanding traffic
warrants. [Amended 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 36-1986; 12-8-1986 by
Ord. No. 49-1986; 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 18-1990]
Name of Street Side Location
Vernon Terrace Both Between William Street and Park
Avenue
Washington Place Both Between Brick Church Plaza and
Main Street
Washington Street Both Between William Street and
Orange City line
(2) The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow
has ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to
the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
A. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
B. Vehicles subject to outstanding traffic warrants.
(1) Any vehicle subject to outstanding traffic warrants, as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.2 et seq., may be immobilized, moved or caused to
be removed by any police officer. Immobilization shall be by use of a
device or other mechanism which will cause no damage to such
vehicle unless moved when such device or mechanism is in place.
In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this
section, the Chief of Police or his designee shall cause to be placed
on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn
any individual of the fact that any attempt to move such vehicle
might result in damage to such vehicle. The owner shall pay the
costs of immobilization, which shall be $75, plus the reasonable
costs of the removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
(2) Within 48 hours of immobilization and/or removal, the Chief of
Police or his designee shall make every effort to ascertain the
identity of the last registered owner and to notify him personally or
by certified mail of the immobilization and/or removal of such
vehicle and all charges which must be paid by the owner to redeem
the vehicle.
(3) Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle impounded
pursuant to this section shall be allowed to repossess or secure the
§ 260-37 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-38
C:1384
§ 260-39. Special parking zones: handicap parking spaces.
[Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 21-2010; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
40-2015]
release of said vehicle, the owner or his agent shall pay all sums
legally due the City of East Orange for warrants issued and
outstanding against such vehicle and all sums due for
immobilization, removal and storage of the vehicle.
(4) Any vehicle not claimed by its registered owner or someone
authorized in writing to act on his behalf by midnight of the 30th
day following the date on which the vehicle was impounded or
immobilized may be sold at auction in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-139.13. Proceeds, if any, from the sale of the vehicle shall be
disbursed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.13.
(5) Any unauthorized person who tampers with or removes the device
or mechanism used to immobilize such vehicle shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $2,000, 90 days' imprisonment and/or 90
days of community service. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015]
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a traffic or police officer or traffic sign
or signal, no operator of a vehicle shall stand or park the vehicle in any
space on public or private property appropriately marked for vehicles
for the physically handicapped pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5 or any
other applicable law, unless the vehicle is authorized by law to be
parked therein and a handicapped person is either the driver or a
passenger in that vehicle.
B. Only persons with special vehicle identification cards issued by the
State Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-205 shall be allowed to park their cars in restricted parking zones
established for handicapped persons, except during those hours when
parking is specifically prohibited. Parking in restricted parking zones
for handicapped persons may further be restricted when those areas
have been designated for specific residents pursuant to this section.
C. Upon adoption of an ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6,
establishing an individualized restricted parking zone in front of a
residence occupied by a handicapped person or persons, the Public
Works Department shall issue a permit which identifies a specific motor
vehicle and the location wherein it is to be parked which shall
correspond to the ordinance. The permit shall be 5 1/2 inches by 8 1/2
inches in size, shall bear an appropriate certification of authenticity and
shall be displayed prominently within the vehicle when it is parked so as
to be seen from the middle of the street. Such permits shall only be
issued to persons who can prove ownership and operation of the motor
vehicle and residency at the location specified thereon. The fee for each
such permit shall be $50.
§ 260-38 CHARTER § 260-39
C:1385
D. Each applicant for an individualized restricted parking zone in front of
his or her residence shall meet and satisfy all of the requirements set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5. N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6. N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7, and
any other applicable state statute, rule or regulation.
E. No handicapped parking space shall be established within 300 feet of
any other handicapped parking space, except that where handicapped
parking spaces are existing in closer proximity on the effective date of
this section, those spaces may remain until the permit holder dies or
otherwise permanently ceases to reside in that residence, or until he or
she no longer qualifies for a handicapped parking space under the
terms of this section and/or the applicable state statutes.
F. Each applicant for an individualized restricted parking zone in front of
his or her residence shall certify on a form provided by the Department
of Public Works that he or she has no driveway or garage accessible for
use as a parking space, unless there are extenuating circumstances
necessitating a need for such restricted parking zone. The Department
of Public Works shall establish the presence of any extenuating
circumstances prior to adoption of an ordinance establishing a
restricted parking zone in front of an applicant's residence.
G. Each applicant for an individualized restricted parking zone in front of
his or her residence may only receive one handicapped parking space.
If there is parking permitted on both sides of the street, the restricted
parking zone shall be limited to that side of the street on which the
applicant's residence is located.
H. Holders of temporary handicapped license plates must reapply annually
with the Department of Public Works to maintain a restricted parking
zone in front of their residence once such handicapped parking space
has been issued.
I. Once every three years, commencing in 2015, the Public Works
Department shall send a form to each recipient of an individualized
handicapped parking zone containing a certification to be signed by the
recipient certifying his or her continuing qualifications and needs for a
handicapped parking space. Each form shall contain instructions for its
completion and return within 30 days of receipt. Within 30 days after
the due date for the return of the certifications, the Public Works
Department shall submit a list to the City Council of all handicapped
parking spaces for which certifications were not returned. The City
Council may then act at a subsequent meeting to terminate approval of
those handicapped parking spaces for which certifications were not
received.
J. Before final adoption of an ordinance establishing an individualized
handicapped parking zone, the Department of Public Works shall
examine each proposed handicapped parking space and shall report to
the City Council if the application can be granted without detriment to
the welfare of the public. Factors that could lead to a finding that a
§ 260-39 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-39
C:1386
§ 260-39.1. Designated individualized restricted parking zones.
[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
§ 260-40. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along Main Street shall be
established as follows:
Zone
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 1 25 From the westerly East Orange line to North
Arlington Avenue and South Arlington Avenue,
thence
Zone 2 35 To the easterly East Orange line
proposed space is a detriment to the welfare of the public include but
are not limited to the following: 1) parking is otherwise prohibited in
the area; 2) the restricted space will interfere with the normal flow
of traffic; 3) the number and/or nature of commercial establishments
in the area make the restricted space burdensome and impractical;
and 4) the existence of other restricted parking spaces in the vicinity
of the proposed space is likely to create an unreasonable burden on
neighboring residents. It shall be the responsibility of the City Clerk
to send on the day following introduction of an ordinance establishing
a handicapped parking space a written notice to the Public Works
Department advising of the date for final adoption of said ordinance.
K. Any person parking a vehicle in a parking space reserved for the
physically handicapped without a special vehicle identification card
issued by the State Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-205 and/or a permit issued by the Department of Public Works
shall be liable to a fine of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent
offenses, a fine of $250 and up to 90 days community service on such
term and in such form as the Court shall deem appropriate. In addition
to any fine or penalty imposed for a violation of this section, the
Municipal Court shall also impose a six-dollar surcharge pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(d) through (g), which shall be collected by the Clerk of
the Municipal Court and forwarded to the State Treasurer. The Court
shall not suspend collection of the six-dollar surcharge imposed
pursuant to this section.
A. The City Council establishes the following individualized restricted
parking zones for handicapped persons pursuant to § 260-39:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 260-39 CHARTER § 260-40
C:1387

ARTICLE IV
Parking Meters
§ 260-41. Purpose of parking meters. [Amended 7-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 30-2015]
The funds required to be deposited in or otherwise paid through parking
meters as provided herein are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide
for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and
also the cost of supervision and regulating the parking of vehicles in the
parking meter zones created hereby and to cover the cost of the purchase,
supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance,
control and use of the parking meters.
§ 260-42. Operation. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 10-1987;
7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 30-2015]
§ 260-43. Director of Public Works authorized to install and
regulate use. [Amended 5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
A. The operation of the parking meters shall be through the use of United
States currency or coin (including through payment by valid credit
card, debit card or other remote payment device) deposited into the
parking meter to the amount shown or displayed on the respective
parking meter.
B. The operator of the vehicles shall, upon entering the parking space,
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited the required currency or
coin (including through payment by valid credit card, debit card or
other remote payment device) of the United States in such parking
meter and set in operation the timing mechanism on such parking
meter in accordance with the directions appearing thereon. Failure to
deposit such currency or coin (including through payment by valid
credit card, debit card or other remote payment device), or to set in
operation the timing mechanism on such parking meter in accordance
with the directions appearing thereon, shall constitute a breach of this
article and shall subject such person to the penalty described in this
chapter.
A. The Director of Public Works, when an appropriation is provided
therefor, is hereby authorized to provide for the installation, regulation,
control, operation and use of the parking meters provided for in this
article and to maintain the parking meters in good working condition
and to sign and mark the parking meter spaces for their legal position
and time limits, and is hereby authorized and empowered, after the
approval of the terms and conditions thereof by the Mayor and City
Council, to purchase and install parking meters, together with extra
coin boxes, service kits, extra units and other accessories.
B. No meters shall be installed at any of the areas where parking is
prohibited pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
§ 260-41 CHARTER § 260-44
C:1389
§ 260-44. Violation of markings or time limits.
§ 260-45. Time of operation of parking meters.
Parking meters shall be in operation between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily,
except Sundays and legal holidays, unless otherwise provided by the City
Council.
§ 260-46. Use of slugs or foreign matter.
It shall be unlawful to knowingly deposit any material other than United
States coins in any parking meter.
§ 260-47. Injuring or destroying parking meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or in any way tamper with any
parking meter.
§ 260-48. Disposition of receipts.
The receipts and revenues collected from the coin boxes of the parking
meters herein provided for shall be paid to the Collector of Taxes and
deposited in the general funds of the City.
§ 260-49. Parking meter areas. [Amended 7-20-2015 by Ord. No.
30-2015]
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to park any vehicle in
any position other than within the stall markings provided or for
periods longer than the legal limit.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the
name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond
the maximum period of legal parking time established for any parking
meter zone.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person to deposit any or cause to be deposited in a parking meter
any currency or coin (including through payment by valid credit card,
debit card or other remote payment device) for the purpose of
increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the
maximum legal parking time which has been established for the
parking space adjacent to which the parking meter is placed.
[Amended 7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 30-2015]
D. It shall be unlawful to permit a vehicle to continue to occupy or be
placed in any metered parking space while the meter is displaying a
violation signal or for which the required amount has not been
deposited. [Amended 7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 30-2015]
§ 260-44 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-49
C:1390
A. Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space in the on-street
parking meter areas described below shall be lawful during the hours,
and upon the deposit or other payment of such amounts as may be
determined and specified, from time to time, by the Parking Authority of
the City of East Orange, pursuant to § 56-2 of the City Code and
Ordinance No. 30 of 2015:
Name of Street Side Location
Amherst Street East Between Central Avenue and 108 feet to
the north
Amherst Street West Between Central Avenue and 104 feet
south
Ampere Parkway East Between Springdale Avenue and 80 feet
north to Rowe Street
Ampere Parkway West Between Springdale Avenue and
Hoffman Boulevard
Ampere Plaza Both Between 4th Avenue and North 18th
Street
Arlington Avenue East Between Chestnut Street and Freeway
Drive
Baldwin Street Both Between Main Street and William Street
Brick Church
Plaza
North Between Halsted Street and 95 feet west
Brick Church
Plaza
North Between South Harrison Street and
Prospect Place
Central Avenue Both Between South Harrison Street and
Orange City line
Central Avenue North Between 166 feet west of Evergreen
Place and 64 feet west
Central Avenue North Between 85 feet west of Halsted Street
and 91 feet west
Central Avenue North Between Nassau Place and South
Clinton Street
Central Avenue North Between 195 feet east of South Harrison
Street and 125 feet east
Central Avenue South Between 46 feet west of Halsted Street
and 60 feet west
Central Avenue South Between 35 feet west of Sanford Street
and 73 feet west
Central Avenue South Between South Clinton Street and Oak
Street
Central Avenue South Between 190 feet east of South Harrison
Street and 120 feet south
§ 260-49 CHARTER § 260-49
C:1391
Name of Street Side Location
City Hall Plaza B-C Between Winans Street and North Munn
Avenue
Dodd Street North Between Cottage Place and North Park
Street
Dodd Street North Between 129 feet east and 179 feet west
of Prospect Street
Eppirt Street West Between Central Avenue and 149 feet
south
Evergreen Place Both Between Central Avenue and Freeway
Drive East
Evergreen Place East Between Harvard Street and 118 feet
south
Evergreen Place West Between 160 feet south of Freeway
Drive East and 44 feet south
Fourth Avenue North Between 240 feet west of Ampere Plaza
and 137 feet west of North 19th Street
Fourth Avenue South Between 105 feet west of North 16th
Street and 138 feet west of North 19th
Street
Freeway Drive West Front of entrance to Municipal Court
Halsted Place South Between Evergreen Place and Halsted
Street
Halsted Street East Between Brick Church Plaza and Main
Street
Halsted Street West Between Central Avenue and 80 feet
south
Hampton Terrace North Between South Harrison Street and 200
feet west
Hoffman
Boulevard
West Between Ampere Parkway and 230 feet
north
Lincoln Street East Between Main Street and William Street
Main Street Both Between Baldwin Street and Lincoln
Street
Main Street North Between North Arlington Avenue and
North Clinton Street
Main Street North Between North Clinton Street and
Orange City line
Main Street North Between Orange City line and Winans
Street
Main Street North Between Winans Street and North
Arlington Avenue
§ 260-49 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-49
C:1392
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street South Between Orange City line and South
Clinton Street
Main Street South Between South Clinton Street and South
Arlington Avenue
Main Street South Between South Maple Avenue and
Newark City line
New Street South Between North Arlington Avenue and
North Munn Avenue
North 16th Street West Between 4th Avenue and 165 feet south
North 17th Street East Between 4th Avenue and 150 feet south
North 18th Street East Between 4th Avenue and 150 feet south
North 18th Street East Between Whitney Place and Ampere
Plaza
North 18th Street West Between 138 feet south of 4th Avenue
and north to Ampere Plaza
North Arlington
Avenue
East Between New Street and City Hall Plaza
North Arlington
Avenue
East Between 45 feet south of New Street
and 110 feet south
North Burnett
Street
East For 291 feet north of Main Street
North Grove
Street
East Between Springdale Avenue and 150
feet north
North Harrison
Street
Both Between Main Street and William Street
North Maple
Avenue
East Between Springdale Avenue and 100
feet north
North Maple
Avenue
West Between Springdale Avenue and 122
feet south
North Munn
Avenue
West Between Main Street and New Street
North Park Street East Between Dodd Street and 160 feet north
North Walnut
Street
East Between Main Street and 89 feet north
Princeton Street East Between Central Avenue and 148 feet
south
Prospect Place Both Between Brick Church Plaza and Main
Street
Prospect Street Both Between Main Street and William Street
Prospect Street East Between Dodd Street and 240 feet north
§ 260-49 CHARTER § 260-49
C:1393
Name of Street Side Location
Prospect Street East Between 165 feet north of William Street
to Carlton Street
Rowe Street North Between Ampere Parkway and Newfield
Street
Rowe Street South Between Ampere Parkway and Division
Street
Sanford Street East Between Central Avenue and 190 feet
south
Sanford Street West Between Central Avenue and 455 feet
south
Shepard Avenue East Between Central Avenue and 115 feet
south
South Burnett
Street
East Between Central Avenue and 203 feet
south
South Burnett
Street
West Between Central Avenue and 161 feet
north
South Clinton
Street
East Between Central Avenue and 129 feet
south
South Clinton
Street
West Between Central Avenue and 110 feet
south
Springdale Avenue North Between North Grove Street and North
Maple Avenue
Springdale Avenue North Between 170 feet east of North Grove
Street and west to North Maple Avenue
Springdale Avenue South Between 120 feet west of North Maple
Avenue and east to North Grove Street
Washington Place Both Between Brick Church Plaza and Main
Street
Washington Place West Between Main Street and 117 feet south
Washington Street Both Between Main Street and William Street
Whitney Place South Between 4th Avenue and Ampere Plaza
William Street North Between Lincoln Street and 120 feet
west
William Street North Between Orange City line and
Washington Street
William Street North Between Prospect Street and Morton
Street
William Street North Between 160 feet east of Prospect Street
and 115 feet east
Winans Street East Between Main Street and 565 feet north
§ 260-49 EAST ORANGE CODE § 260-49
C:1394
Name of Street Side Location
Winans Street West Between William Street and Main Street
B. Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space in off-street
parking meter areas owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the
Parking Authority of the City of East Orange, if any, shall be lawful only
when not in excess of the maximum time, and only upon the deposit or
other payment of such amounts as may be determined and specified,
from time to time, by the Parking Authority of the City of East Orange
pursuant to § 56-2 of the City Code and Ordinance No. 30 of 2015.
§ 260-49 CHARTER § 260-49
C:1395

ARTICLE V
Severability; Repealer; Title
§ 260-50. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 260-51. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 260-52. Title.
The short title of this chapter shall be and this chapter shall be cited as the
"Traffic Ordinance of the City of East Orange."
§ 260-50 CHARTER § 260-52
C:1397
Chapter 262
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION AND EQUIPMENT
FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Noise pollution — See Ch. 184.
Poles and wires — See Ch. 203.
§ 262-1. Purpose and goals.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide sound land use policies,
procedures and regulations for personal wireless telecommunications
facilities to protect the East Orange community from the visual or other
adverse impacts of these facilities while encouraging their unobtrusive
development to provide comprehensive wireless telecommunications
service in the East Orange community with its benefits to residents and
businesses. The chapter expresses a preference that antennas be located
on existing buildings and towers, preferably on municipal or other public
property, and not on newly constructed telecommunications towers and
encourages co-location and site-sharing of new and existing PWTFs.
§ 262-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency signals for wireless communications.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure other than a
telecommunications tower which is attached to a building and on which one
or more antennas are located.
CO-LOCATION — Use of a common PWTF or a common site by two or more
wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than
one type of communications technology and/or placement of a PWTF on a
structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
FACILITIES (PWTEFs) — Accessory facilities serving and subordinate in
area, extent and purpose to, and on the same lot as, a telecommunications
tower or antenna location. Such facilities include, but are not limited to,
transmission equipment, storage sheds, storage buildings, and security
fencing.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (PWTFs) —
Facilities for the provision of wireless communications services, including,
but not limited to, antennas, antenna support structure,
telecommunications towers, and related facilities other than PWTEFs.
§ 260-52 EAST ORANGE CODE § 262-2
C:1398
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A freestanding structure on which
one or more antennas are located, including lattice towers, guyed towers,
monopoles and similar structures.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA), which
includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and
similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed.
It does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by
a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular telephone service.
§ 262-3. Development standards.
§ 262-4. Conditional use.
A. Height standards. Where permitted, PWTFs may exceed the maximum
building height limitations, provided the height has the least visual
impact and is not greater than required to achieve service area
requirements and potential co-location, when visually appropriate.
PWTEFs are limited to 12 feet in height.
B. Setback standards.
(1) All PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be subject to the minimum yard
requirements of the zoning district in which they are located,
provided the minimum setback may be increased where necessary
to address safety concerns.
(2) If PWTFs are located on the roof of the building, the area of the
PWTEFs and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more
than 25% of the roof area. The location on the roof shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis.
A. Locational priority. If needed in accordance with an overall
comprehensive plan for the provision of full wireless communications
service within the East Orange community, PWTFs and PWTEFs shall
be permitted as a conditional use at the following prioritized locations:
(1) The first priority location shall be lands or structures owned by the
City of East Orange;
(2) The second priority location shall be on lands or structures owned
by the East Orange School District;
(3) The third priority location shall be co-location on existing PWTFs
(or existing water tanks), provided that the new installation does
not increase the height by more than 10%; and
§ 262-2 CHARTER § 262-4
C:1399
§ 262-5. Site design standards.
The following design standards shall apply to PWTFs and PWTEFs installed
or constructed pursuant to the terms of this chapter:
(4) The fourth priority location shall be such locations as the applicant
proves are essential to provide required service to the East Orange
community.
B. Conditional use standards. All PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be located to
minimize visual impacts on the surrounding area in accordance with the
following standards. In applying these standards, locations in a higher
priority category under § 262-4A shall be deemed more acceptable than
lower priority sites.
(1) Sites for PWTFs and PWTEFs must demonstrate that they provide
the least visual impact on residential areas and public way. All
potential visual impacts must be analyzed to illustrate the selected
site provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of
the proposed facility.
(2) PWTEFs should be located to avoid being visually solitary or
prominent when viewed from residential areas and the public way.
The facility should be obscured by vegetation, tree cover,
topographic features and/or other structures to the maximum
extent feasible.
(3) PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be placed to ensure that historically
significant viewscapes, streetscapes and landscapes are protected.
The views of and vistas from architecturally and/or significant
structures should not be impaired or diminished by the placement
of telecommunications facilities.
A. Fencing and other safety devices. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be
surrounded by a security feature such as a fence. All towers shall be
designed with anticlimbing devices in order to prevent unauthorized
access. Additional safety devices shall be permitted or required, as
needed, and as approved by the Planning Board.
B. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of the
security fence to provide a visual screen or buffer for adjoining private
properties and the public right-of-way. Required front yard setback
areas shall be landscaped. All PWTEFs shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge eight to ten feet in height at planting time and/or a
solid fence eight feet in height.
C. Signs. Signs shall not be permitted except for signs displaying owner
contact information, warnings, equipment information and safety
instructions. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area. No
commercial advertising shall be permitted on any PWTF or PWTEF.
§ 262-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 262-5
C:1400
D. Color. PWTFs shall be of a color appropriate to the tower's locational
context and to make it as unobtrusive as possible, unless otherwise
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
E. Activity and access. All equipment shall be designed and automated to
the greatest extent possible in order to reduce the need for on-site
maintenance and thereby to minimize the need for vehicular trips to
and from the site, Access shall be from established site access points
whenever possible. Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as
needed and as approved by the Planning Board.
F. Dish antennas. Dish antennas shall be colored, camouflaged or
screened to make them as unobtrusive as possible, and in no case shall
the diameter of a dish antenna exceed six feet.
G. Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows:
(1) PWTEFs enclosing electronic equipment may have security and
safety lighting at the entrance, provided that the light is attached
to the facility, is focused downward and is on timing devices and/or
sensors so that the light is turned off when not needed for safety or
security purposes; and
(2) No lighting is permitted on a PWTF except lighting that specifically
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any
such required lighting shall be focused and shielded to the greatest
extent possible so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby
properties.
H. Monopole. Any proposed new telecommunications tower shall be a
monopole unless the applicant can demonstrate that a different type
pole is necessary for the co-location of additional antennas on the
tower. Such towers may employ camouflage technology.
I. Noise. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in excess
of the limits set by the local noise ordinance,326 except for in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator.
J. Radio frequency emissions. The FTA gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of
the field of regulation of radio frequency (RF) emission, and PWTFs
which meet the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the
basis of RF impacts. Applicants shall provide current FCC information
concerning PWTFs and radio frequency emission standards. PWTFs
shall be required to provide information on the projected power density
of the proposed facility and how this meets the FCC standards.
K. Structural integrity. PWTFs must be constructed to the Electronic
Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/
TIA) 222 Revision F Standard, entitled "Structural Standards for Steel
326. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Noise Pollution.
§ 262-5 CHARTER § 262-5
C:1401
§ 262-6. Co-location policy.
Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures," (or equivalent),
as it may be updated or amended.
L. Maintenance. PWTFs shall be maintained to assure their continued
structural integrity. The owner of the PWTF shall also perform such
other maintenance of the structure and of the site as to assure that it
does not create a visual nuisance.
A. The Director of Public Works shall maintain an inventory of existing
PWTF locations within or near the East Orange community.
B. An applicant proposing a PWTF at a new location shall demonstrate
that it made a reasonable attempt to find a co-location site acceptable
to engineering standards and that none was practically or economically
feasible.
C. Each applicant for a PWTF shall be accompanied by a plan which shall
reference all existing PWTF locations in the applicant's City of East
Orange inventory, any such facilities in the abutting towns which
provide service to areas within the City of East Orange, any changes
proposed within the following twelve-month period, including plans for
new locations and the discontinuance or relocation of existing facilities.
D. Each application shall include a site location alternative analysis
describing the location of other sites considered, the availability of
those sites, the extent to which other sites do or do not meet the
provider's service or engineering needs, and the reason why the subject
site was chosen. The analysis shall address the following issues:
(1) How the proposed location of the PWTF relates to the objective of
providing full wireless communication services within the City of
East Orange at the time full service is provided by the applicant
throughout the City of East Orange.
(2) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF relates to the
location of any existing antennas within and near the City of East
Orange.
(3) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF relates to the
anticipated need for additional antennas within and near the City of
East Orange.
(4) How the plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with the
needs of all other providers or wireless communication services
within the City of East Orange.
E. The Planning Board may retain technical consultants as it deems
necessary to provide assistance in the review of the site location
alternatives analysis. The service provider shall bear the reasonable
§ 262-5 EAST ORANGE CODE § 262-6
C:1402
§ 262-7. Removal of abandoned PWTFs.
§ 262-8. Nonconforming PWTFs.
PWTFs in existence on the date of the adoption of this chapter which do not
comply with the requirements of this chapter (nonconforming PWTFs) are
subject to the following provisions:
§ 262-9. Additional site plan submission requirements.
In addition to the applicable documentation and items of information
required for site plan approval, the following additional documentation and
items of information are required to be submitted to the Planning Board for
review and approval as part of the site plan submission:
cost associated with such consultation, which cost shall be deposited in
accordance with the City's escrow provisions.
A. Any PWTF that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months
shall be considered abandoned. If there are two or more users of a
single PWTF, then the abandonment shall not become effective until all
users cease using the PWTF for a continuous period of 12 months. The
owner of such PWTF shall remove same within 90 days of notice from
the Zoning Officer that the PWTF is abandoned. If such PWTF is not
removed within said 90 days, the municipality may remove such PWTF
at the property owner's expense.
B. If the facility is to be retained, the provider(s) shall establish that the
facility will be reused within one year of such discontinuance. If a
facility is not reused within one year, a demolition permit shall be
obtained and the facility removed. At the discretion of the Zoning
Officer, upon good cause shown, the one-year reuse period may be
extended for a period not to exceed one additional year.
A. Nonconforming PWTFs may continue in use for the purpose now used,
but may not be expanded without complying with this chapter.
B. Nonconforming PWTFs which are partially damaged or destroyed due
to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to their former
use, location and physical dimensions, subject to obtaining a building
permit therefor, but without otherwise complying with this chapter. If
the destruction is greater than partial, then repair or restoration will
require compliance with this chapter.
C. The owner of any nonconforming PWTF may repair, rebuild and/or
upgrade such PWTF (but not expand or increase its height or reduce its
setbacks), in order to improve the structural integrity of the facility, to
allow the facility to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities, or to
upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological or
communications standards, without having to conform to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 262-6 CHARTER § 262-9
C:1403
Chapter 264
WRECKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor vehicle repair garages — See Ch. 175. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 264-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A two- or four-wheeled motor vehicle suitable for use on
a street or roadway; usually propelled by an internal combustion engine
[using volatile inflammable liquids (i.e., gasoline), steam engines or electric
motors].
CHIEF LICENSE INSPECTOR — The Supervisor of the Licensing
Subdivision of the Division of Tax Collection and Revenue.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for nonpersonal use, including
but not limited to omnibuses, limousines and commercially registered
vehicles.
CONSUMER — A natural person.[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
DECOUPLING — Releasing a motor vehicle to its owner or operator when
the motor vehicle has been or is about to be hooked to or lifted by a wrecker,
A. Documentation by a qualified expert regarding the capacity of any
proposed PWTF for the number and type of antennas;
B. Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed PWTF will have
sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed antennas and the
anticipated future co-located antennas and that the structural
standards developed for antennas by the Electronic Industries
Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunication Industry Association
(TIA) have been met;
C. A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form which is reviewed and
approved by the Office of Corporation Counsel, indicating that the
applicant will share the use of any PWTF with other approved providers
of wireless communication services; and
D. A visual impact study, graphically simulating through models,
computer-enhanced graphics, or similar techniques, the appearance of
any proposed tower and indicating its view from at least the five
locations around and within 2,000 feet of the proposed PWTF where the
PWTF will be most visible. Aerial photographs of the impact area shall
also be submitted.
§ 262-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 264-1
C:1404
but prior to the motor vehicle actually having been moved or removed from
the property.[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
FOUR-WHEEL DRIVE VEHICLE — A motor vehicle with an automotive
drive mechanism in which all four wheels are linked to the source of the
driving power.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Any commercially registered vehicle weighing over
20,001 pounds.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled other than by muscular power,
excepting such vehicles as run only by rails or tracks and motorized
bicycles, motorized scooters, motorized wheelchairs and motorized
skateboards.[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING — The towing of a motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. "Nonconsensual towing"
includes towing a motor vehicle when law enforcement orders the vehicle
to be towed whether or not the owner consents.[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord.
No. 7-2009]
NOTICE — The procedure by which the wrecker company owner or driver
is informed of a violation of this chapter either by the Municipal Court of
the City of East Orange or by the Licensing Subdivision of the Division
of Tax Collection and Revenue. Pursuant to Rules 4:4-4 and 7:2-4 of the
New Jersey Court Rules, notice shall be delivered simultaneously by regular
and certified mail to the wrecker company owner or driver at the last
known mailing address. Consistent with due process of law, service by
simultaneous mailing shall constitute effective notice unless the mail is
returned either to the court or the Licensing Subdivision by the postal
service marked "Moved, Left No Address," "Attempted Not Known," "No
Such Number," "No Such Street," "Insufficient Address" or "Not Deliverable
as Addressed - Unable to Forward.” However, if the certified mail is
returned either to the Court or Licensing Subdivision marked "Refused" or
"Unclaimed," notice is effective, providing that the ordinary mail has not
been returned.
PARKING LOT — An off-street area utilizing a minimum of 10 spaces used
for the parking of private motor vehicles.
PICKUP TRUCK — A light truck with an open body and low sides.
PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWING — Nonconsensual towing from private
property or from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's
motor vehicle that is parked illegally, parked during a time at which such
parking is not permitted or otherwise parked without authorization, or the
immobilization of or preparation for moving or removing of such motor
vehicle, for which a service charge is made, either directly or indirectly. This
term shall not apply to towing of a motor vehicle that has been abandoned
on private property in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5, provided that the
abandoned vehicle is reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency
prior to removal and the vehicle is removed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-56.6.[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
§ 264-1 CHARTER § 264-1
C:1405
SPORT UTILITY VEHICLE — A high-performance motor vehicle built upon
a truck chassis.
TRACTOR — An automotive vehicle with a short chassis equipped with a
swivel for attaching a trailer and used especially for the highway hauling of
freight.
TRUCK — Any commercially registered vehicle weighing up to 10 tons.
VAN — A usually enclosed wagon used for transportation of goods or
animals; a multipurpose enclosed motor vehicle having a boxlike shape, rear
or side doors and side panels often with windows.
WRECKER — Any vehicle which can be used to tow or otherwise move
another vehicle and which is for hire or used in connection with another
business.
§ 264-2. Wrecker license; fee.
§ 264-3. Powers and duties of Chief License Inspector.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated a wrecker upon all the
streets of the City of East Orange without first obtaining a license from
the Chief License Inspector. The license shall expire on February 1 of
every calendar year, unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Chief
License Inspector. The annual fee for such a license shall be $1,000.
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
B. The license (or a copy thereof) shall be affixed to the interior of the
wrecker in a conspicuous position.
A. The Chief License Inspector, under the supervision of the Tax Collector,
is hereby authorized and empowered to establish reasonable rules and
regulations governing the inspection and operation of wreckers
pursuant to § 5-51 of the Code of the City of East Orange.
B. The Chief License Inspector, under supervision of the Tax Collector,
shall, after receiving a complaint involving a wrecker owner's or
driver's conduct pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any rules
or regulations established hereunder, refer the matter to the East
Orange Police Department for investigation. If any investigation
conducted by the East Orange Police Department determines that a
violation under this chapter has been committed, a summons shall be
issued by a sworn member of the East Orange Police Department.
However, the Chief License Inspector shall maintain concurrent
jurisdiction and shall have the authority to issue summonses. Any
summons issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be under the
jurisdiction of the City's Municipal Court. However, a copy of any
summons issued and disposition of the same shall be provided to the
Chief License Inspector.
C. The Chief License Inspector, under supervision of the Tax Collector,
after providing an owner or driver with notice of a hearing, shall have
§ 264-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 264-3
C:1406
§ 264-4. Insurance.
the power, consistent with due process of law, to suspend, revoke or
not renew a wrecker owner's or driver's license for violations of safety
standards or rules and regulations of operation under this chapter
or any rules or regulations established hereunder. Said hearing shall
be conducted by the Tax Collector or an authorized designee. This
provision shall apply in addition to the penalties for violations of this
chapter as described in § 264-10. This provision shall not apply to
sanctions imposed under § 264-4 of this chapter. [Amended
8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
D. The Chief License Inspector shall maintain proper records of licenses
issued and inspections made and shall also require all licensees to keep
proper business records as to date towed, locations towed to and from,
person(s) authorizing tow, year, make and vehicle identification number
of vehicle being towed, and to have them available for inspection by the
East Orange Police Department and the Licensing Subdivision.
E. The Tax Collector's authority and duties to act under this chapter shall
be under the supervision of the Director of the Department of Finance.
A. No licensee shall operate nor cause to operate a wrecker upon the
streets of the City of East Orange until said wrecker is covered by an
insurance policy which is acceptable to the Chief License Inspector in
coverage amounts of at least of $750,000 for a wrecker capable of
towing a motor vehicle up to 26,000 pounds and $1,000,000 for
wreckers capable of towing a motor vehicle that is more than 26,000
pounds, and $100,000 garage-keeper legal liability and "on-hook"
coverage. Said coverage shall comply with state and federal
regulations. No license shall be issued until the applicant presents
evidence to the Chief License Inspector that this requirement has been
met. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
B. When a licensee changes insurance companies or renews an existing
policy, he must immediately notify the Chief License Inspector of this
change.
C. When a licensee's insurance has been canceled or he has received
notice that his insurance will be canceled by the insurance company, he
must notify the Chief License Inspector immediately. The licensee's
license shall, upon termination of insurance coverage and notice that
the previous coverage will not be reinstated, be suspended
automatically as an operation of law pursuant to Title 39 of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated until the Chief License Inspector receives
either a letter of reinstatement or a letter of new coverage from the
insurance carrier. Upon receipt by the Chief License Inspector of said
notice, the license shall be reinstated.
D. The City of East Orange must be listed as an additional insured as well
as certificate holder on the insurance policy. Furthermore, the licensee
§ 264-3 CHARTER § 264-4
C:1407
§ 264-5. Wrecker driver's license; fee.
shall execute a hold-harmless agreement releasing the City from any
liability incurred as a result of the licensee's towing activities within the
City.
A. No person shall engage in the operation of a wrecker in the City of East
Orange unless he first applies for and receives a wrecker driver's
license from the Licensing Subdivision.
B. The Chief License Inspector shall establish reasonable rules and
regulations governing the issuance of such licenses, which rules and
regulations shall include the provision that a license will not be issued
unless the applicant:
(1) Is over 18 years of age.
(2) Has a valid New Jersey driver's license in effect.
(3) Is not addicted to the use of any narcotic or intoxicating beverage.
(4) Has not been convicted of any crime of the first, second or third
degree or a crime of similar seriousness in a foreign jurisdiction
within the 10 years preceding the application.
(5) Every applicant for a wrecker driver's or wrecker owner's license
shall be fingerprinted and shall submit to a comprehensive
nationwide criminal record history check by the East Orange Police
Department for his initial license. Thereafter, a comprehensive
nationwide criminal history record check shall be required every
year upon the renewal of the license. The applicant shall have the
record check done through the East Orange Police Department
with the results being forwarded to the Chief License Inspector.
Furthermore, the applicant shall be responsible for all fees
associated with obtaining a record check. The refusal or failure of
any applicant to comply with the provisions of this section shall be
grounds for denial of the issuance of a license. Furthermore, at the
request of the Chief License Inspector, the East Orange Police
Department shall conduct comprehensive nationwide criminal
history record checks on any wrecker owner or wrecker driver at
any time during the year after the license has been issued. The East
Orange Police Department shall report the findings of such
searches to the Chief License Inspector. Any wrecker owner or
driver who has obtained a criminal conviction as discussed in
§ 264-5B(4) since the issuance of his or her initial or renewal
license shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of his or her
license by the Chief License Inspector under the provisions of
§ 264-3. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
(6) The applicant must be a citizen of the United States or a legal
resident alien. Should the applicant not be a citizen of the United
§ 264-4 EAST ORANGE CODE § 264-5
C:1408
§ 264-6. Required equipment.
§ 264-7. Notification of towing.
States, the applicant shall provide a copy of the resident alien or
work authorization card.
C. When issued, the wrecker driver's license shall bear a photograph of
the licensee. The licensee shall have the license in his possession
whenever he drives or operates a wrecker.
D. A wrecker driver's license shall be issued at the fee of $300 and shall
expire on February 1 of every calendar year, unless sooner suspended
or revoked by the Chief License Inspector. [Amended 8-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 7-2009]
E. No wrecker driver's license is transferable.
A. All wreckers must be equipped with a rotary or flashing amber light,
approved-type fire extinguisher for gasoline and electrical fires, and
road flares.
B. All wreckers must be kept in good running condition, including but not
limited to tires, brakes, steering mechanism, lights and body and tow
body (boom mechanism).
C. All wreckers will have the name of the registered owner, city and state
of the business painted in three-inch letters and numerals on both sides
of the wrecker.
D. If the applicant's business is not located in the City of East Orange, the
applicant shall provide the Chief License Inspector with a copy of the
applicant's current license from the city from which the licensee's
business is located. If the applicant fails to provide the license, the
applicant shall not be granted a license to operate a wrecker in the City
of East Orange.
A. A licensee must notify the East Orange Police Department of any and all
vehicles towed from private property within the City of East Orange at
the time of the tow.
B. Any licensee who tows a vehicle from private property must notify the
owners of both the property and the vehicle towed by certified mail
within 48 hours of the time said vehicle is towed.
C. No vehicle subject to nonconsensual towing shall be towed from public
or private property until the East Orange Police Department has issued
a summons and upon notification of the property owner or his agent.
Said provision shall not apply when emergency or accident conditions
exist as determined by the East Orange Police Department. Said
summons shall only be written by a sworn officer of the East Orange
Police Department on active and official tour of duty at the time the
§ 264-5 CHARTER § 264-7
C:1409
§ 264-7.1. Wrecker inspection; display of inspection sticker.
summons is issued. In the event that a vehicle is towed from private
property, the summons shall be executed by the property owner or
his agent, or the tenant of the premises to whom the parking space
is permitted, who shall provide written documentation at the time the
summons and tow are requested that they are authorized as such
to execute said summons, except that no wrecker company owner or
employee of said wrecker company shall be authorized to execute a
summons. Such documentation provided by the agent shall include the
correct name, address and telephone number of the agent. Further,
each property owner shall at the time of initial or renewal license
application through the wrecker company owner provide the Police
Department, with copy to the Chief License Inspector, in writing, with
the name, address, and telephone number of his/her current agent.
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
D. The wrecker company shall provide the Chief License Inspector with
copies of all contracts within the City of East Orange and shall submit
any new contracts awarded by property owner or agent within the City
of East Orange at the time of application or renewal. Furthermore, the
wrecker company shall provide to the Chief License Inspector at the
time of initial application or renewal a written certification from the
property owner or agent on a form to be provided by the Chief License
Inspector that all present tenants residing in the property have been
given a copy of the provisions of this chapter related to nonconsensual
towing. Failure to provide same shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and the company shall be subject to penalties including
suspension or revocation of license or permit pursuant to § 264-3.
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
E. The wrecker company shall provide the Chief Licensing Inspector with
a monthly report of all vehicles towed off of private property within the
City of East Orange. Failure to provide same shall constitute a violation
of this chapter, and the company shall be subject to penalties including
suspension or revocation of license or permit pursuant to § 264-3.
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
F. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those wrecker
companies who are under contract to remove vehicles from private
property with said vehicle belonging to either the property owner or an
authorized tenant of the property. Said companies shall include private
companies, as well as wrecker companies associated with automobile
agencies (i.e., AAA).
A. Prior to use and operation of any wrecker under the provisions of this
chapter, said wrecker must pass the state motor vehicle services
inspection.
B. No wrecker shall operate upon the streets of the City of East Orange
without a current New Jersey state inspection sticker.
§ 264-7 EAST ORANGE CODE § 264-7.2
C:1410
§ 264-7.2. Towing storage location; redemption of vehicle.
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
A. The wrecker company shall at the time of the initial or renewal
application of a license provide to the Chief License Inspector the
location and address of the wrecker company's storage yard or lot for
any vehicles towed off of private property in the City of East Orange.
Said yard or lot shall be physically located within or no more than five
miles in any direction from the boundary limits of the City of East
Orange. Furthermore, the wrecker company at the time of initial or
renewal application shall provide the Chief License Inspector with
proof of permission to store towed automobiles at the storage location.
Said proof shall consist of a deed of ownership, tenancy lease or useand-
occupancy agreement between the wrecker company and property
owner. The wrecker company shall notify the Chief License Inspector of
a change of towing storage location immediately, but no later than three
business days after changing locations, and shall comply with all other
provisions of this section. Failure to comply shall subject the wrecker
company to suspension or revocation of license under § 264-3.
B. The Chief License Inspector, under the supervision of the Tax Collector
and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall with the
assistance of the East Orange Police and Public Works Departments
physically determine if the storage yard is in compliance with the
provisions of § 264-7.2A and shall deny any initial or renewal
application or suspend or revoke any issued license of a wrecker
company that fails to comply with the provisions of this section.
C. The storage facility shall have business hours open to the public
Monday through Friday between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The wrecker
company shall have someone at the premises at all times during
operation authorized to release a vehicle to the motor vehicle owner or
someone authorized to retrieve the motor vehicle. Furthermore, should
a wrecker company that engages in nonconsensual towing from private
property tow and store a motor vehicle after hours (including
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays), the wrecker company shall provide
or arrange for after-hours release within one hour of the vehicle being
stored in the storage location. Failure to comply with the provisions of
this section shall constitute a violation and shall subject the wrecker
company to suspension and revocation of license under § 264-3.
D. For services rendered, or to redeem a motor vehicle from storage, the
wrecker company shall accept payment in the form of cash, a check
issued by an insurance company, a valid debit card or a valid major
credit card, subject to the provisions of § 264-7.2E of this chapter.
E. The wrecker company may request identification before releasing the
motor vehicle. Unless the motor vehicle owner or representative
authorized to retrieve the motor vehicle is unable to produce such
identification, or the wrecker company owner or representative has a
bona fide reason to believe the card or other identification is fictitious,
§ 264-7.2 CHARTER § 264-7.2
C:1411
§ 264-8. Wrecker license to be nontransferable.
No wrecker license is transferable.
§ 264-9. Service rates and charges.
altered, stolen, expired or revoked or not valid for any other cause or
is clearly offered with the intent to defraud the issuer, the debit or
credit card shall be deemed an acceptable form of payment in lieu of
cash if the wrecker company ordinarily accepts the card at his place
of business. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude payment by a motor
vehicle owner or representative in the form of a check or money order,
if this form of payment is acceptable to the wrecker company.
F. If a wrecker company charges a consumer a fee for a private property
or nonconsensual towing service that is disputed by the consumer, or is
inconsistent with the fees established under this chapter, the parties
shall make a good faith effort to resolve the dispute. If the parties are
unable to resolve the dispute and the Chief License Inspector
determines the fees to be inconsistent and unreasonable under the fees
established under this chapter, the Chief License Inspector may order
the wrecker company to reimburse the consumer for an amount equal
to the difference between the charged fee and the fees established
under this chapter. Failure of a wrecker company to return an amount
after being ordered by the Chief License Inspector shall constitute a
violation and shall subject the wrecker company to suspension or
revocation of license under § 264-3.
G. Nothing in the provisions of this section shall prohibit or restrict the
powers and duties granted to the Chief License Inspector under any
other provision of this chapter.
A. Any person licensed to operate his vehicle in the City of East Orange
must comply with the rates in this section. These rates are subject
solely to the repeal, modification, addition and deletion by operation of
law enacted by the City of East Orange. The charge(s) for services
rendered by any licensee operating in the City of East Orange shall not
exceed the following rates: [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
7-2009]
Service Rate
Towing fees
Automobiles (including sport utility vehicles,
vans, pickup trucks, motorcycles, mopeds and
scooters), utilizing nonflatbed towing service
$125
Trucks, buses, tractors and other heavy
equipment
$200
Tractor(s) with trailer(s) attached $300
Storage fees (daily) $25
§ 264-7.2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 264-9
C:1412
B. All rates shall be posted on a card at least three inches by five inches
inside the wrecker in a conspicuous place.
C. All rates pertaining to the City of East Orange shall be posted on a card
at least 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches in a conspicuous place near the
payment area. Failure to comply with said rates shall result in the
issuance of a summons and possible suspension and revocation of
licensing and towing privileges in the City of East Orange.
D. Vehicle owners or their agents shall be provided with a copy of the rates
for review at a reasonable time prior to making payment.
E. All fees shall be the same, regardless of whether the vehicle towed is
privately or commercially registered.
F. Storage fees shall be based upon full twenty-four-hour periods a motor
vehicle is in the storage facility. For example, if a motor vehicle is towed
to a storage facility at 7:00 p.m. on one day and the owner of the motor
vehicle retrieve the motor vehicle before 7:00 p.m. the next day, the
wrecker company shall charge for only on day of storage. If a motor
vehicle is stored for more than 24 hours but less than 48 hours, the
towing company may charge for two days of storage. [Amended
8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
G. Parking lot owners shall install signage at each and every entrance and
exit of their respective parking lots. Such sign shall be a minimum of 36
inches wide by 36 inches high with a minimum letter height of two
inches. The sign shall list the following information, provided the
parking lot owner is under contract with the wrecker company:
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
(1) The purpose or purposes for which parking is authorized and the
times during which such parking is permitted;
(2) That unauthorized parking is prohibited and unauthorized motor
vehicles will be towed at the owner's expense;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the towing company
that will perform the towing;
(4) The charges for the towing and storage of towed automobiles;
(5) The street address of the storage facility where the towed vehicles
can be redeemed after payment of posted charges and the times
during which the vehicle may be redeemed and the days and hours
of operation of the storage facility; and
(6) That a consumer may contact the New Jersey Division of Consumer
Affairs by calling 1-800-242-5846, prompt number 4.
H. The wrecker company owner or operator must provide to the vehicle
owner or driver of the vehicle an itemized receipt, including the
wrecker owner's name, address and telephone number, listing all fees
§ 264-9 CHARTER § 264-9
C:1413
§ 264-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
7-2009]
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of no
less than $1,000 for a first offense; no less than $2,000, or imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days for a second offense and subsequent offenses. Each subsequent offense
shall be deemed continuous with prior offenses if occurring within one year
of the previous offense. Furthermore, any wrecker owner or operator who
receives more than six sustained violations in a calendar year shall have his
or her license revoked by the Chief License Inspector for a period of not less
than three years.
§ 264-10.1. Additional towing fee requirement. [Amended
8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
If an automobile owner or person authorized to drive the automobile arrives
at the scene of a tow and his or her vehicle has been connected to a wrecker
but not yet moved or removed from the property, the vehicle shall be
decoupled and released at the scene for a fee of $25, provided the owner or
driver has the fee available for payment at that time and place. If the vehicle
has not been connected to the wrecker, then there shall be no charge to
the owner or driver. Failure of a wrecker company owner or operator to
comply with this decoupling provision shall constitute a violation and shall
be subject to penalties including suspension or revocation of license or
permit pursuant to § 264-3.
§ 264-11. Applicability. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
This chapter shall apply to any persons who are property owners or agents
of the property owner or tenants of the premises to whom a parking space
is assigned, who engage or contract with wrecker companies for services
to have automobiles nonconsensually towed from property in the City of
East Orange pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. This chapter shall
also apply to any persons who apply for or are issued a wrecker owner's
or wrecker driver's license by the Subdivision of Licensing of the Division
of Tax Collection and Revenue in the City of East Orange pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
Part IV: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 270
charged. The wrecker company owner or operator must also include on
the receipt the time the vehicle was towed, the time the vehicle was
deposited in its storage lot and what type of towing service was utilized.
Failure to comply with the provisions of any portion of this section
shall constitute a violation and shall subject the wrecker company
to suspension or revocation of license under § 264-3. [Amended
8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
§ 264-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 264-11
C:1414
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 264-11 CHARTER § 264-11
C:1415

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
An ordinance adopting Part IV of the Code of the City of East
Orange and making certain substantive changes to existing Board
of Health ordinances of the City is presently proposed before the
Board of Health. Upon final adoption, it will be included here as
Article I of this chapter.
CHARTER § 264-11
C:1417
Chapter 280
MERCANTILE PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health and Human
Services — See Ch. 5, Art. XVI.
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Land use — See Ch. 51.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
§ 280-1. Findings of fact.327
It is hereby declared that the public policy of the City of East Orange is
to protect and promote the general welfare, public health and safety of its
citizenry by enacting ordinances that prevent the spread of communicable
diseases and curb activity that has the potential to be injurious to the
public at large. Boards of health are charged with ensuring that populationbased
public health services are provided to the public, N.J.A.C. 8:52-3.1.
Population-based public health services include the investigation of health
hazards, preventable injuries and exposure-related diseases in both work
and community settings, N.J.A.C. 8:52-3.2(a)6iv.
§ 280-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to allow the East Orange Department of
Health to issue mercantile permits to persons engaged in commercial
activity that has the potential to lead to the spread of communicable
diseases, public health nuisances and/or otherwise be injurious to the public
at large.
§ 280-3. Permit requirement.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation and/or other business
entity to engage in or carry on any business, trade, occupation or activity
as enumerated in this chapter without having first obtained a mercantile
permit from the East Orange Department of Health.
§ 280-4. Businesses subject to mercantile permit requirement.
Businesses engaged in the following endeavors must obtain mercantile
permits:
A. Hair salons.
B. Nail salons.
C. Barbershops.
327. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 264-11 EAST ORANGE CODE § 280-4
C:1418
§ 280-5. Certificates of occupancy.
This chapter in no way absolves businesses from obtaining certificates of
occupancy before they commence operations. In fact, businesses must first
obtain a certificate of occupancy before a mercantile permit may be issued
for a particular location.
§ 280-6. Forms.
Forms for all permits and applications therefor shall be prepared and kept
on file by the City of East Orange Division of Environmental Health.
§ 280-7. Investigations.
Upon receipt of an application for a mercantile permit, the Department of
Health shall have 30 days to conduct an investigation and issue a report
to the Health Officer regarding said application. The report shall detail
whether the condition and/or state of the applicant's business is likely to
lead to the spread of communicable diseases, the creation of a nuisance
or otherwise be injurious to the public. If a report is not generated within
40 days or if the Department of Health fails to make a determination as
to whether a permit should be issued within 40 days, the application for a
mercantile permit will be deemed approved.
§ 280-8. Standards.
The determination as to whether a mercantile permit should be issued is
contingent on the investigatory reports of the Department of Health. The
Department of Health's position as to whether a mercantile permit should
be issued shall be based on the following factors:
D. Supermarkets.
E. Grocery stores.
F. Convenience stores.
G. Restaurants.
H. Bars/liquor sales.
I. Sale of tobacco.
J. Day-care centers.
A. Whether the applicant is in compliance with the general laws, public
health statutes and codes of the State of New Jersey and the City of East
Orange.
B. The license history of the applicant regarding past violations, rejections
or suspensions, and the timeliness of past applications for permits and
the applicant's continued compliance with permit requirements.
§ 280-4 CHARTER § 280-9
C:1419
§ 280-9. Fees.
Applicants for mercantile permits shall be assessed a two-hundred-and-fiftydollar
fee. All fees and charges for mercantile permits shall be paid in cash,
certified check, bank check or money order at the time the application is
filed. Where an applicant is engaged in more than one activity at a single
location that requires a mercantile permit, he shall only be assessed one
fee.
§ 280-10. Termination of permits.
All mercantile permits shall expire one calendar year from the date of issue.
§ 280-11. Zoning laws.
This chapter does not excuse applicants from complying with the City of
East Orange's land use and zoning laws.328
§ 280-12. Change of location.
Mercantile permits are tied to the location where a particular business
operates. If a permit holder desires to transfer his/her business to another
location within the City of East Orange, he must file an application for a new
mercantile permit.
§ 280-13. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of an applicant to permit an inspector from the City of
East Orange to enter and inspect the location where he/she will conduct
business. If an inspector is unable to gain access to an applicant's place of
business, his/her application will be denied.
§ 280-14. Revocation of mercantile permits.
The City of East Orange's Mayor and governing body reserve the right to
revoke mercantile permits whenever their holders violate any local, state or
federal laws, regulations, rules and/or ordinances. Prior to the revocation
of a holder's mercantile permit(s), he or she will be provided notice of the
City's intention to revoke his or her permit. Said notice shall detail the basis
for the City's contemplated action and provide a hearing date wherein the
holder of the permit will have an opportunity to contest the City's action. At
the time of the hearing, the holder of the permit shall have the opportunity
to present evidence, introduce testimony and cross examine any witnesses
who testify. Permit holders may be represented by counsel at the hearing.
The City must support its allegations by a preponderance of the evidence.
328. Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Land use.
§ 280-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 280-15
C:1420
§ 280-15. Posting permits.
Permits issued under this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous location
at the place of business shown on said permit.
§ 280-16. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter dealing with mercantile
permits shall be within the jurisdiction of the East Orange Department of
Health.
§ 280-17. Violations and penalties.329
Any person, firm, association, corporation or business entity that violates
any section of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500
nor less than $5, in compliance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-70, and shall be barred
from conducting business within the City of East Orange.
Chapter 282
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 282-1. Nuisance conditions enumerated.
Any thing, condition or act which is or may become a detriment or menace
to human health is, and the following specific things, conditions and acts
are, each and all of them, hereby declared to be and defined as nuisances:
A. Any water or liquid in which mosquito larvae exist.
B. Any accumulation of manure or vegetable or animal matter in which fly
larvae exist.
C. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or household
purposes which is polluted or which is so situated or constructed that it
may become polluted.
D. Permitting ragweed in a flowering state or poison ivy to exist or to grow
upon any public or private property.
329. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 280-15 CHARTER § 282-1
C:1421
§ 282-2. Creation or maintenance prohibited. [Amended 2-22-1999
by Ord. No. 4-1999]
No person shall create, commit or maintain, or permit to be created,
committed or maintained, any nuisance as described in § 282-1. (See
§ 282-6 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 282-3. Permit required for use of poisonous substances for
fumigation.
No person shall use or permit the use of hydrocyanic acid gas or any
product of cyanogen or any other substance poisonous to life or human
beings for fumigating or disinfecting any structure or premises in the City of
East Orange without first having obtained a permit so to do from the Health
Department of the City, which permit shall be exercised only in the presence
of an authorized representative of the Health Department of the City of East
Orange at the time and place said gas or other product is released.
§ 282-4. Rodents. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
E. Any imperfect, defective, leaking, unclean or filthy sink, water closet,
urinal, sump pit, slop basin or other plumbing fixture in any building
used or occupied by human beings.
F. Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any household
wastewater, sewage, garbage, tin cans, offal or excrement; any
decaying fruit, vegetable, fish, meat or bones; any oyster or clam shells;
any foul or noxious odors, gases or vapors; or any foul, putrid or
obnoxious liquid or substance.
G. Permitting any garbage, offal, scraps, waste food or other putrescible
material to be held in a container which is not watertight or which is
uncovered in any store, factory or outside of any building or on any
public or private property or in any building of multiple occupancy
except in the individual apartment.
H. Any person killing or slaughtering in the City any cattle, calf, sheep,
lamb or swine or maintaining any establishment or place for the
purpose of killing or dressing poultry or any establishment where such
practices are carried on.
I. Any person spitting upon any public sidewalk or crossing or upon the
floor of any public building, bus or other public conveyance.
A. No person shall feed, permit to be fed, make accessible or permit to be
made accessible any food, food scrap, garbage, bird feed or other
organic substance for mice, rats or other rodents; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to any school, pet shop or other place
where rodents are properly confined as pets, experimental animals or
§ 282-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § 282-4
C:1422
§ 282-5. Pools and stagnant water. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
No person shall accumulate or permit to be accumulated on any private
or public property pools of water, stagnant water or other liquid of any
unconfined, uncontrolled or unplanned manner for a period exceeding
seven days. (See § 282-6 for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 282-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
for other useful or meaningful purposes. (See § 282-6 for violations and
penalties hereof.)
B. No person shall harbor or permit to be harbored on any private or
public property any mice, rats or other rodents; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to any school, pet shop or other place where
rodents are properly confined as pets, experimental animals or for
other useful or meaningful purposes. (See § 282-6 for violations and
penalties hereof.)
C. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any private or
public property any accumulation of wood, rocks, construction material
or other debris which is suitable for the harborage of mice, rats or other
rodents. (See § 282-6 for violations and penalties hereof.)
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
except as provided in § 282-6B, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500.
B. Payment through Violations Bureau. If you wish to plead guilty of
violating or refusing to comply with §§ 282-2, 282-4A, B and C, and
282-5, respectively, and give up your rights to have a lawyer and a trial,
you may pay a fine of $200 by bringing or mailing the summons
together with payment within 14 days of notice of violation to the
Violations Bureau located at:
Violations Bureau
Municipal Court - East Orange
221 Freeway Drive
East Orange, New Jersey 07018
§ 282-4 CHARTER § 282-6
C:1423
Chapter 288
RETAIL FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Licenses and fees — See Ch. 170.
Mercantile permits — See Ch. 280.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 292.
§ 282-6 EAST ORANGE CODE § 282-6
C:1424
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)330
§ 288-1. through § 288-6. (Reserved)
330. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Adoption of Standards, adopted 4-4-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of
Health, Art. I).
§ 288-1 CHARTER § 288-1
C:1425

ARTICLE II
Licensing
[Adopted 5-2-1972 by Ord. No. 3-1972]
§ 288-7. License required. [Amended 2-2-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999331]
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail
food establishment as defined in and governed by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.,
Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending
Machines, without first having procured a license from the local Board of
Health so to do or without complying with any or all of the provisions
concerning operation and maintenance of the same as contained in the
aforementioned N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. (See § 288-11 for violations and
penalties hereof.)
§ 288-8. Fees.332
The fees for licensure of retail food establishments are set forth in Chapter
170, Licenses and Fees.
§ 288-9. Suspension or revocation of licenses; notice; hearing.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this municipality for the
violation by the licensee of any provision of this article or N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq., Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines, or whenever it shall appear that the
business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or
corporation to whom such license was issued is being conducted in a
disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any laws of the United
States, the State of New Jersey or any ordinance of this municipality, or
that the person or persons conducting the retail food establishment are
of an unfit character to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which
the license has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the
public, or that such license is being used for a purpose foreign to that
for which the license was issued.333
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior
to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or
331. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
332. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
333. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 288-7 CHARTER § 288-9
C:1427
§ 288-10. Effect on interstate commerce or governmental activities.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 288-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-2-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal
delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by depositing the same
in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the Board of Health,
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Board
of Health concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee.
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the City unless the
application for such license shall be approved by the Board of Health.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, except as provided in § 288-11B, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
$500 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any
of the provisions of this article and each day the same is violated shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
B. Payment through Violations Bureau. If you wish to plead guilty to
violating or refusing to comply with § 288-7, and give up your rights to
have a lawyer and a trial, you may pay a fine of $200 by bringing or
mailing the summons together with payment within 14 days of notice of
violation to the Violations Bureau located at:
Violations Bureau
Municipal Court - East Orange
221 Freeway Drive
East Orange, New Jersey 07018
§ 288-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 288-11
C:1428
Chapter 292
SANITARY STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 14A, Art. II.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 40.
Air pollution — See Ch. 94.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 113.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 125.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 132.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 156.
Housing standards; property
maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
§ 288-11 CHARTER § 288-11
C:1429

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 292-1. Short title.
This chapter and all ordinances supplementary hereto or amendatory hereof
shall be known and designated as the "Sanitary Code of East Orange."
§ 292-1 CHARTER § 292-1
C:1431

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 292-2. Definitions of terms.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the
enforcement of this chapter:
BOARD OF HEALTH; BOARD — The Board of Health of the City of East
Orange, New Jersey. 334
CITY; The City; This City; MUNICIPALITY — The City of East Orange, New
Jersey.
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENT — Any factory, store, market, room
or other place where food or nonalcoholic drink for consumption is
manufactured, processed, prepared, handled, stored, displayed or sold. 335
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Health Department of the City of East
Orange, New Jersey.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of East Orange,
appointed by the Board of Health of the City of East Orange.
ISOLATION — The placing apart of a person or persons affected with or
exposed to a communicable disease for the purpose of preventing contact
with other persons, and the establishment of restrictions directly
surrounding such person or persons.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT — One operating for a temporary period in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar
gathering, or from a vehicle, wagon, truck or other conveyance.
OPERATOR — Any person who, by contract, agreement or ownership,
conducts a restaurant, food-handling establishment or itinerant restaurant,
or operates a vending machine or apparatus, or who vends any food or food
product within the City.
PERSON — Any person or persons, firm, corporation or association.
QUARANTINE — The placing of restrictions upon households or premises
or the persons thereof for the purpose of preventing the spread of a
communicable disease to other persons, households or premises.
RESTAURANT — Restaurant, hotel, coffee shop, dining room, cafeteria,
luncheonette, soda fountain, sandwich stand or any other place where food
or drink is prepared, handled, stored, sold or served for consumption on the
premises to the public, organization members or employees, with or without
charge.
334. Editor's Note: See Ch. 14A, Art. II, Board of Health.
335. Editor's Note: See Ch. 288, Retail Food-Handling Establishments.
§ 292-2 CHARTER § 292-2
C:1433

ARTICLE III
Communicable and Reportable Diseases
§ 292-3. Diseases enumerated; reports of certain diseases by
physicians.
A. The following diseases and conditions are hereby declared to be
reportable, and it shall be the duty of every physician, within 12 hours
after the disease has been diagnosed, to report the name, age, disease
or condition and the precise location of the person so affected to the
Health Department:
Communicable:
Amebiasis
Anthrax
Brucellosis
Cholera
Dengue
Diarrhea of newborn
Diphtheria
Food poisonings
Glanders
Infectious encephalitis
Infectious hepatitis, including serum hepatitis
Influenza
Leptospirosis
Malaria
Measles (rubeola)
Meningococcal meningitis
Ophthalmia neonatorum
Pertussis (whooping cough)
Plague
Pneumonia, all forms
Poliomyelitis
Psittacosis
Q fever
Rabies
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rubella [Added 1-5-1971 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
Salmonellosis (other than typhoid fever)
§ 292-3 CHARTER § 292-3
C:1435
§ 292-4. Reporting diseases to Health Department by householders.
Every house owner or householder who shall know of or have reason to
suspect the existence of any person affected with any disease or condition
mentioned in § 292-3A, who is in or upon any premises owned or occupied
by him (or her) and who is not being attended by a physician, shall report
immediately to the Health Department the existence of such person and all
necessary facts within the knowledge of the person making such report as
to the name, address, age and sex of the person having or suspected of
having such disease or condition.
§ 292-5. Exclusion of children from school.
The principal or person in charge of every school shall immediately exclude
from school or isolate any child or person in such school who appears to
be affected with any communicable disease mentioned in § 292-3A and shall
immediately report such fact to the Health Department, together with the
Shigellosis
Smallpox
Streptococcal sore throat, including scarlet fever
Trachoma
Trichinosis
Tuberculosis, all forms
Tularemia
Typhoid fever
Typhus fever
Yellow fever
Noncommunicable:
Botulism
Cerebral palsy
Dog bite
Epilepsy
Leprosy
Mental deficiency
Plumbism (lead poisoning) [Added 1-5-1971 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
Tetanus
B. Physicians having knowledge of any outbreak of a disease not listed in
Subsection A above or of unusual manifestations of disease shall report
the facts to the Health Officer in whose jurisdiction the condition exists,
who shall make an investigation and submit a report thereof to the
State Department of Health.
§ 292-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-5
C:1436
name and address of such child or person and the supposed nature of the
disease.
§ 292-6. Conspicuous posting of premises.
Whenever a communicable disease as listed in § 292-3A exists in any house
or upon any premises, the Health Department may cause a placard stating
the name of the disease to be posted in a conspicuous place upon such
house or premises, and no person shall conceal, mutilate, destroy or remove
such placard except by authority of the Health Department.
§ 292-7. Imposition of quarantine; persons subject to quarantine.
Every person affected with, suspected to be affected with or exposed to any
communicable disease mentioned in § 292-3A shall, until officially released
by the Health Department, be quarantined, isolated or restricted according
to the rules and regulations of the Board of Health, and shall follow such
precautions to prevent the spread or transfer of such disease as this Board
or the Health Department may direct.
§ 292-8. Entering or leaving quarantined premises.
No person shall enter or leave the house or premises where any person
is quarantined or isolated by reason of being affected with or having been
exposed to any communicable disease mentioned in § 292-3A, except in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health and by
permission granted by the Health Department.
§ 292-9. Venereal diseases.
A. Syphilis, gonorrhea, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale
and chancroid are hereby declared to be infectious and communicable
venereal diseases and dangerous to the public health. Whenever the
Board of Health or Health Officer of the City of East Orange shall
receive a report from any practicing physician, nurse, welfare worker,
health inspector or any authorized officer or attache of any court of this
City that any person within the jurisdiction of the Board or Health
Officer is suffering or is suspected to be suffering from or infected with
gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale
or chancroid in a communicable stage, and such person cannot furnish
satisfactory evidence that he or she is being treated for the suspected
infection by a physician licensed to practice medicine in New Jersey, the
Board of Health Officer may cause a medical examination to be made of
said person for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not such person
is in fact infected with any of the above-mentioned venereal diseases in
a communicable stage; and it shall be the duty of every such person to
submit to such examination as aforesaid and to permit such specimens
of blood or bodily discharges to be taken for laboratory examination as
may be necessary to establish the presence or absence of such disease
or infection in a communicable stage.
§ 292-5 CHARTER § 292-9
C:1437
B. All persons recently convicted on charges involving sex offenses or who
are known to have been exposed to infection of any disease designated
in Subsection A above shall be included under the class of "suspected
persons" described in said Subsection A and may be required to submit
to examination at any time, but no certificate of freedom from
gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale
or chancroid, except a health certificate required for a marriage license
or for working purposes, shall be issued.
C. If a person infected with any disease mentioned in this section in a
communicable stage shall fail to report to his (or her) physician for
treatment by the physician when directed to do so, said physician shall
report such failure on the part of said person to the Health Department,
giving the name and address of such person and the disease with which
he (or she) is infected, and the Health Department may thereupon
require said person to be examined as provided for in Subsection A
above.
D. Any such person described in Subsection A, B or C above who refuses to
submit to the examination provided for in Subsection A or who refuses
to supply or permit to be taken the specimens provided for in said
subsection, or who, upon examination, is found to be infected with
gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale
or chancroid in a communicable state and not to be regularly treated by
a licensed physician and refuses or neglects to secure such treatment
by a private physician or at a clinic provided for such purpose and to
remain under treatment until discharged as being no longer in a
communicable stage, shall be isolated at home or in a hospital and shall
take such precautions to prevent spread of the disease as the Health
Department may direct.
E. Achievement of noncommunicable or noninfectious state.
(1) Cases of gonorrheal infection are to be regarded as communicable
until adequate treatment, as specified by the State Department of
Health, has been received by the patient and until at least two
successive smears, taken not less than 48 hours apart, fail to show
gonococci.
(2) Cases of syphilis shall be regarded as communicable until adequate
treatment, as specified by the State Department of Health, has
been received by the patient or until the disease is of at least four
years' duration.
(3) Cases of lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale or
chancroid shall be regarded as infectious until all lesions have fully
healed.
F. All persons known to be or suspected of being sources of infection of
any disease mentioned in this section, and all persons known to have
been or suspected of having been exposed to any such infection from
these sources, shall be required to undergo such examination as
§ 292-9 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-9
C:1438
§ 292-10. Use of silver nitrate in eyes of newborn infants.
Every physician, midwife, nurse or any other person in attendance at the
birth of any child shall, for the prevention of ophthalmia neonatorum, use a
one-percent solution of silver nitrate in wax ampules or any other solution
approved by the Health Department in each eye of said child.
§ 292-11. Spreading of communicable diseases prohibited.
No person shall commit any act which may be liable to cause, contribute
or promote the spread of any disease from any person affected with such
disease, either by the exposure of any person not affected with such disease
or by any negligent act connected with or in respect to the care or custody
of the person affected.
prescribed in Subsection A above, and if found infected, shall undergo
such treatment or isolation as provided for in Subsection D above.
G. No person infected with any of these venereal diseases in a
communicable stage shall conduct himself or herself in such a manner
as to expose others to infection. No person shall be permitted to
conduct a boarding home for children for pay without first being
examined as provided for in Subsection A above. No person infected
with gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma
inguinale or chancroid in a communicable stage shall engage in the
nursing or care of children or of the sick or in any other occupation of
such a nature that his or her infection may be transmitted to others.
H. No druggist, pharmacist or other person in the City of East Orange shall
sell, give away, prescribe or administer to any person any drug,
medicine or preparation thereof intended to be used for the treatment,
relief or cure of any disease mentioned in this section, except upon a
written prescription of a physician licensed to practice medicine in New
Jersey.
I. No person shall publish or distribute or cause to be published or
distributed in the City of East Orange any advertisement concerning
gonorrhea, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale
or chancroid or any other sexual function, weakness or disorder, or
calling attention to a medicine, article or preparation that may be used
therefor, or to a person or persons or an office or place at which
information, treatment or advice relative to such disease, function,
weakness or disorder may be obtained, provided that this regulation
shall not apply to didactic or scientific treatises which do not advertise
or call attention to any person or persons from whom or to any office or
place at which information, treatment or advice concerning such
disease, function, weakness or disorder may be obtained, nor shall it
apply to advertisements or notices issued by a hospital or licensed
dispensary or by the Board of Health or Health Officer or by the
Department of Health of the State of New Jersey.
§ 292-9 CHARTER § 292-12
C:1439
§ 292-12. Isolation of persons having certain diseases.
The Health Department shall have the power to remove to a hospital or
institution any person affected with scarlet fever (scarletina), diphtheria,
meningococcic (cerebrospinal) meningitis, smallpox, acute anterior
poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis), typhoid fever, tuberculosis or any other
communicable disease which this Board may so designate, whenever, in the
opinion of the Health Department, such removal is necessary to prevent
further spread of such disease or whenever the isolation of such person
is not effective or is contrary to the rules and regulations of the Board of
Health.
§ 292-13. Disinfection of premises when quarantine terminated.
Whenever the quarantine of a public or private building or premises is
terminated by the Health Department, such disinfection and cleansing as
this Board may require shall be performed immediately by the occupant of
said public or private building or premises.
§ 292-14. Bringing diseased persons into City.
No person shall bring into the City of East Orange any person affected
with any communicable disease mentioned in § 292-3 of this article without
previously obtaining a permit from the Health Department for that purpose.
§ 292-15. Authority of Health Department to require medical
examinations.
§ 292-16. Carriers of diphtheria, typhoid fever and salmonella
infections.
For the purpose of this chapter, all persons who harbor or carry the
causative germs of diphtheria, typhoid fever or salmonella infections and
who are commonly known as "carriers" shall be considered as being
affected with such disease and shall be subject to and comply with all
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Board of
Health which relate to the quarantine, isolation and control of persons
affected with such diseases.
A. Whenever the Health Department shall deem it necessary to establish
the true nature of any disease which may be communicable, the
Department may require any person or persons suspected of being so
affected or any person or persons who have been exposed to a
communicable disease to have a medical examination; and it shall be
the duty of such person or persons to submit to such examination.
B. The medical examination may include a chest X-ray, sputum
examination, blood test or any standard or recognized method for
determining the presence of communicable disease that the Board may
prescribe.
§ 292-12 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-17
C:1440
§ 292-17. Exclusion of unvaccinated persons from schools.
The Health Department, whenever deemed necessary by the Board of
Health, may require and order the person in charge of any school under
the jurisdiction of such Board to exclude any or all unvaccinated children
and teachers in such school and may specify the length of time for such
exclusion; and any person who shall fail to comply with such order shall be
subject to the penalty provided by this chapter.
§ 292-18. Immunization and examination of children in institutions.
Every person, corporation, organization or society maintaining a home,
orphanage, nursery or other establishment for the care and/or maintenance,
in whole or in part, of infants or children who are not members of the
family shall require that each such child be vaccinated against smallpox,
immunized against diphtheria and any other communicable disease that
the Board may designate and be examined for syphilis or gonorrhea at a
time specified by the Board of Health. No infant or child not protected
and examined as provided by this chapter shall be received by such home,
orphanage, nursery or other establishment.
§ 292-19. Epidemics.
The Health Department, under the direction and approval of the Board of
Health, in case of an epidemic or unusual prevalence of any communicable
disease, may take such measures and order done and cause to be done
such acts as may be deemed necessary for the preservation of the public
health and, to that end, may cause any and all schools within the territorial
jurisdiction of this Board, all churches, libraries, theaters, houses, buildings
and other places where people are accustomed to congregate to be closed
for a specified period of time or until the epidemic or unusual prevalence
of such communicable disease shall have ceased to exist. Any person who
violates or neglects or refuses to comply with any such measures or orders
shall be subject to the penalty as provided in Article XIII of this chapter.
§ 292-20. Preservation of life and health. [Added 5-2-1972 by Ord.
No. 1-1972]
When it appears to the Health Officer that any person shall be in danger of
suffering death or severe physical or mental illness, the Health Officer shall
have the right to enter upon any premises in the City of East Orange and
cause a medical and mental examination to be made of such person, and if
the examination reveals that the person's life or health is in danger, then
such person may be removed from the premises to suitable quarters and
thereafter to be dealt with in accordance with law.
§ 292-17 CHARTER § 292-20
C:1441

ARTICLE IV
Milk
§ 292-21. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article:
ADULTERATED MILK OR CREAM — Milk or cream to which any water,
foreign oil or fat, drug, chemical, preservative or coloring matter, or other
substance has been added or mixed, except as provided for modified milk
as defined herein, and also milk or cream which fails to meet the standards
or has not been produced, handled or processed in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
BOTTLE or CONTAINER — A container made of glass or other officially
approved material or a single-service container made of an officially
approved material and used for the delivery of milk or fluid milk products to
consumers.
CERTIFIED CREAM — A portion of certified milk which contains not less
than 20% of milk fat.
CERTIFIED HEAVY CREAM — A portion of certified milk which contains not
less than 35% of milk fat.
CERTIFIED MILK — Milk which bears the certification of a medical milk
commission.
CONCENTRATED MILK — The product resulting from the elimination of a
portion of the water from milk.
CREAM — A portion of milk which contains not less than 18% milk fat.
FLUID MILK PRODUCTS — Includes the following products, unless
sterilized and packaged in hermetically sealed containers: milk, cream,
certified milk, skim milk, skimmed milk, nonfat milk, nonfat fortified milk,
fortified skim milk, fortified skimmed milk, vitamin D milk, vitamin D fluid
milk products, homogenized milk, modified milk, ice-cream mix and halfand-
half.
GRADE — The differentiation between milk, certified milk, modified milk,
irradiated milk, skimmed milk, concentrated milk, cream, heavy cream,
certified cream and certified heavy cream.
HALF-AND-HALF — A product consisting of a mixture of milk and cream,
with or without added milk solids not fat, and which contains not less than
10% milk fat.
A. LIGHT CREAM — Cream which contains not less than 18% milk fat.
B. MEDIUM CREAM — Cream which contains not less than 27% milk fat.
C. HEAVY CREAM — Cream which contains not less than 36% milk fat.
§ 292-21 CHARTER § 292-21
C:1443
HOMOGENIZED MILK — Milk which has been treated in such a manner as
to ensure such breakup of the fat globules that, after 48 hours of quiescent
storage, no visible cream separation occurs and fat percentage of the top
100 milliliters of milk in a quart bottle or of proportionate volumes in
containers of other sizes does not differ by more than 10% of itself from the
fat percentage of the remaining milk, as determined after thorough mixing.
ICE MILK — Any frozen, sweetened milk product which is made of the same
ingredients as ice cream and in a manner similar to the process used in
the manufacture of ice cream, but which contains less than the minimum
percentage of milk fat required for ice cream, but is no less than 3%, and
contains not less than 14% by weight of total milk solids, no matter under
what trade or coined name it may be sold or offered for sale.
MILK — The lacteal secretion of one or more cows. The term "milk" shall
mean and include milk, certified milk and also that which has been
pasteurized, homogenized, irradiated, modified, skimmed, concentrated or
otherwise processed or treated, but shall not include or mean condensed,
evaporated or dried milk in hermetically sealed containers.
MILK PRODUCTS — Includes ice cream, ice milk, sherbets, butter, butter
oil, dried whole milk, dried skim milk and any other food for human
consumption made from milk or cream, or both, and designated as a milk
product.
MODIFIED MILK — Milk prepared from milk meeting the requirements of
this article and modified in accordance with the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey.
PASTEURIZATION — The process of heating every particle of milk products
to a temperature of not less than 143º F. and holding at that temperature
for 30 consecutive minutes in approved pasteurizing apparatus or by such
other method demonstrated to accomplish the same results, and shall be
held to mean and include "high-temperature short-hold pasteurization," a
process whereby every particle of milk or milk products is heated to a
temperature of not less than 161º F. and held at that temperature for not
less than 15 consecutive seconds in approved pasteurizing apparatus or
equipment.
SKIM MILK, SKIMMED MILK AND NONFAT MILK — Milk from which
practically all milk fat has been removed and which contains not more than
1/2 of 1% milk fat, with or without added milk solids.
VITAMIN D MILK — Milk, the vitamin D content of which has been
increased to at least 400 USP units of vitamin D per quart by an acceptable
method.
§ 292-22. Licenses and permits.
A. Milk license.
(1) No person, either as principal or through agents or employees,
shall deliver or sell any milk, cream or fluid milk products within
the municipality without an official license so to do, provided that
§ 292-21 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-22
C:1444
no license shall be required for the proprietor of a public eating
establishment to sell or deliver, for consumption on the premises,
milk or cream obtained from a person licensed hereunder.
(2) A license fee as provided for in Chapter 170, Licenses and Fees, is
hereby established for each vehicle used in the sale or delivery of
milk or cream. The word "vehicle" as used in this section shall be
held to include vehicles of any kind and, where no vehicle is used,
the store from which the milk or cream is sold or delivered or the
person carrying, distributing or delivering the milk or cream.336
(3) Such license shall not be transferable and shall continue in force
and effect until the first day of May next ensuing the date of
granting thereof, unless previously suspended or revoked.
B. Permit for change of supply. No person having been granted a license
hereunder shall procure for sale or delivery in the municipality any milk
or cream from a source other than the source specified on the
application for a license hereunder without having obtained an official
permit so to do.
C. Permit for bulk milk and cream. No person shall sell or deliver any milk
or cream in the municipality in containers of more than one-quart
capacity without obtaining a bulk milk or bulk cream official permit so
to do. Such permit shall only be granted to persons licensed under
Subsection A of section and shall permit the sale or delivery of milk and
cream in containers of more than one-quart capacity under the
following conditions and no other:
(1) For cooking and manufacturing purposes only in quantities of not
less than 20 quarts in a single container to operators of bakeries,
confectioneries, hotels or restaurants.
(2) In sanitary dispensers filled and sealed at the milk plant and so
constructed as to ensure adequate refrigeration during
transportation and use and the protection of the contents from
outside contamination, for use by the operators of public eating
establishments; provided, however, that the type and construction
of any such dispenser shall, before use, be officially approved.
D. Applications. Each application for a license or permit required under
the terms of this section shall be made in writing, signed by the person
applying, upon official forms supplied for that purpose, and shall
truthfully set forth all information which may be necessary to ascertain
the facts that the milk or cream proposed to be sold or delivered by the
applicant is of the standard and quality required by and was produced,
handled, processed and transported in accordance with the provisions
of this article and such other information as may be necessary to the
proper administration of this article.
336. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 270, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I.
§ 292-22 CHARTER § 292-22
C:1445
§ 292-23. Source of supply; requirements.
No license shall be granted to any applicant and no permit for additional
supplies or for a change in source of supply shall be issued to any licensee
under the provisions of this article unless he or the person or persons
from whom he proposes to obtain his supplies of milk, cream or fluid milk
products shall:
E. Permit to obtain milk from certain sources. No person having been
granted a license hereunder shall procure for sale in the City of East
Orange any milk or cream from any source which, in processing or
transporting said milk or cream, utilizes the methods known as "bulk
farm holding or cooling tanks and transportation of milk from farms to
processing plants," without having obtained a permit to do so from the
Board of Health. No permit shall be issued to any licensee under the
provisions of this subsection unless he or the source utilizing the
aforesaid methods shall comply with the regulations of the Board of
Health pertaining to the utilization of said methods of processing and
transporting milk and cream.
F. Ice cream manufacturer's permit.
(1) No person, either as principal or through agents or employees,
shall deliver or sell any ice cream, ice cream mix, ice- cream
products or frozen confections within the municipality without first
making written application for a permit and securing the approval
of the Health Officer of the City of East Orange for the conduct of
said activity under the conditions specified, provided that no permit
shall be required for the proprietor of a public eating establishment
to sell or deliver for consumption on the premises or public food
store to sell or deliver ice cream, ice cream products or frozen
confections obtained from a person permitted hereunder.
(2) No charge shall be made for this permit, but only persons who
comply with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to
receive and retain such permit.
A. Maintain an adequate system of supervision over the dairies, milk
plants and the equipment and appurtenances thereof, including
periodic inspections, examination and tests and chemical and
bacteriological tests of the milk, cream and milk products produced or
handled by him, and keep on file in the milk plant complete and
accurate records of such inspections, tests and examinations, together
with all other records required by law.
B. Permit the official inspection of the dairies, milk plants, milk and milk
products and the records aforesaid at any time and make available such
information as shall be officially required to determine whether the
requirements of this article are being complied with.
§ 292-22 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-23
C:1446
§ 292-24. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be suspended
or revoked unless the licensee and the person or persons from whom the
licensee obtains his supplies of milk, cream or milk products shall comply
with the requirements of § 292-23A, B and C of this article.
§ 292-25. Requirements for sale of milk.
No person shall sell or deliver milk, milk products or fluid milk products in
the City of East Orange unless such milk or milk products comply with the
standards and quality required by and were produced, handled, processed
and transported in accordance with the provisions of Title 24 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, as amended, the Sanitary Code enacted by the
Department of Health of the State of New Jersey, and the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 292-26. Pasteurization standards.
The following standards shall be in addition to those required in Title 24
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, as amended, and the Sanitary Code
enacted by the Department of Health of the State of New Jersey:
§ 292-27. Milk cooling and refrigeration.
C. Comply with the requirements of this article with respect to the
production, handling, processing and transportation of milk, cream and
milk products.
A. All milk and cream sold or delivered within the municipality shall be
pasteurized and, after having been pasteurized, shall not be
pasteurized a second time.
B. The pasteurizing system in each milk plant shall be so constructed and
installed as to prevent any unpasteurized milk or milk products from
mixing with pasteurized milk or milk products, and no pasteurized milk
or milk products shall be permitted to come in contact with equipment
with which unpasteurized milk or milk products have been in contact.
C. High-temperature short-hold pasteurizers shall be equipped with a flow
diversion control bulb and also a flow diversion valve kept in working
order and adjustment so that the valve will immediately divert milk or
milk products for preheating when the temperature of the milk or milk
products at the diversion control bulb reaches 161 1/2º F. during
descending temperatures and, when in diverting position, will not
permit forward flow of milk or milk products past the flow diversion
bulb and be so placed that any milk or milk products passing by the
bulb will be held for 15 seconds at not less than 161º F. as determined
by approved tests.
§ 292-23 CHARTER § 292-27
C:1447
§ 292-28. Bacterial standards.
A. Milk to be ultimately used for the sale or distribution as such to
consumers, including milk from which cream or skimmed milk is to be
separated to be used ultimately for sale or distribution as such to
consumers, shall be cooled immediately after milking to a temperature
not over 50º F. and maintained at that temperature until delivered to
and received in the milk plant, provided that morning milk need not be
cooled between the time of milking and the time of delivery to and
receipt in the milk plant or creamery if such delivery and receipt is not
made later than 9:00 a.m. standard time.
B. Milk plant operators must cool all milk as soon as received from the
producer to a temperature not over 50º F., and this temperature must
be maintained during storage and transportation.
C. Milk and fluid milk products, after pasteurization, shall be rapidly
cooled to a temperature of 50º F. or below and maintained at that
temperature during storage, distribution, shipment, transportation and
until delivered to the consumer.
A. Schedule of standards.
(1) Milk and fluid milk products shall not contain more bacteria per
milliliter or gram than herein indicated:
Type of Milk or Milk Products
Maximum
Permissible
Number of Bacteria
per Milliliter
Milk, skimmed or whole
Raw: blended or individual bulk can
sample taken at receiving station or at a
source of production
100,000
Raw: sampled after processing and
prior to pasteurization
300,000
Pasteurized: sampled either in bulk or
consumer package
20,000
Certified milk
Raw: blended or individual bulk cans 10,000
Pasteurized: sampled in either bulk or
consumer package
500
Cream
Raw: sampled after separation and
cooking at plant where separation
occurs
200,000
§ 292-27 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-28
C:1448
§ 292-29. Bottling, capping and canning.
Type of Milk or Milk Products
Maximum
Permissible
Number of Bacteria
per Milliliter
Raw: sampled after separation, cooking
and shipment either in cans or by tank
truck or rail tank car to pasteurizing
plant
300,000
Pasteurized: sampled either in bulk or
consumer package
30,000
Ice cream, ice cream mix, frozen custard,
sherbets and ice milk
Sampled after procession and
production or as sold or delivered
50,000
(2) Whenever more than one of the last four consecutive counts taken
on separate days exceeds the limits established herein, the milk or
fluid milk product shall be deemed in violation.
B. Compliance with bacterial standards prescribed in this section shall be
determined by the method known as the "Standard Agar Plate Method"
of the American Public Health Association or by any other method
approved by the East Orange Board of Health.
C. The Health Officer or any milk inspector of the City of East Orange is
hereby empowered to prohibit the transportation into or the sale or
distribution within the municipality of any milk or milk products if it
shall appear, after investigation or upon other evidence received by the
Health Officer or milk inspector, that such milk or milk products have
been contaminated by the emanation, exhalations or discharges of any
person affected with any communicable disease transmissible through
milk or milk products or that such milk or milk products have been or
are produced, stored or kept on any premises upon which any source of
a communicable disease exists.
A. Milk, certified milk, half-and-half, skimmed milk or cream shall be sold
only in bottles to consumers unless permission has been granted as
provided in § 292-22C of this article.
B. Milk, certified milk, skimmed milk or cream shall not be delivered
except in approved single-service containers to any premises where
there exists a case of infectious, contagious or communicable disease
transmissible through milk.
C. In the bottling of milk, half-and-half, certified milk, skimmed milk or
cream, a mechanical filling and capping device shall be used. Hand
§ 292-28 CHARTER § 292-29
C:1449
§ 292-30. Labeling.
§ 292-31. Noncomplying supplies.
filling and capping are prohibited. All bottles shall be capped with caps
which completely cover the pouring lip of the bottle.
D. Single-service containers used for holding milk or milk products shall
be sanitary and shall be packed in sealed dust-proof packages in the
manufacturing plant and so delivered to the milk dealer.
E. Any can used for holding milk or milk products shall be made of metal
and include a cover of the same metal and shall be of the same design
commonly known as the "umbrella-type" cover.
A. Required identification.
(1) Containers in which pasteurized milk or fluid milk products are
shipped or delivered shall be plainly tagged, capped or labeled
"pasteurized," and the tags, caps or labels shall be marked with the
location of the pasteurizing plant and the name of the proprietor of
the business which is conducted at the said pasteurizing plant. The
tags, caps or labels of the containers shall also be coded to indicate
the day on which the milk or fluid milk products were pasteurized
or be marked with the day or date of pasteurization. Code
identifications and systems established by the processor shall be
made available to and subject to the approval of the Board of
Health.
(2) Certified milk or certified cream tags, caps or labels shall also bear
the name of the medical milk commission with which the person
producing such milk or cream is under contract.
(3) No other tag, label, symbol or device shall be used except that
permitted by Title 24 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
B. No person shall erase, cancel, obliterate, deface, cover, remove or alter
any brand, tag, label or other marking required by any provision of this
article attached or affixed to any container or bottle of milk or milk
products.
C. No person shall sell any milk or milk product which has a false or
misleading word, statement, designation, name, address, symbol or
mark appearing on any tag, cap or label or in any labeling, or which has
on it a label or labeling which is false or misleading in any particular.
A. No milk or fluid milk products from a source which has not been
inspected and investigated to determine whether it complies with the
requirements of § 292-23 of this article, nor any such product from a
source which upon inspection and investigation has been found not to
be in compliance with said section, shall be allowed to enter a milk
§ 292-29 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-31
C:1450
§ 292-32. Physical examination of cows.
plant in which milk or milk products are handled or processed for
subsequent sale or distribution in the municipality.
B. Any supply of milk or cream not complying with this article may, upon
official notice, be excluded forthwith from the municipality.
C. Adulterated milk or cream shall not be brought into, sold, delivered or
offered for sale or delivery in the municipality; and adulterated milk or
cream may be seized and destroyed by any duly authorized agent.
D. The methods of processing and transportation of milk or cream known
as "bulk farm holding or cooling tanks and transportation of milk from
farm to processing plants" shall be carried on in strict compliance with
the regulations of the Board of Health with respect thereto now or
hereafter adopted.
A. Cows shall be physically examined every six months by a licensed
veterinarian of the state or other jurisdiction where the cows are
maintained, and a certificate showing the results of such examination
shall be placed and kept on file for a period of one year at the milk plant
to which the milk is delivered by the producer.
B. Dairy herds shall be under the supervision of the rules and regulations
of the state and Federal Bureau of Animal Industry for the control and
eradication of tuberculosis and brucellosis.
§ 292-31 CHARTER § 292-32
C:1451

ARTICLE V
Sewer Connections
§ 292-33. Connections required. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
The owner or person in charge of any building used or occupied by human
beings shall connect such building with the public sewer. The sewer
connection for any such building erected or constructed after the passage of
this chapter shall be made immediately after the cellar has been excavated
and the foundation for said building has been laid, and such sewer
connection shall be made before any of the structural work upon said
building shall be begun. (See §§ 292-61 and 292-62, respectively, for
violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 292-33 CHARTER § 292-33
C:1453

ARTICLE VI
Privies and Cesspools
§ 292-34. Permit required.
No person shall erect, construct or maintain any privy or privy vault,
temporary or otherwise, without a permit therefor from the Health
Department, and the person who receives such permit shall construct and
maintain such privy or privy vault as directed by the Health Department.
§ 292-35. Filling required upon abandonment.
Whenever any privy, privy vault or cesspool is abandoned or the use thereof
discontinued, the owner or person in charge of the property upon which
such privy, privy vault or cesspool is located shall have the vault or hole
filled up with clean dirt or ashes.
§ 292-34 CHARTER § 292-35
C:1455

ARTICLE VII
Housing
§ 292-36. Plumbing requirements. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
The owner or person in charge of any building used or occupied by human
beings shall provide at all times an adequate supply of City water under
pressure for domestic purposes. Such owner or person in charge shall
provide not less than one water closet for every 15 occupants and shall keep
the same in good working order at all times. Every house or building used
as a place of residence shall have at least one water closet, one sink and one
tub or shower; and in the case of a house or building containing two or more
flats or apartments, there shall be at least one water closet, one sink and
one tub or shower provided for each such flat or apartment thereof. (See
§§ 292-61 and 292-62, respectively, for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 292-37. Heating. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
It shall be the duty of the owner, in the absence of a lease, contract
or agreement to the contrary, to maintain the heating system in proper
working order between October 1 of each year and May 1 of the next
succeeding year where said heating system or systems are a permanent
part of the property and where the building or any portion thereof is
occupied as a home or place of residence for one or more persons or as
a business establishment where one or more persons are employed. (See
§§ 292-61 and 292-62, respectively, for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 292-38. Janitor service; removal of garbage and refuse. [Amended
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
The owner of any building, tenement or apartment house containing six
or more occupied apartments or flats shall provide adequate and proper
janitor service at all times for the purpose of keeping the premises in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall have removed daily, on a regular schedule
at a reasonable time, all garbage and other household refuse from each flat
or apartment in such building, tenement or apartment. (See §§ 292-61 and
292-62, respectively, for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 292-39. Discharge of dust by tenants. [Amended 2-22-1999 by
Ord. No. 4-1999]
No tenant or occupant of any flat or apartment in any house occupied by
two or more families, and no agent, servant or employee of such tenant or
occupant, shall use any window, dumbwaiter shaft, fire escape or porch of
such house for the purpose of discharging dust, by shaking or otherwise,
from any clothes, rug or other floor covering, broom, mop, rag or other
cleaning implement or material. (See §§ 292-61 and 292-62, respectively, for
violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 292-36 CHARTER § 292-40
C:1457
§ 292-40. Cleanliness of premises. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
No owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of any building, house, store,
apartment, room or place shall maintain the same or permit the same to
be maintained in any state of uncleanliness or filthiness or in an unsanitary
manner which may be or may become a detriment to health. (See §§ 292-61
and 292-62, respectively, for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 292-41. Authority of Health Department to vacate buildings.
[Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
Whenever any building or part thereof is in such condition as to be a
menace or a detriment to the health of human beings occupying the same,
the same may be ordered by the Health Department to be vacated and to
remain vacant until such building or part thereof shall be, in the opinion of
the Health Department, no longer a menace or a detriment to human health.
Any person receiving such an order shall comply with all the provisions and
terms thereof. (See §§ 292-61 and 292-62, respectively, for violations and
penalties hereof.)
§ 292-42. Rodent infestation. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
No owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of any building, house, store,
apartment, room or place shall permit infestation by insects, rodents or
other vermin to exist or be maintained. (See §§ 292-61 and 292-62,
respectively, for violations and penalties hereof.)
§ 292-43. Use of lead base paint on interiors prohibited. [Added
1-5-1971 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
A. The use of lead-based paint on interior surfaces is hereby prohibited.
Any person responsible for applying lead-based paint on any interior
surface shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.
B. If upon inspection by the Health Officer or his duly authorized
representative there is found the presence of flaking, peeling, chipped
or loose paint, plaster or structural material in any building being used
for housing, the Health Officer or his duly authorized representative is
hereby empowered to secure specimens of flaking, peeling, chipped or
loose paint, plaster or structural material and to analyze or cause an
analysis to be made, determining whether or not the materials contain
lead or its compounds. In any case where analysis reveals the presence
of lead or its compounds in a quantity of more than 1% by weight, or
when a child is diagnosed by a licensed physician as suffering from
plumbism (lead poisoning) and the child has resided in the dwelling unit
for a period of six months, the dwelling unit shall be declared to be a
hazard to the health and safety of the occupants of the family unit.
§ 292-40 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-43
C:1458
C. When such a hazard exists, the Health Officer shall order the owner of
the premises to remove or prohibit access to leaded material in the
dwelling unit. Such order may be to the extent to require all surfaces in
the dwelling unit to be stripped free and clean of all leaded materials or
the covering of leaded surfaces with suitable materials in order to
protect life and health.
§ 292-43 CHARTER § 292-43
C:1459

ARTICLE VIII
Diseases of Animals
§ 292-44. Diseases to be reported to Health Department.
Every veterinarian who shall attend any animal in the City of East Orange
affected with or suspected to be affected with anthrax, glanders, farcy, footand-
mouth disease, rabies, tuberculosis or any other communicable disease
shall file with the Health Department, within 12 hours thereafter, a written
report stating the name of the disease, the kind of animal, the precise
location of such animal, the name and address of the owner or person in
charge thereof and any other necessary information regarding the animal
so affected. In case no veterinarian shall attend such animal, then it shall be
the duty of the owner or person in charge to file such report with the Health
Department.
§ 292-45. Isolation of diseased animals; authority to order
destruction.
The owner or person in charge of any animal affected with or suspected
to be affected with any disease mentioned in § 292-44 or with any other
communicable disease shall isolate or restrict such animal and follow such
precautions in such manner and for such length of time as the Health
Department may direct. The Health Department shall have the power to
order the destruction of any animal so affected, and it shall be the duty of
the owner or person in charge thereof to comply immediately with the terms
of such order. The Health Department or the Board of Health shall not be
liable for the value of any animal so destroyed.
§ 292-46. Isolation or destruction of animals bitten by rabid
animals.
Whenever any animal shall be bitten by any animal affected with rabies, the
owner or person in charge of the animal so bitten shall, according as the
Health Department may order, either have such animal destroyed or have it
isolated for a period of six months.
§ 292-47. Quarantine of dogs which bite persons.
A. Whenever a dog not vaccinated against rabies within one year last past
shall have bitten any person not a member of the dog owner's family or
household, the owner or person in charge thereof shall either surrender
the dog for quarantine in accordance with instructions of the Health
Department, to be quarantined for such observation period not
exceeding 10 days as may be deemed safe by the Board of Health, or
arrange with the Department for the quarantine of such dog for a like
period by a veterinarian at the expense of the owner or person in
charge of the dog. If the person bitten is a member of the dog owner's
family or household, the dog may be quarantined at home for a like
period. Dogs with nursing puppies may also be quarantined at home.
§ 292-44 CHARTER § 292-47
C:1461
B. Whenever any vaccinated dog has bitten any person and the
vaccination was not performed at least three months prior to the bite,
as shown by a certificate of a licensed veterinarian, such dog shall be
quarantined in the same manner as provided for in Subsection A hereof;
if vaccinated within a year and at least three months prior to the bite, it
may be quarantined at home.
§ 292-47 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-47
C:1462
ARTICLE IX
Boarding Homes for Infants or Children
§ 292-48. License required; nontransferability; expiration date.
No person shall conduct or maintain any boardinghouse for infants or
children without having a license therefor from the Board of Health, and
the same shall be nontransferable and shall expire on April 30 following the
date of issue.
§ 292-49. Revocation of license.
The Board of Health may revoke at any time any such license upon violation
of any of the requirements set forth in § 292-50 of this article or rules and
regulations adopted by the Board for the conduct of boarding homes for
infants or children.
§ 292-50. Regulations and standards.
§ 292-51. Inspections by health and fire officials.
The building and premises in which is conducted the business of operating
a boarding home for infants and children may be inspected from time to
time by the Health Officer or his authorized representative or by the Chief
or other authorized representative of the Fire Department. At the time of
A. No greater number of infants or children shall be kept at any time than
shall be authorized by the Health Department.
B. The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times
and ample provision shall be made for light and fresh air.
C. Such infants or children at all times shall be kept clean and properly
clothed, shall be fed wholesome food and shall be given proper medical
attention and preventive treatment prescribed by the Department.
D. Any or all such infants or children shall be brought to the weighing
stations conducted by the Health Department as often as required by
said Department.
E. No such infants or children shall be kept in any house in which any of
the other occupants are affected with tuberculosis or any venereal
disease in a communicable stage.
F. All such infants or children shall at all times be properly cared for, and
such boarding home shall be conducted in a manner which meets with
the approval of the Health Department.
G. All boarding homes for infants or children must be approved by the
Chief of the Fire Department of the City of East Orange.
H. No license for a home shall be granted where adult roomers or boarders
are living.
§ 292-48 CHARTER § 292-51
C:1463
such inspections, all rooms in the building and all parts of the premises
must be available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner or
operator is required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate
such inspections.
§ 292-52. Definitions.
The term "boarding homes for infants or children" shall be held to mean
any house or other place where one or more children are received, cared
for or kept, unattended by their parents or legal guardians, for the purpose
of providing such child or children with food, lodging or care. A child shall
be regarded as unattended, within the meaning of this section, even though
the parent, close relative or legal guardian of any child boarded or lodged
at such home may also reside at such home if such parent, close relative or
legal guardian shall be customarily absent therefrom during any substantial
part of a twenty-four-hour day.
§ 292-53. Nonapplicability of provisions.
This article shall not apply to:
A. Any person caring for a child related by blood or marriage.
B. The State Board of Children's Guardians.
C. Any children's home, orphan asylum or children's aid society
incorporated under the laws of this state.
D. Any aid society of a properly organized and accredited church or
fraternal society organized for aid and relief to its members.
E. Any charitable society incorporated under the laws of this state, having
as one of its objects the prevention of cruelty to children or the care and
protection of children.
§ 292-51 EAST ORANGE CODE § 292-53
C:1464
ARTICLE X
Food Service in Boardinghouses and Nursing Homes
§ 292-54. Adoption of regulations.
In accordance with the provisions of Part 4 of Chapter 159, Housing
Standards; Property Maintenance, the following requirements are adopted
to govern the food service in all licensed boardinghouses (Class A and Class
B) and nursing homes, as defined in Articles XX and XXI of Chapter 159,
Housing Standards; Property Maintenance.
§ 292-55. Compliance with other regulations.337
The operator of any boardinghouse or nursing home shall operate any food
service in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey
Sanitary Code.
§ 292-56. Regulations and requirements.
The operator of a boardinghouse (Class B) or a nursing home shall comply
with the following requirements to ensure the proper nutrition of all guests,
clients or inhabitants:
A. The following foods must be included daily in recommended amounts:
at least two cups of milk or milk substitute; two or more servings of
meat, poultry, fish or its protein equivalent; four or more servings of
fruit and vegetables, which includes one serving of citrus fruit or other
fruit or vegetable high in vitamin C; and at least three eggs per week.
B. Three nourishing meals shall be served daily on a regular schedule.
There shall be a lapse of at least four hours between breakfast and the
noon meal, at least four hours between the noon and evening meal and
at least 10 hours between breakfast and the evening meal.
C. A minimum of 1,800 calories shall be provided daily, unless otherwise
prescribed by a physician, and provision made for special diets when
prescribed by a physician.
D. Weekly menus shall be planned ahead and be available for inspection at
all times. Weekly menus shall be sent each week to the Health
Department for evaluation and shall be received each week by
Wednesday for the preceding Monday through Sunday period.
337. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 270, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I.
§ 292-54 CHARTER § 292-56
C:1465

ARTICLE XI
Burials
§ 292-57. Permit required for burial and cremation.
No person shall bury or deposit in any grave, tomb or vault, or cremate or
remove from the limits of the City of East Orange the body of any person
dying in the City of East Orange or of any child stillborn in this City without
a permit therefor from the Registrar of Vital Statistics of the City of East
Orange.
§ 292-58. Permit required for disinterment of bodies.
No dead human body shall be disinterred or removed from any grave, tomb
or vault without a permit therefor from the Health Department.
§ 292-59. Funerals for persons dying of communicable diseases
prohibited.
The Health Department may specify any communicable disease or diseases
causing death from which no public funeral shall be held and prohibit such
public funeral, and in case of threat or prevalence of an epidemic, may
prohibit such public funeral of persons dying from the particular disease or
diseases specified.
§ 292-57 CHARTER § 292-59
C:1467

ARTICLE XII
Barbershops and Beauty Parlors
§ 292-60. Regulations.
Every person operating or conducting a barbershop or beauty parlor and
employed therein shall comply with the following requirements:
A. The shop or parlor and all appurtenances shall be kept in a clean
condition at all times.
B. Any tool or part thereof which comes in contact with the head, face or
neck of the patron, such as razors, scissors, tweezers, combs and parts
of vibrators, shall be immersed in boiling water or in alcohol of a
strength of 70% or higher or be treated by some other equally effective
method as approved by the Health Department before being used on
each patron.
C. Every such shop or parlor shall be provided with hot and cold water
under pressure.
D. Clean towels shall be used for each customer.
E. No styptic pencils, finger bowls, sponge, lump alum or powder puff shall
be used, except of the individual applicator type.
F. Each operator, immediately before serving a patron, shall wash his
hands with soap and water.
§ 292-60 CHARTER § 292-60
C:1469

ARTICLE XIII
Violations and Penalties
§ 292-61. Fines and imprisonment; continuing violations. [Amended
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
§ 292-62. Imprisonment for second violation within six months.
In case a defendant shall have been twice convicted within the space of
six months of the violation of the same health regulation or code, and due
proof of such fact is made, the Court may, in addition to the imposition
of the penalty prescribed in § 292-61 of this article, cause the defendant
to be imprisoned in the County Jail or county workhouse, with or without
hard labor, for any number of days not exceeding one for each dollar of the
penalty.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of any of the
foregoing sections, except as provided in § 292-61B, shall be liable to a
penalty not to exceed $500 and not less than $200 for each offense.
Each day or part thereof during which such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. The Court may cause a defendant
who refuses or neglects to pay the amount of a judgment rendered
against him and all costs and charges incident thereto to be committed
to the County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days.
B. Payment through Violations Bureau. If you wish to plead guilty of
violating or refusing to comply with §§ 292-33, 292-36, 292-37, 292-39,
292-40, 292-41 or 292-42, respectively, on your first offense of any of
the sections hereof, and give up your rights to have a lawyer and a trial,
you may pay a fine of $200 by bringing or mailing the summons
together with payment within 14 days of notice of violation to the
Violations Bureau located at:
Violations Bureau
Municipal Court - East Orange
221 Freeway Drive
East Orange, New Jersey 07018
§ 292-61 CHARTER § 292-62
C:1471
Chapter 294
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
§ 294-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
CITY — The City of East Orange.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
ENCLOSED AREA — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health and Human Services
of the City of East Orange.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of East Orange or his/
her designee.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
LICENSE — Any license issued by the City, including, but not limited to, a
liquor license, a license to sell or distribute food and beverages or a license
to permit vending machines and/or mechanical amusement devices.[Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
LIQUOR LICENSE — Any license to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
issued by the City pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.[Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
MINOR — Any male or female under the age of 18 years of age.[Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — Includes all structures owned, leased, rented
and/or operated by the City of East Orange, and/or occupied by City
employees and used for official business of the City of East Orange.
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCT — Any product that is designed to deliver
nicotine, nicotine vapor or non-nicotine vapor, including, but not limited
to, any type of electronic smoking device defined as an electronic or other
powered device that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances
to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an
electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe, or any cartridge or other
component of the device or related product, including, but not limited
to, any substances used in such devices, such as liquids or powders or
other forms of tobacco, but excluding United States Food and Drug
Administration approved nicotine patches or nicotine chewing gum.[Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
§ 292-62 EAST ORANGE CODE § 294-1
C:1472
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes all public parks,
playgrounds, ball fields publicly owned or leased by the City of East Orange,
and all property owned or leased by the City of East Orange upon which
the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where
individuals gather for recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to
such facilities, and including, but not limited to, any parking area driveway
or drive aisle.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, cooperative
association, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building or enclosed structure open to the general
public and any street, road, sidewalk, walkway, park or open space located
within the City and maintained for use by the general public.[Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of, including but not limited to, smoking, chewing, inhaling or other use,
including but not limited to cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff,
shisha and cigarettes in any form, or shall mean any other matter or
substance which can be smoked.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person that operates a store, stand, booth,
concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made, including a person
that owns, operates or uses a vending machine.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 38-2018]
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment, dispenses a tobacco
product or nicotine delivery product.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
38-2018]
§ 294-2. Prohibition of smoking in public places; signs.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all municipal buildings as defined
herein. No-smoking signs or the international no-smoking symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at each municipal building
entrance and within each closed area where smoking is prohibited by
this section. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall
contain letters or a symbol which contrasts in color with the sign,
indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The sign shall also
indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 294-1 CHARTER § 294-2
C:1473
§ 294-2.1. Tobacco product and nicotine delivery product sales to
persons under age 21. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
§ 294-2.2. Identification required. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
38-2018]
B. Smoking shall be prohibited within a thirty-five-foot radius of the front
entrance of all municipal buildings. No-smoking signs or the
international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted both on the building and at the thirty-five-foot
perimeter of the front entrance of all municipal buildings when smoking
is prohibited by this section. The signs shall be clearly visible to the
public and shall contain letters or a symbol, which shall also indicate
that violators are subject to a fine.
C. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities
owned or leased by the City of East Orange and all property owned or
leased by the City of East Orange upon which the public is invited or
upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather for
recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities,
and including, but not limited to, any parking area, driveway or drive
aisle, which have been designated with no-smoking signs. No-smoking
signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by this section. The
signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or a
symbol which contrasts in color with the sign, indicating that smoking
is prohibited at the designated area. The sign shall also indicate that
violators are subject to a fine.
D. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered to the City of East
Orange.
A. No person shall sell, distribute or give tobacco or nicotine delivery
products in the City of East Orange unless an employee of the
establishment controls the sale of such products. A person may only sell
tobacco or nicotine delivery products in a direct, face-to-face exchange
between the retailer and the consumer. Self-service displays and all
vending machines of tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall be
prohibited.
B. No person shall sell, distribute, or give tobacco or nicotine delivery
products to any person under the age of 21 years.
C. The purchase or attempted purchase, taking or borrowing of any
tobacco product by or on behalf of a person under the age of 21 is
prohibited.
§ 294-2 EAST ORANGE CODE § 294-2.2
C:1474
§ 294-2.3. Sign requirement. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
38-2018]
The following six-inch by eight-inch sign shall be posted in a conspicuous
place near each cash register in all retail establishments which sell tobacco
products and/or nicotine delivery products:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS
TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. LEGAL
PROOF OF AGE MUST BE SHOWN. A PERSON WHO SELLS OR OFFERS
TO SELL A TOBACCO PRODUCT OR A NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCT
TO A PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE MAY BE PROSECUTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH STATE STATUTES AND CITY OF EAST ORANGE
ORDINANCES. THE PURCHASE OR ATTEMPTED PURCHASE, TAKING
OR BORROWING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR NICOTINE DELIVERY
PRODUCTS BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 IS PROHIBITED BY
LAW. A person UNDER AGE 21 who PURCHASES OR ATTEMPTS TO
PURCHASE, TAKE OR BORROW a tobacco product OR A NICOTINE
DELIVERY PRODUCT to a person under 21 years of age may be prosecuted
in accordance with State Statutes and CITY OF EAST ORANGE
ORDINANCES. IF YOU ARE AWARE OF ANY RETAILER WHO IS
VIOLATING THIS SECTION OF THE LAW, PLEASE CONTACT THE EAST
ORANGE HEALTH DEPARTMENT AT (973) 266-5109.
§ 294-2.4. Tobacco vending machines and sales. [Added 9-10-2018
by Ord. No. 38-2018]
Self-service displays and vending machines of tobacco or nicotine delivery
products shall be prohibited.
§ 294-3. Enforcement. [Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
A. Any retailer, employee or other person selling, distributing or giving
tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall verify, by means of
government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer's
date of birth, that no person purchasing the tobacco or nicotinecontaining
products is younger than 21 years of age. No such
verification is required for any person over the age of 26.
B. No clerk shall sell, furnish or give tobacco or nicotine delivery products
to a person less than 21 years of age who has a note or any form of
communication from any person, including an adult.
A. Whenever the Health Officer, or his or her designee, or a police officer
of the City of East Orange reasonably believes there exists a violation of
this chapter, such officer shall issue a summons and complaint not later
than 30 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The complaint
shall be written and shall state with reasonable particularity the nature
of the violation, including reference to the subsection(s) of this chapter
alleged to have been violated. The complaint shall be delivered
personally or sent via certified mail to the alleged violator.
§ 294-2.2 CHARTER § 294-3
C:1475
§ 294-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
38-2018]
B. The Health Officer, his/her designee or a police officer of the City, after
giving proper identification, and if no search or other warrant is
required by law, may summarily inspect any matter, thing, premises,
place, person, record, incident or event as necessary to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, or
otherwise act to interfere with or obstruct the Health Officer or his/her
designee or any police officer in the performance of duties under this
section. The Health Officer or designee may request the assistance of
the police department when necessary to execute his or her official duty
in the manner prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
pay a fine of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500
for the second violation, and not less than $1,000 for the third and each
subsequent violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation
occurs, shall constitute a separate violation. The complaint shall be
made in the Municipal Court or before such other judicial officer having
authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. In addition, any violator of this chapter shall be subject to having any
City license held by the violator suspended, revoked or fined. No such
action may be taken unless the requirements of due process are
satisfied.
C. Any person who continually violates this chapter may also be charged in
the Municipal Court or in Superior Court with maintaining a nuisance.
D. These penalties are in addition to any penalties that may be imposed,
including but not limited to penalties imposed by the New Jersey Code
of Juvenile Justice, N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 et seq.,338 and N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1
et seq.
E. Each sale, furnishing or giving of tobacco and/or a nicotine delivery
product to any person under the age of 21, and each purchase or
alleged purchase, taking or borrowing of tobacco or a nicotine delivery
product, shall constitute a separate violation.
F. Fines and sanctions associated with this section shall be dedicated and
forwarded to the Health Department to be used in connection with
education and enforcement of this chapter. The monies shall be
338. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 was repealed by L.1999, c. 90, § 19, effective 5-3-1999.
See now N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-20 et seq.
§ 294-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § 294-4
C:1476
Appendix
Chapter A300
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Poles and wires — See Ch. 203. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 238.
§ A300-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system, provided that Comcast accepts, in writing, all of the terms and
conditions set forth herein.
§ A300-2. Statement of findings.
The City, having held a hearing fully open to the public, after proper
public notice, pursuant to the requirements of law and having received and
considered all comments relating to its consent to a renewal of the franchise
agreement, herein finds that:
maintained by the Chief Financial Officer or Comptroller of the City of
East Orange.
G. Individuals under the age of 21 who unlawfully purchase or attempt to
purchase, take or borrow any tobacco product or nicotine delivery
product may be subject to completing tobacco-related education
classes, diversion programs, or community service programs.
A. Since Comcast has substantially performed its obligations under its
previous franchise agreement and under applicable law, the City has no
reason to believe that in the future Comcast will fail to comply with its
obligations under a renewal franchise agreement or under applicable
law.
B. If Comcast undertakes all commitments set forth in this ordinance and
performs its obligations pursuant to the terms and conditions
hereunder, the City will have reasonable assurance that Comcast will
meet the City's future cable-related needs.
§ 294-4 CHARTER § A300-3
C:1477
§ A300-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD OR BPU OR NJBPU — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of
New Jersey or any successor agency.
CITY OR MUNICIPALITY — The City of East Orange, County of Essex, State
of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
Comcast of New Jersey II, LLC.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE OR OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA — Consists of the area of the
municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map
annexed to the company's application for municipal consent.
§ A300-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A300-5. Franchise fee.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 10
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board. Said consent shall therefore expire on December
31, 2027.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
complied with the material terms and conditions of this ordinance, the
municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification and/or
termination of the certificate of approval; provided, however, that the
municipality shall first have given the company written notice of all
alleged instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same
within 90 days of that notification.
§ A300-3 EAST ORANGE CODE § A300-5
C:1478
§ A300-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A300-7. Extension of service.
§ A300-8. Construction requirements.
A. Comcast shall, during each year of operation under the consent granted
herein, pay to the City the maximum franchise fee allowable by law and
any other legally permissible amount. Pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Act, the company shall, during each year of operation
under the consent granted herein, pay to the municipality 2% of the
gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature of subscription
fees paid by subscribers for cable television reception service in the
municipality or any higher amount required by the Act or otherwise
allowable by law, whichever is greater.
B. The City reserves the right to increase the franchise fee to take
advantage of increases in the maximum franchise allowable by law or
changes in the legal definition of gross revenues and, if legally
permissible, to petition the BPU for permission to charge a rate higher
than the maximum.
C. On or before January 25 of each year, Comcast shall file with the City's
Chief Financial Officer a verified statement indicating the amount of
gross revenues from all recurring subscription fees paid by subscribers
in the City. Simultaneously with the filing of its verified statement of
gross revenues, Comcast shall pay to the City's Chief Financial Officer
the yearly fee and amount imposed by this section.
A. The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
set forth in the company's application. The company's line extension
policy, as set forth in the company's application, shall govern any
extension of plant beyond the primary service area.
B. The company's installation and line extension policy must comply with
all federal and state laws, regulations or other pronouncements.
A. Restoration.
(1) In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any
pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense
and in compliance with all applicable regulations, restore and
replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
§ A300-5 CHARTER § A300-8
C:1479
§ A300-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality's Administrator or Clerk.
(2) If, in connection with said work, Comcast disturbs any
underground condition or damages underground real or personal
property, Comcast shall, at its sole expense, restore such condition
or real property to as good of condition as existed before the
commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Temporary removal of cables. Comcast shall temporarily raise, lower or
remove its cables and appropriate parts of its facilities to permit the
moving of buildings, machinery or other similar circumstances. If the
requesting party is a private party, that party shall bear the expense. If
the requesting party is the City, Comcast shall bear the expense.
D. Removal or trimming of trees.
(1) During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise,
the company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places of the
municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
(2) No trees shall be trimmed, removed or destroyed unless Comcast
first obtains all necessary municipal permits. Comcast shall make
reasonable efforts to notify property owners before trimming trees
on private property. In addition, any removal shall be done in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent Comcast from
trimming trees without a permit in emergency situations.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
§ A300-8 EAST ORANGE CODE § A300-9
C:1480
§ A300-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A300-11. Local office.
§ A300-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A300-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer or impair the right of the complaint
officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
A. During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the
company shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and
resolving all local complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions, and similar matters. Such a business office
shall be located no more than 10 square miles outside of the City of East
Orange, have a publicly listed toll-free telephone number and be open
during standard business hours, and in no event (excepting emergent
circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday. Such local office shall be designated to receive payments on
behalf of Comcast.
B. The telephone number and address of the local office shall be listed in
applicable telephone directories and in correspondence from Comcast
to City subscribers. The telephone number for the local office shall
utilize an exchange, which is a non-toll call for City residents.
§ A300-9 CHARTER § A300-14
C:1481
§ A300-14. Public, educational and governmental access.
§ A300-15. Commitments by company.
A. Public access. The company shall provide residents with a system-wide
public access channel maintained by the company. Qualified individuals
and organizations may utilize public access for the purpose of
cablecasting noncommercial access programming in conformance with
the company's published public access rules.
B. Leased access. The company shall provide a system-wide leased access
channel maintained by the company for the purpose of cablecasting
commercial access programming in conformance with the company's
guideline and applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
C. Local access. Comcast shall make available two channels for use and
access by the City and one channel for use and access by the East
Orange Public School District for the cablecasting of noncommercial
governmental and/or educational programming.
D. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the access channels are carried, without material
degradation, to all subscribing residents of the City of East Orange, and
with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the other standard
channels that the company transmits.
E. The company shall take all steps necessary to ensure that the City's two
public access channels are viewable to all Comcast subscribers in the
City, including residential and business customers in the Ampere
section of the City, on the basic level service offered by the company.
F. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(4)],
allows the company to itemize and/or identify the amount on the
monthly bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the
company by the cable franchise to support public, educational, and
governmental channels, or the use of such channels or any other
services required under the franchise. The company reserves its
external cost, pass-through rights to the extent permitted by law.
A. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service on one outlet at no cost to each existing and future
school in the municipality, public and private, elementary, intermediate
and secondary, provided the school is within 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for on a material-plus-labor basis by the school requesting service.
Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets except
for equipment.
B. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each of the City's existing
and future municipal buildings, including but not limited to City Hall,
police, fire and emergency management facilities, first aid squad
§ A300-14 EAST ORANGE CODE § A300-15
C:1482
facilities, public libraries, and community and senior centers in the
municipality, provided that each facility is located within 200 feet of
active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any,
shall be paid for on a material plus labor basis by the municipality.
Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets except
for equipment.
C. The company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable modern, to one nonnetworked computer in each school, public
and private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, and public library
facilities, provided that the schools and library facilities are located
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. The Internet
connections shall be installed on a computer that is accessible to
student and library patron use, as applicable, and may not be installed
on a computer that is restricted to administrative use.
D. Comcast shall provide a high-speed Internet access, including standard
installation (within 200 feet of a cable plant), any necessary modems,
routers or other equipment (except the computers) and monthly service
on up to eight computers each in five technology centers to be
established and operated by the City. If the City desires, it may transfer
this commitment to municipal libraries. Comcast shall fulfill this
obligation within 12 months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of
approval by the BPU.
E. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval
from the Board, the company will provide a one-time access and
technology related grant in the amount of $150,000 to the City. This
amount shall be borne solely by Comcast and will not be passed onto
the City's residents.
F. The company shall provide an additional grant of $60,000 in support of
community-related events, activities and programs as determined by
the City, and such grant shall be payable in annual installments, in the
amount of $6,000 per year for the term of the ten-year franchise.
Comcast shall be recognized as a supporter/sponsor of any event,
activity or program that is the beneficiary of such grant or any part
thereof. The first payment of the grant shall be shall be due on April 1,
2019, and each additional payment due on April 1 of each succeeding
year for the term of the franchise.
G. The company shall, within six months of the issuance of the renewal
certificate of approval by the Board, make the City's two public access
channels viewable to all Comcast subscribers in the City, including
residential and business customers in the Ampere section of the City, on
the basic level service offered by the company.
H. Two-way services and interconnection. If the City deems the provision
of two-way or interconnection services necessary and feasible, Comcast
shall be required to apply to the BPU for approval to enter into and
§ A300-15 CHARTER § A300-15
C:1483
§ A300-16. Emergency uses.
§ A300-17. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A300-18. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in this ordinance and
the application, or annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any
amendment thereto, except as modified herein, are binding upon the
company as terms and conditions of this consent. The application and
other relevant writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto
and made a part hereof by reference, provided same do not conflict with
applicable state or federal law.
§ A300-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A300-20. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
establish the terms and conditions of a contract for the provision of
such services. The City shall bear all application costs.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
C. The City shall in no way be held liable if the company's failure to
adequately maintain, replace or renew its equipment is the cause of
damage to any person or property.
§ A300-15 EAST ORANGE CODE § A300-21
C:1484
§ A300-21. Number of subscribers irrelevant.
Comcast shall be bound by the terms and provisions of this ordinance
irrespective of the number of subscribers to its system.
§ A300-22. Restrictions against transfers.
This consent shall not be assigned or transferred without prior notice and/
or approval of the City and the BPU.
§ A300-23. Notices.
Every direction, notice or other communication to be served upon the City
shall be sent, by certified mail, to the office of the City Clerk. The delivery
or mailing of such notice, direction or order shall be equivalent to direct
personal notice and shall be deemed to have been given at the time of
delivery.
§ A300-24. Consistency with future federal and state statutes,
regulations, rules and orders.
Should any of the federal or state statutes or regulations concerning cable
television be modified in any way, such modification shall be incorporated
into this ordinance to the extent it 1) encompasses any required term
or condition and 2) can meaningfully be so incorporated. Any such
modification shall become effective on the effective date specified in the
modification. To the extent that any such modification restricts any
permissible term or condition and thereby renders any provision of this
ordinance invalid, Section 19 of this ordinance shall apply.339
§ A300-25. FCC and BPU changes to be part of this consent.
It is understood by Comcast and the City that should the FCC or BPU
modify, change or alter any of their regulations in a manner that may impact
this municipal consent, such modifications, changes or alterations shall
be incorporated into this municipal consent ordinance consistent with the
applicable dates specified in the change.
§ A300-26. Effective date of consent.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
339. Editor's Note: See § A300-19.
§ A300-21 CHARTER § DT-1
C:1485
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1980 Code to 2014 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
PART I
CHARTER
Charter Charter
PART II
ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code
§§ 1-1 to 1-14, Adoption of 1980 Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
§§ 1-15 and 1-16, General Penalty Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 3, Abolition of Offices and Extinguishment
of Positions
Ch. 3
Ch. 5, Administrative Organization
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 5, Art. I
Art. II, Bonds of City Officers and Employees Ch. 5, Art. II
Art. III, City Clerk; Deputy Clerk Ch. 5, Art. III
Art. IV, Corporation Counsel's Office Ch. 5, Art. IV
Art. V, Department of Finance Ch. 5, Art. VI
Art. VI, Division of Tax Collection and
Revenue
Ch. 5, Art. VII
Art. VII, Director of Department of Property
Taxation
Ch. 5, Art. VIII
Art. VIII, Division of Treasury Ch. 5, Art. VI, § 5-42
Art. IX, Department of Public Works Ch. 5, Art. IX
Art. IXA, Coordinator of Community
Activities
Repealed by Ord. No.
47-1986
Art. X, Secretary to the Mayor; Executive
Secretary to the Mayor
Ch. 5, Art. XIX
Art. XI, Local Assistance Board REP
Art. XII, Police Department Surgeon Ch. 55, Art. II
Art. XIII, Fire Department Surgeon Ch. 55, Art. III
Art. XIV, Department of Public Buildings and
Grounds
Repealed by Ord. No.
16-1986
§ DT-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DT-1
C:1486
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
Art. XV, Mayor's Office of Planning and
Development
Ch. 5, Art. XX
Art. XVI, Insurance Advisory Committee Ch. 14A, Art. I
Art. XVII, Department of Electronic Data
Processing
Ch. 5, Art. X
Art. XVIII, Model Cities Department Repealed by Ord. No.
11-1979
Art. XIX, Department of Neighborhood
Facilities
Repealed by Ord. No.
11-1979
Art. XX, Department of Grants and Aid Ch. 5, Art. XI
Art. XXI, Department of Drug Abuse and
Alcoholism Control
Repealed by Ord. No.
11-1979
Art. XXII, Department of Property
Maintenance
Ch. 5, Art. XII
Art. XXIII, Department of Recreation and
Cultural Affairs
§ 5-157, Citizens' Advisory Committee to
Department of Recreation and Cultural
Affairs
Ch. 14A, Art. XI
Art. XXIV, Division of Public Relations Repealed by Ord. No.
37-1984 and Ord. No.
22-1986
Art. XXV, Boards, Commissions and
Authorities: Appointees
Ch. 5, Art. XXV
Art. XXVI, Officers and Employees: School
Traffic Guards
Ch. 55, Art. I
Art. XXVII, Community Development
Advisory Council
REP
Art. XXVIII, Department of Recreation Repealed by Ord. No.
21-1986
Art. XXIX, Department of Economic
Development
Ch. 5, Art. XIII
Art. XXX, Municipal Court Administrator Ch. 5, Art. XXVI
Art. XXXI, Department of Youth Services Repealed by Ord. No.
38-1984
Art. XXXI, Mayor's Division of Neighborhood
Facilities
REP
Art. XXXII, Department of Neighborhood
Facilities
Repealed by Ord. No.
38-1984
Art. XXXII, Mayor's Division of the East
Orange Golf Course
Ch. 5, Art. XXI
§ DT-1 CHARTER § DT-1
C:1487
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
Art. XXXIII, Department of East Orange Golf
Course
Repealed by Ord. No.
38-1984
Art. XXXIII, Mayor's Division of Senior
Citizens
Ch. 5, Art. XXII
Art. XXXIV, Department of Senior Citizens
Activities
Repealed by Ord. No.
38-1984
Art. XXXV, Department of Drug Abuse and
Alcoholism
Repealed by Ord. No.
48-1986
Art. XXXVI, Office of Business Administrator Repealed by Ord. No.
24-1987
Art. XXXVII, Mayor's Office of Administrative
Services
Ch. 5, Art. XXIII
Art. XXXVIII, Department of Community
Affairs
Repealed by Ord. No.
33-1989
Art. XXXVIII, Mayor's Division of Recreation REP
Art. XXXIX, Office of Intergovernmental
Relations Officer
Repealed by Ord. No.
26-1989
Art. XL, Office of Coordinator of Employment
and Training Activities
Ch. 5, Art. XXIV
Art. XLI, Administrative Office of the City
Council
Ch. 5, Art. XXVII
Art. XLII, Office of Director of Arts and
Cultural Affairs
Repealed by Ord. No.
26-1989
Art. XLIII, Office of Police Department
Chaplain
Ch. 55, Art. IV
Art. XLIV, Fire Department
§ 5-239, Position of Supervisor, Public
Firesafety Education
Ch. 55, Art. V
§ 5-240, Position of Community Relations
Specialist
Ch. 55, Art. VI
Art. XLV, Office of the City Administrator Ch. 5, Art. V
Art. XLVI, Chief of Staff to the Mayor Repealed by Ord. No.
8-1999
Art. XLVII, Department of Policy, Planning
and Economic Development
Ch. 5, Art. XIV
Art. XLVIII, Department of Recreation and
Cultural Affairs
Ch. 5, Art. XV
Art. XLIX, Department of Human Resource
Services
Ch. 5, Art. XVII
§ DT-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DT-1
C:1488
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
Art. L, Defined Contribution Retirement
Program
Ch. 79, Art. I
Art. LI, Youth Advisory Council Ch. 14A, Art. XII
Ch. 8, Affirmative Action Program Ch. 8
Ch. 11, Alcoholic Beverage Control, Board of Ch. 14A, Art. III
Ch. 13, Arts and Cultural Commission Ch. 14A, Art. IX
Ch. 14, Auxiliary Police Ch. 14
Ch. 15, Business Development Authority Ch. 15
Ch. 17, Checks or Drafts, Returned Ch. 17
Ch. 18, Claims: Approval and Payment Ch. 18
Ch. 21, Court Ch. 21
Ch. 23, Defense and Indemnification Ch. 23
Ch. 25, Education, Board of Ch. 14A, Art. VI
Ch. 28, Emergencies, Public Ch. 28
§ 28-7, Office of Emergency Management Ch. 5, Art. XVIII
Ch. 32, Fire Citizens Advisory Council; Fire
Department
Ch. 14A, Art. IV
Ch. 36, Health, Board of Ch. 14A, Art. II
Ch. 40, Housing Authority Ch. 40
Ch. 42, Human Rights and Intergroup
Relations Commission
REP
Ch. 43, Improvement Districts
Art. I, Central Avenue Business
Improvement District
Ch. 43, Art. I
Ch. 44, Interlocal Services Ch. 44
Ch. 50, Land Use and Development Repealed by Ord. No.
4-2012; see Ch. 51
Ch. 53, Mental Health Advisory Board REP
Ch. 54, Mutual Assistance
Art. I, Supplemental Fire Assistance Ch. 54, Art. I
Ch. 56, Parking Authority Ch. 56
Ch. 59, Personnel Committee Ch. 14A, Art. VIII
Ch. 60, Personnel Policies Ch. 60
Ch. 65, Police Citizens' Advisory Council;
Police Director
Ch. 14A, Art. X
Ch. 68, Purchasing and Contracting Ch. 68
Ch. 71, Real Estate Commission Ch. 14A, Art. VII
§ DT-1 CHARTER § DT-1
C:1489
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 74, Records and Information Ch. 74
Ch. 76, Redevelopment Agency Ch. 76
Ch. 80, Telegraph Bureau, Fire and Police REP
Ch. 83, Urban Enterprise Zone
Art. I, Zone Development Corporation Ch. 83, Art. I
Art. II, Acceptance of Zone Designation
and Zone Development Plan
Ch. 83, Art. II
Ch. 84, Vehicles, City-Owned
Art. I, Use Ch. 84, Art. I
Art. II, Insurance Ch. 84, Art. II
Ch. 86, Water Commissioners, Board of Ch. 14A, Art. V
PART III
GENERAL LEGISLATION
Ch. 94, Air Pollution Ch. 94
Ch. 97, Alarm Systems Ch. 97
Ch. 100, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 100
Ch. 103, Amusement Devices Ch. 103
Ch. 107, Bingo Ch. 107
Ch. 110, Building Contractors REP
Ch. 113, Buildings Unfit for Human Habitation Ch. 113
Ch. 118, Canvassers, Solicitors and Peddlers Ch. 118
Ch. 121, Checks, Fraudulent REP
Ch. 125, Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 125
Ch. 127, Curfew Ch. 127
Ch. 128, Dance Halls and Discotheques Ch. 128
Ch. 132, Dogs, Cats and Other Animals Ch. 132
Ch. 138, Hours of Operation Ch. 138
Ch. 142, Excavations Ch. 142
Ch. 146, Fire Prevention Ch. 146
Ch. 150, Floodplain Management Ch. 150
Ch. 153, Fuel Oil
Art. I, Emergency Delivery Ch. 153, Art. I
Ch. 156, Solid Waste
Art. I, Collection and Transportation Ch. 156, Art. I
Art. II, Recycling Ch. 156, Art. II
Ch. 157, Graffiti Ch. 157
§ DT-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DT-1
C:1490
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 159, Housing Standards; Property
Maintenance
Ch. 159
Ch. 162, Insurance
Art. I, Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 162, Art. I
Ch. 165, Laundromats and Dry Cleaning
Establishments, Coin-Operated
Ch. 165
Ch. 170, Licenses and Fees Ch. 170
Ch. 172, Littering Ch. 172
Ch. 173, Loitering Ch. 173
Ch. 175, Motor Vehicle Repair Garages
Art. I, Licensing Ch. 175, Art. I
Art. II, Abandoned Vehicles Ch. 175, Art. II
Ch. 176, Moving Permits REP
Ch. 182, Newspapers, Advertisements and
Periodicals
Ch. 182
Ch. 184, Noise Pollution Ch. 184
Ch. 186, Open-Air Lots, Vehicle Ch. 186
Ch. 188, Outdoor Activities Ch. 188
Ch. 190, Parental Responsibility Ch. 190
Ch. 192, Parking Lots, Municipal Ch. 192
Ch. 193, Parks, Public Ch. 193
Ch. 195, Pawnbrokers Ch. 195
Ch. 198, Peace and Good Order Ch. 198
Ch. 201, Plumbers Ch. 201
Ch. 203, Poles and Wires Ch. 203
Ch. 206, Precious Metals and Gems Ch. 206
Ch. 214, Recreational Facilities: Fees Ch. 214
Ch. 218, Rent Control and Conversions Ch. 218
Ch. 223, Sales, Forced-Out-Of-Business Ch. 223
Ch. 226, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewers and Drains Ch. 226, Part 1
Part 2, Service by the Passaic Valley
Sewerage Commissioners
Ch. 226, Part 2
Part 3, Service by Joint Meeting Ch. 226, Part 3
Part 4, Miscellaneous Fees Ch. 226, Part 4
Ch. 228, Shade Trees Repealed by Ord. No.
1-2006
§ DT-1 CHARTER § DT-1
C:1491
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 232, Site Plan Review Superseded by Ord. No.
7-1997; see now Ch. 51,
Land Use
Ch. 238, Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 238
Ch. 240, Subdivision of Land Superseded by Ord. No.
7-1997; see now Ch. 51,
Land Use
Ch. 243, Sunday Activities REP
Ch. 246, Swimming Pools: Fencing Ch. 246
Ch. 247, Taxation
Art. I, Five-Year Tax Exemptions and
Abatements
Ch. 247, Art. I
Art. II, Long-Term Tax Exemptions and
Payments in Lieu of Taxes
Ch. 247, Art. II
Ch. 249, Taxicabs Ch. 249
Ch. 250, Livery Service Repealed by Ord. No.
16-2012; see now Ch. 249
Ch. 251, Tenants' Property Tax Rebate Ch. 251
Ch. 252, Theaters, Movies and Exhibitions Ch. 252
Ch. 257, Vehicles, Abandoned Superseded by Ord. No.
41-1985
Ch. 260, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 260
Ch. 262, Wireless Telecommunication and
Equipment Facilities
Ch. 262
Ch. 264, Wreckers Ch. 264
Ch. 268, Zoning Superseded by Ord. No.
7-1997; see now Ch. 51,
Land Use
PART IV
BOARD OF HEALTH LEGISLATION
Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health Ch. 270
Ch. 276, Health and Human Services,
Department of
Ch. 5, Art. XVI
Ch. 282, Nuisances Ch. 282
Ch. 288, Retail Food-Handling Establishments
Art. I, Adoption of Standards REP
Art. II, Licensing Ch. 288, Art. I
Ch. 292, Sanitary Standards Ch. 292
§ DT-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DT-1
C:1492
Chapter/Title from 1980 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 295, Swimming Pools REP
APPENDIX
Ch. A300, Cable Television Franchise Ch. A300
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of City Council legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-1999 5-10-1999 Bond NCM
10-1999 5-10-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
11-1999 5-24-1999 Sick leave payment NCM
12-1999 6-28-1999 Curfew amendment Ch. 127
13-1999 8-16-1999 Fee for returned checks Ch. 17
14-1999 9-20-1999 Bond NCM
15-1999 12-27-1999 Auxiliary police
amendment
Ch. 14
1-2000 2-14-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
2-2000 2-14-2000 Sale of property NCM
3-2000 Not adopted
4-2000 Not adopted
5-2000 Not adopted
6-2000 3-27-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 146
7-2000 4-10-2000 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
8-2000 4-10-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 146
9-2000 5-15-2000 Bond NCM
10-2000 4-24-2000 Court amendment Ch. 21
11-2000 5-22-2000 Bond NCM
12-2000 5-22-2000 Bond NCM
13-2000 Bond NCM
§ DT-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1493
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-2000 5-22-2000 Bond amendment NCM
15-2000 8-21-2000 Vehicles, City-owned: use
of City-owned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 84, Art. I
16-2000 9-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
17-2000 Not adopted
18-2000 10-10-2000 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
19-2000 10-10-2000 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
20-2000 10-10-2000 Court amendment Ch. 21
21-2000 10-10-2000 Licenses and fees
amendment (filming on
public lands)
Ch. 170, Art. V
22-2000 10-10-2000 Purchase property NCM
23-2000 10-10-2000 Administrative
organization amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-2015
24-2000 11-13-2000 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
25-2000 11-13-2000 Purchasing and
contracting amendment
Ch. 68
1-2001 2-13-2001 Stipend for Council
Labor Negotiations Team
NCM
2-2001 5-14-2001 Street vacation NCM
3-2001 8-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
4-2001 9-24-2001 Acquisition of title to
condominiums
NCM
5-2001 9-10-2001 Appropriation NCM
6-2001 9-10-2001 Lease of property NCM
7-2001 10-22-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
8-2001 11-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
1-2002 2-11-2002 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1494
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2002 3-11-2002 Service charge for
returned checks
amendment
Ch. 17
3-2002 4-22-2002 Administrative
organization amendment
(IT Division)
Ch. 5
4-2002 6-24-2002 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
5-2002 Bond NCM
6-2002 Bond NCM
7-2002 8-26-2002 Conservation easement NCM
8-2002 8-26-2002 Transfer of property NCM
9-2002 8-26-2002 Improvement districts:
Central Avenue Business
Improvement District
Repealed by Ord.
No. 26-2018
10-2002 9-16-2002 Mutual assistance:
supplemental fire
assistance
Ch. 54, Art. I
11-2002 9-16-2002 Taxicabs amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 17-2012
12-2002 9-16-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
13-2002 9-16-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
14-2002 9-30-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
15-2002 Bond NCM
16-2002 10-15-2002 Personnel policies:
military leave
amendment
Ch. 60
17-2002 10-28-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
18-2002 Bond NCM
19-2002 12-9-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
20-2002 12-24-2002 Wireless
telecommunication and
equipment facilities
Ch. 262
1-2003 2-10-2003 Sale of real property NCM
2-2003 3-10-2003 Recreational facilities:
fees amendment
Ch. 214
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1495
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2003 3-10-2003 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
4-2003 3-24-2003 Property transfer NCM
5-2003 3-24-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
6-2003 3-24-2003 Bond amendment NCM
7-2003 4-28-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
8-2003 5-12-2003 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5, Art. IX
9-2003 5-12-2003 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
10-2003 5-27-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
11-2003 8-18-2003 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Police Citizens
Advisory Council; Police
Director
Ch. 14A, Art. X
12-2003 8-18-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
13-2003 Replaced by Ord.
22-2003
14-2003 9-15-2003 Transfer of property NCM
15-2003 9-15-2003 Transfer of property NCM
16-2003 9-15-2003 Transfer of property NCM
17-2003 9-15-2003 Sale of property NCM
18-2003 9-29-2003 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
19-2003 10-14-2003 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 21
20-2003 10-14-2003 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
21-2003 11-10-2003 Transfer of property NCM
22-2003 11-24-2003 Peace and good order
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 7-2015
23-2003 12-15-2003 Transfer of property
amendment
NCM
24-2003 12-15-2003 Transfer of property
amendment
NCM
25-2003 12-15-2003 Transfer of property
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1496
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
26-2003 12-15-2003 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 198
1-2004 2-9-2004 Redevelopment plan NCM
2-2004 2-9-2004 Transfer of property NCM
3-2004 2-9-2004 Transfer of property NCM
4-2004 2-23-2004 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
5-2004 3-8-2004 Transfer of property NCM
6-2004 3-22-2004 Exchange of property NCM
7-2004 4-26-2004 Redevelopment plan NCM
8-2004 Not yet adopted
9-2004 4-26-2004 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
10-2004 4-26-2004 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
11-2004 4-26-2004 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
12-2004 4-26-2004 Acquisition of easements NCM
13-2004 4-26-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 100
14-2004 5-10-2004 Sale of property NCM
15-2004 5-24-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
16-2004 6-28-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
17-2004 6-28-2004 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Citizens
Advisory Council; Police
Director amendment
Ch. 14A, Art. X
18-2004 7-19-2004 Transfer of property NCM
19-2004 7-19-2004 Transfer of property NCM
20-2004 7-19-2004 Transfer of property NCM
21-2004 8-16-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
22-2004 8-16-2004 Administrative
organization
Ch. 5, Art. XVI
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1497
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
23-2004 8-16-2004 Transfer of property NCM
24-2004 8-16-2004 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
25-2004 9-13-2004 Redevelopment plan NCM
26-2004 9-13-2004 Appropriation NCM
27-2004 9-13-2004 Conveyance of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 42-2018
28-2004 9-27-2004 Transfer of property NCM
29-2004 9-27-2004 Records and information
amendment
Ch. 74
30-2004 9-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
31-2004 9-27-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
32-2004 9-27-2004 Budget cap adjustment NCM
33-2004 10-12-2004 Transfer of property NCM
34-2004 Not acted upon
35-2004 12-27-2004 Sale of property NCM
1-2005 1-24-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 146
2-2005 1-24-2005 Bond NCM
3-2005 1-24-2005 Bond NCM
4-2005 2-14-2005 Wreckers amendment Superseded by
Ord. 11-2005
5-2005 2-28-2005 Cable television
franchise
Superseded by
Ord. No. 43-2018
6-2005 2-28-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
7-2005 3-14-2005 Transfer of property
amendment
NCM
8-2005 3-14-2005 Conveyance of property NCM
9-2005 4-11-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
10-2005 4-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
11-2005 4-11-2005 Wreckers amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 11-2008
12-2005 4-25-2005 Sale of property NCM
13-2005 5-9-2005 Hours of operation Ch. 138
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1498
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-2005 5-23-2005 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 260
15-2005 6-27-2005 Transfer of property NCM
16-2005 7-18-2005 Appropriation NCM
17-2005 7-18-2005 Transfer of property NCM
18-2005 7-18-2005 Rent control and
conversions amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 9-2010
19-2005 8-15-2005 Hours of operation
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 26-2007
20-2005 9-12-2005 Bond NCM
21-2005 9-12-2005 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
22-2005 9-26-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
23-2005 9-26-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
24-2005 9-26-2005 Grant of easement NCM
25-2005 10-24-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
26-2005 11-14-2005 Administrative
organization and court
amendments
Ch. 5; Ch. 21
27-2005 11-28-2005 Cable television
franchise amendment
Ch. A300
28-2005 Not adopted
29-2005 12-12-2005 Lease of property NCM
30-2005 12-12-2005 Budget cap adjustment NCM
31-2005 12-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
32-2005 12-27-2005 Outdoor activities;
streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 188; Ch. 238
(repealer only)
33-2005 12-27-2005 Bond NCM
34-2005 12-27-2005 Purchasing and
contracting amendment
Ch. 68
1-2006 2-14-2006 Streets and sidewalks
(shade trees) amendment
Ch. 228
2-2006 4-10-2006 Recreational facilities:
fees amendment
Ch. 214
3-2006 Not adopted
4-2006 4-10-2006 Transfer of property NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1499
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2006 4-10-2006 Long-term tax exemption
for Dr. King Plaza Urban
Renewal Associates
NCM
6-2006 4-10-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
7-2006 4-24-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
8-2006 4-24-2006 Lease of property NCM
9-2006 5-22-2006 Transfer of property NCM
10-2006 6-12-2006 Transfer of property NCM
11-2006 7-17-2006 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Citizens
Advisory Committee to
Department of
Recreation and Cultural
Activities
Ch. 14A, Art. XI
12-2006 7-17-2006 Transfer of property NCM
13-2006 7-17-2006 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
14-2006 Not adopted
15-2006 7-17-2006 Street vacation NCM
16-2006 8-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
17-2006 8-21-2006 Hours of operation
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 26-2007
18-2006 10-23-2006 Street vacation NCM
19-2006 8-21-2006 Transfer of property NCM
20-2006 9-18-2006 Outdoor activities
amendment
Ch. 188,
attachment only
21-2006 9-18-2006 Public parks amendment Ch. 193
22-2006 9-18-2006 Solid waste amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 22-2011
23-2006 9-18-2006 Sewers and drains
amendment
Ch. 226, Part 1
24-2006 9-18-2006 Adoption of code:
general penalty
amendment; housing
standards; property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
159
25-2006 9-18-2006 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1500
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
26-2006 12-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
27-2006 10-10-2006 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
28-2006 10-10-2006 Public parks amendment Ch. 193
29-2006 10-23-2006 Authorization to
extinguish and create
drainage and sanitary
sewer easements
NCM
30-2006 10-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
31-2006 12-11-2006 Transfer of property NCM
32-2006 12-11-2006 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
33-2006 12-26-2006 Sale of property NCM
34-2006 12-26-2006 Dogs, cats and other
animals amendment
Ch. 132
35-2006 12-26-2006 Noise pollution
amendment
Ch. 184
1-2007 2-13-2007 Sale of property
amendment
NCM
2-2007 2-13-2007 Appropriation NCM
3-2007 2-13-2007 Appropriation NCM
4-2007 2-13-2007 Redevelopment
agreement
NCM
5-2007 2-13-2007 Personnel policies:
supplemental benefits
and compensation upon
retirement for City
officers and employees
not covered by
bargaining unit
amendment
Ch. 60, Art. XVII
6-2007 3-26-2007 Administrative
organization amendment
(Department of Health
and Human Services)
Ch. 5
7-2007 3-26-2007 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5, Art. XV,
§ 5-98
8-2007 4-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1501
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2007 5-14-2007 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
10-2007 Pending
11-2007 5-29-2007 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
12-2007 5-29-2007 Salaries amendment NCM
13-2007 5-29-2007 Board of Fire
Commissioners
amendment; Board of
Health amendment;
Parking Authority
amendment; Board of
Water Commissioners
amendment
Ch. 14A, Art. IV,
Art. II; Ch. 56;
Ch. 14A, Art. V
14-2007 5-29-2007 Redevelopment
agreement
NCM
15-2007 5-29-2007 Bond NCM
16-2007 Establish state-approved
tax increase
Not adopted
17-2007 7-16-2007 Court amendment Ch. 21
18-2007 7-16-2007 Purchasing and
contracting amendment
Ch. 68
19-2007 7-16-2007 Administrative
organization amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1-2015
20-2007 7-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
21-2007 8-20-2007 Appropriation NCM
22-2007 8-20-2007 Redevelopment
agreement amendment
NCM
23-2007 8-20-2007 Redevelopment
agreement
NCM
24-2007 8-20-2007 Redevelopment
agreement
NCM
25-2007 10-9-2007 Transfer of property NCM
26-2007 10-9-2007 Hours of operation
amendment
Ch. 138
27-2007 12-10-2007 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
28-2007 10-9-2007 Bond NCM
29-2007 10-9-2007 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1502
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
30-2007 10-22-2007 Salaries amendment NCM
31-2007 Not adopted
32-2007 12-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
1-2008 1-28-2008 Bond NCM
2-2008 1-28-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
3-2008 2-25-2008 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
4-2008 2-25-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
5-2008 3-24-2008 Records and information
amendment
Ch. 74
6-2008 Not adopted
7-2008 3-31-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
8-2008 4-14-2008 Recreational facilities:
fees amendment
Ch. 214
9-2008 4-14-2008 Recreational facilities:
fees amendment
Ch. 214
10-2008 Not adopted
11-2008 5-27-2008 Wreckers amendment Ch. 264
12-2008 5-27-2008 Transfer of property NCM
13-2008 6-9-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
14-2008 6-9-2008 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Fire Citizens
Advisory Council; Fire
Department amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2-2015
15-2008
16-2008
17-2008 8-18-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
18-2008 10-28-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
19-2008 11-7-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 15-2009
20-2008 11-24-2008 Five-year tax exemptions
and abatements
Ch. 247, Art. I
21-2008 11-24-2008 Long-term tax
exemptions and
payments in lieu of taxes
Ch. 247, Art. II
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1503
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
22-2008 12-8-2008 Retirement: defined
contribution retirement
program
Ch. 79, Art. I
23-2008 12-8-2008 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
1-2009 2-9-2009 Appropriation NCM
2-2009 4-13-2009 Bond NCM
3-2009 7-20-2009 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Youth Advisory
Council
Ch. 14A, Art. XII
4-2009 7-20-2009 Bond NCM
5-2009 7-20-2009 Bond NCM
6-2009 Not adopted
7-2009 8-17-2009 Wreckers amendment Ch. 264
8-2009 10-26-2009 Conveyance of property NCM
9-2009 10-13-2009 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
10-2009 10-13-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11-2009 11-16-2009 Transfer of property NCM
12-2009 Bond NCM
13-2009 Bond NCM
14-2009 11-16-2009 Court amendment Ch. 21
15-2009 11-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
16-2009 11-16-2009 Taxation: five-year tax
exemptions and
abatements amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 13-2011
17-2009 12-14-2009 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
18-2009 Bond NCM
19-2009 12-28-2009 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
1-2010 2-22-2010 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Fire Citizens
Advisory Council; Fire
Department amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2-2015
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1504
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2010 2-22-2010 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Police Citizens'
Advisory Council; Police
Director amendment
Ch. 14A, Art. X
3-2010 Bond NCM
4-2010 4-12-2010 Taxation: long-term tax
exemptions and
payments in lieu of taxes
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. II
5-2010 6-14-2010 Bond NCM
6-2010 6-14-2010 Appropriation NCM
7-2010 6-14-2010 Appropriation NCM
8-2010 6-28-2010 Bond NCM
9-2010 7-19-2010 Rent control and
conversions amendment
Ch. 218
10-2010 7-19-2010 Sale of property NCM
11-2010 8-16-2010 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 23
12-2010 8-16-2010 Salaries amendment NCM
13-2010 9-13-2010 Bond NCM
14-2010 Rent control amendment Not adopted
15-2010 10-12-2010 Salaries amendment NCM
16-2010 10-12-2010 Appropriation NCM
17-2010 10-12-2010 Exceed municipal
budget; establish cap
bank
NCM
18-2010 10-12-2010 Bond NCM
19-2010 10-12-2010 Sale of property NCM
20-2010 10-12-2010 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 97
21-2010 10-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
22-2010 10-12-2010 General provisions:
general penalty
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
260
23-2010 Not introduced
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1505
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-2010 12-13-2010 Bond NCM
25-2010 12-13-2010 Bond NCM
26-2010 Not introduced
27-2010 12-13-2010 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
28-2010 12-13-2010 Bond NCM
29-2010 12-13-2010 Tax exemption for and
financial agreement with
Fern Preservation Urban
Renewal, L.P.
NCM
1-2011 2-14-2011 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
2-2011 2-14-2011 Land use and
development amendment
Repealed; see
now Ch. 51
3-2011 2-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
4-2011 3-14-2011 Reversion to calendar
fiscal year
NCM
5-2011 3-14-2011 Appropriation NCM
6-2011 3-14-2011 Bond NCM
7-2011 3-28-2011 Recreational facilities:
fees amendment
Ch. 214
8-2011 3-28-2011 Transit Village District Repealed by Ord.
No. 29-2011
9-2011 4-18-2011 Appropriation NCM
10-2011 4-18-2011 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
11-2011 5-16-2011 Deed restriction removal NCM
12-2011 5-16-2011 Bond NCM
13-2011 5-16-2011 Taxation: five-year tax
exemptions and
abatements amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
14-2011 6-20-2011 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 146
15-2011 6-20-2011 Street acceptance NCM
16-2011 6-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
17-2011 6-20-2011 Transit Village District Repealed by Ord.
No. 4-2012
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1506
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-2011 6-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
19-2011 6-20-2011 Purchasing and
contracting amendment
Ch. 68
20-2011 7-18-2011 Redevelopment plan NCM
21-2011 7-18-2011 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 100
22-2011 7-18-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 156, Art. I
23-2011 7-18-2011 Taxicabs amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 17-2012
24-2011 Bond NCM
25-2011 Bond NCM
26-2011 Bond NCM
27-2011 Not adopted
28-2011 11-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
29-2011 11-14-2011 Purchasing and
contracting amendment;
Transit Village Overlay
(Ord. No. 8-2011)
repealer
Ch. 68
30-2011 11-14-2011 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
31-2011 11-14-2011 Appropriation NCM
32-2011 11-14-2011 Five-year tax exemption
for certain property
NCM
33-2011 11-14-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
34-2011 11-28-2011 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 146
35-2011 11-28-2011 Appropriation NCM
1-2012 1-30-2012 Administrative
organization amendment;
City Purchasing Agent
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1-2015; Ch.
68, Art. II
2-2012 Bond NCM
3-2012 Capital improvement NCM
4-2012 1-30-2012 Land use Ch. 51
5-2012 2-27-2012 Redevelopment plan NCM
6-2012 2-27-2012 Transfer of property NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1507
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2012 Bond refund NCM
8-2012 2-27-2012 Project labor agreements Ch. 8A
9-2012 4-9-2012 Redevelopment plan NCM
10-2012 4-9-2012 Solid waste: recycling Ch. 156, Art. II
11-2012 4-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
12-2012 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
13-2012 4-23-2012 Referendum question on
open space, recreation
and historic preservation
tax
NCM
14-2012 6-11-2012 Sale of property NCM
15-2012 6-11-2012 Stormwater management
maintenance easement
NCM
16-2012 6-25-2012 Livery service (Ch. 250)
repealer
Repealer only
17-2012 6-25-2012 Taxicabs (Ch. 249)
repealer
Repealer only
18-2012 6-25-2012 Taxicabs and liveries Ch. 249
19-2012 6-25-2012 Salaries amendment NCM
20-2012 7-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
21-2012 7-16-2012 Excavations amendment Ch. 142
22-2012 8-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
23-2012 8-20-2012 Appropriation NCM
24-2012 9-24-2012 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5, Art. III
25-2012 10-9-2012 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5, Art. III
26-2012 10-9-2012 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 146
27-2012 10-9-2012 Extinguishment and
creation of drainage and
sewer easements
NCM
28-2012 10-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
29-2012 10-22-2012 Redevelopment plan NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1508
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
30-2012 10-22-2012 Salaries amendment NCM
31-2012 11-19-2012 Redevelopment plan NCM
32-2012 11-19-2012 Taxation: long-term tax
exemptions and
payments in lieu of taxes
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. II
1-2013 Bond NCM
2-2013 Bond NCM
3-2013 3-25-2013 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Municipal
Recreation and Open
Space Advisory Board
Ch. 14A, Art. XIII
4-2013 4-22-2013 Transfer of property NCM
5-2013 4-22-2013 Tax exemption and
financial agreement
NCM
6-2013 6-10-2013 Transfer of property NCM
7-2013 6-10-2013 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
8-2013 6-24-2013 Transfer of property NCM
9-2013 7-15-2013 Refunding bond NCM
10-2013 8-12-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
11-2013 9-23-2013 Transfer of property NCM
12-2013 9-23-2013 Transfer of property NCM
13-2013 10-21-2013 Transfer of property NCM
14-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
15-2013 Not adopted
16-2013 12-16-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 51
17-2013 Not adopted
18-2013 12-16-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
1-2014 2-24-2014 Transfer of property NCM
2-2014 4-28-2014 Parking Authority
amendment
Ch. 56
3-2014 4-28-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
4-2014 5-12-2014 Refunding bond NCM
5-2014 5-12-2014 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1509
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2014 5-12-2014 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
7-2014 Not adopted
8-2014 5-19-2014 Appropriation NCM
9-2014 5-19-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
10-2014 5-19-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
11-2014 5-19-2014 Community gardens Ch. 122
12-2014 6-23-2014 Tax exemption and
financial agreement
NCM
13-2014 6-23-2014 Transfer tax exemption
and amend financial
agreement
NCM
14-2014 7-7-2014 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Insurance Fund
Commission
Ch. 14A, Art. XIV
15-2014 Not adopted
16-2014 7-7-2014 Court amendment Ch. 21
17-2014 7-7-2014 Transfer of property NCM
18-2014 Not adopted
19-2014 8-18-2014 Project labor agreement
amendment
Ch. 8A
20-2014 Not adopted
21-2014 9-8-2014 Employer regulations:
paid sick time for private
employees
Ch. 140, Art. I
22-2014 Not adopted
23-2014 9-22-2014 Bond NCM
24-2014 10-14-2014 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
25-2014 10-14-2014 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
26-2014 10-14-2014 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1510
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
27-2014 10-14-2014 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
28-2014 10-14-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
29-2014 11-24-2014 Bond NCM
30-2014 11-24-2014 Bond NCM
31-2014 10-14-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
32-2014 Not adopted
33-2014 11-10-2014 Tax exemption
agreement
NCM
34-2014 11-24-2014 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
1-2015 2-2-2015 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
2-2015 2-2-2015 Division of Fire Ch. 14A, Art. IV
3-2015 2-2-2015 Department of Public
Safety; Public Safety
Citizens Advisory Council
Ch. 25
4-2015 2-2-2015 Division of Police Ch. 14A, Art. X
5-2015 2-23-2015 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
6-2015 2-23-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
7-2015 2-23-2015 Adoption of Code by City
Council
Ch. 1, Art. I
8-2015 2-23-2015 Tax abatement
agreement amendment
NCM
9-2015 Not adopted
10-2015 2-23-2015 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 125
11-2015 3-9-2015 Sussex Area
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
12-2015 3-9-2015 Bond NCM
13-2015 3-9-2015 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
14-2015 3-23-2015 Recreational facilities:
fees amendment
Ch. 214
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1511
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-2015 3-23-2015 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
16-2015 3-23-2015 Administrative
organization amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 12-2017
17-2015 4-13-2015 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
18-2015 4-13-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
19-2015 4-13-2015 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
20-2015 4-13-2015 Department of Public
Safety; Public Safety
Citizens Advisory Council
amendment
Ch. 25
21-2015 4-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
22-2015 4-27-2015 Recreational facilities:
fees amendment
Ch. 214
23-2015 Not adopted
24-2015 6-22-2015 Bond NCM
25-2015 5-11-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
26-2015 5-26-2015 Land use amendment Ch. 51
27-2015 Not adopted
28-2015 5-26-2015 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
29-2015 6-8-2015 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
30-2015 7-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
31-2015 7-20-2015 Parking Authority
amendment
Ch. 56
32-2015 6-22-2015 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
33-2015 6-22-2015 Tax abatement
agreement amendment
NCM
34-2015 7-20-2015 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1512
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
35-2015 7-20-2015 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
36-2015 7-20-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
37-2015 7-20-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
38-2015 7-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
39-2015 7-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
40-2015 8-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
41-2015 8-10-2015 Toy guns Ch. 255
42-2015 Not adopted
43-2015 8-24-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
44-2015 8-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
45-2015 9-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
46-2015 10-13-2015 Transfer of property NCM
47-2015 10-13-2015 Rent control and
conversions amendment
Ch. 218
48-2015 10-26-2015 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
49-2015 10-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
50-2015 11-9-2015 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
51-2015 11-23-2015 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
52-2015 11-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
53-2015 12-14-2015 Appropriation NCM
54-2015 Not adopted
55-2015 Not adopted
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1513
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
56-2015 12-28-2015 Administrative
organization amendment;
recreation facilities: fees
amendment
Ch. 5; Ch. 214
1-2016 Not adopted
2-2016 2-22-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
3-2016 2-22-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
4-2016 3-14-2016 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
5-2016 3-14-2016 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
6-2016 3-14-2016 Operation of cranes Ch. 126
7-2016 3-14-2016 Vacation of property NCM
8-2016 4-25-2016 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
9-2016 4-11-2016 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
10-2016 4-11-2016 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
11-2016 4-25-2016 Private sale of parking
spaces to contiguous
property owners
NCM
12-2016 6-27-2016 Bond NCM
13-2016 4-25-2016 Bond NCM
14-2016 4-25-2016 Licenses and fees
amendment
Ch. 170
15-2016 4-25-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
16-2016 4-25-2016 Excavations amendment Ch. 142
17-2016 6-27-2016 Bond NCM
18-2016 5-23-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
19-2016 5-23-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
20-2016 5-23-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1514
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
21-2016 6-27-2016 Hiring from locally
approved training
programs on multi-unit
construction projects
receiving financial
assistance from the City
NCM
22-2016 6-13-2016 Transfer of property NCM
23-2016 6-13-2016 Transfer of property NCM
24-2016 6-13-2016 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
25-2016 6-6-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
26-2016 6-27-2016 Claims: approval and
payment amendment
Ch. 18
27-2016 6-27-2016 Bond NCM
28-2016 6-27-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
29-2016 6-27-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
30-2016 7-18-2016 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
31-2016 7-18-2016 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
32-2016 7-18-2016 Transfer of property NCM
33-2016 7-18-2016 Dogs, cats and other
animals amendment
Ch. 132
34-2016 7-18-2016 Housing standards;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 159
35-2016 7-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
36-2016 8-8-2016 Establishing an Adopt-APark
program
NCM
37-2016 8-8-2016 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
38-2016 8-8-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
39-2016 8-8-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
40-2016 8-8-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
41-2016 8-8-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1515
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
42-2016 9-26-2016 Bond NCM
43-2016 10-11-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
44-2016 10-24-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
45-2016 10-24-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
46-2016 11-7-2016 Hotel and motel room
occupancy tax
Ch. 247, Art. III
47-2016 11-7-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
48-2016 11-7-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
49-2016 11-7-2016 Peddlers, solicitors and
mobile food vendors
amendment
Ch. 118
50-2016 11-21-2016 Financial agreement NCM
51-2016 11-21-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
52-2016 11-21-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 60
53-2016 11-21-2016 Rent control and
conversions amendment
Ch. 218
54-2016 11-21-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
55-2016 12-19-2016 Financial agreement NCM
56-2016 12-5-2016 Smoke-free air Ch. 230
57-2016 12-5-2016 Committee on the Status
of Men
Ch. 14A, Art. XV
58-2016 Not adopted
59-2016 12-19-2016 Bond NCM
60-2016 12-19-2016 Licenses and fees
amendment
Ch. 170
61-2016 12-19-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
62-2016 12-19-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
1-2017 2-14-2017 Bond NCM
2-2017 2-14-2017 Sale of property;
redevelopment
agreement
NCM
3-2017 2-14-2017 Dogs, cats and other
animals amendment
Ch. 132
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1516
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2017 2-14-2017 Financial agreement
amendment
NCM
5-2017 2-14-2017 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement amendment
NCM
6-2017 2-14-2017 Financial agreement
amendment
NCM
7-2017 3-13-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
8-2017 3-13-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
9-2017 3-13-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
10-2017 3-27-2017 Sale of property NCM
11-2017 3-27-2017 Redevelopment plan NCM
12-2017 3-27-2017 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 5
13-2017 4-10-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
14-2017 4-10-2017 Narcotic drugs and other
dangerous substances:
sale of
dextromethorphan to
minors
Ch. 180, Art. I
15-2017 4-24-2017 Transfer of property NCM
16-2017 4-24-2017 Tax exemption
amendment; financial
agreement amendment
NCM
17-2017 5-22-2017 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
18-2017 5-22-2017 Transfer of property NCM
19-2017 5-22-2017 Bond NCM
20-2017 6-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
21-2017 6-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 260
22-2017 8-14-2017 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
23-2017 8-14-2017 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1517
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-2017 8-14-2017 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
25-2017 8-14-2017 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
26-2017 8-14-2017 Approval of tax
exemption; financial
agreement
NCM
27-2017 9-11-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 260
28-2017 9-11-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 260
29-2017 9-25-2017 Sale of Property NCM
30-2017 9-25-2017 Sale of Property NCM
31-2017 9-25-2017 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
32-2017 9-25-2017 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 198
1-2018 2-13-2018 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 238
2-2018 2-26-2018 Administrative
Organization Amendment
Ch. 5
3-2018 2-26-2018 Housing Standards;
Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 159
4-2018 3-19-2018 Easement Vacation NCM
5-2018 3-19-2018 Approval of Tax
Exemption; Financial
Agreement
NCM
6-2018 3-19-2018 Refunding Bond NCM
7-2018 3-19-2018 Creation of Internship
Program
NCM
8-2018 4-9-2018 Transfer of Property NCM
9-2018 4-9-2018 Rent Control and
Conversions Amendment
Ch. 218
10-2018 4-23-2018 Approval of Tax
Exemption; Financial
Agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1518
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-2018 4-23-2018 Approval of Tax
Exemption; Financial
Agreement
NCM
12-2018 4-23-2018 Approval of Tax
Exemption; Financial
Agreement
NCM
13-2018 4-23-2018 Bond NCM
14-2018 Not adopted
15-2018 4-23-2018 Salaries Amendment NCM
16-2018 4-23-2018 Salaries Amendment NCM
17-2018 Not adopted
18-2018 Not adopted
19-2018 4-23-2018 Crossing Guard
Appreciation Day
NCM
20-2018 4-23-2018 Support of Intervention,
Prevention and
Elimination of Bullying
NCM
21-2018 4-23-2018 Recreation Facilities:
Fees Amendment
Ch. 214
22-2018 4-23-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
23-2018 5-14-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
24-2018 5-14-2018 Rent Control and
Conversions Amendment
Ch. 218
25-2018 5-29-2018 Approval of Tax
Exemption; Financial
Agreement
NCM
26-2018 5-29-2018 Improvement Districts
Repealer
Ch. 43, reference
only
27-2018 5-29-2018 Salaries Amendment NCM
28-2018 5-29-2018 Rental of Senior Services
Facility
Ch. 225
29-2018 Not adopted
30-2018 6-25-2018 Renaming of Park NCM
31-2018 Not adopted
32-2018 7-23-2018 Transfer of Property NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1519
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
33-2018 8-13-2018 Approval of Tax
Exemption; Financial
Agreement
NCM
34-2018 8-13-2018 Bond NCM
35-2018 Not adopted
36-2018 8-13-2018 Identification Card
Program
Ch. 161
37-2018 9-10-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
38-2018 9-10-2018 Smoking Amendment Ch. 294
39-2018 9-24-2018 Transfer of Property NCM
40-2018 11-19-2018 Bond NCM
41-2018 11-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 260
42-2018 12-3-2018 Repeal of Ord. No.
27-2004
NCM
43-2018 12-3-2018 Cable Television
Franchise
Ch. A300
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1-2019 2-11-2019 Transfer of Tax
Exemption and
Financial
Agreement
NCM 7
2-2019 2-25-2019 Administrative
Organization
Amendment
Ch. 5 7
3-2019 3-11-2019 Transfer of
Property
NCM 7
4-2019 3-11-2019 Transfer of
Property
NCM 7
5-2019 3-11-2019 Housing
Standards;
Property
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 159 7
6-2019 3-25-2019 Rent Control and
Conversions
Amendment
Ch. 218 7
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-1
C:1520
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
7-2019 4-8-2019 Transfer of Tax
Exemption and
Financial
Agreement
NCM 7
8-2019 4-8-2019 Redevelopment
Plan Amendment
NCM 7
9-2019 4-8-2019 Taxation: Long-
Term Tax
Exemptions and
Payments in Lieu
of Taxes
Amendment
Ch. 247, Art.
II
7
10-2019 4-22-2019 Administrative
Organization
Amendment;
Taxation: Long-
Term Tax
Exemptions and
Payments in Lieu
of Taxes
Amendment
Ch. 5; Ch.
247, Art. II
7
11-2019 5-13-2019 Salaries
Amendment
NCM 7
12-2019 5-13-2019 Littering
Amendment;
Sewers and
Sewage Disposal:
Sewers and
Drains
Amendment;
Service by Joint
Meeting
Amendment
Ch. 172; Ch.
226, Pt. 1; Ch.
226, Pt. 3
7
13-2019 5-13-2019 Salaries
Amendment
NCM 7
14-2019 5-13-2019 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 7
15-2019 Not Adopted
16-2019 6-10-2019 Approval of Tax
Exemption;
Financial
Agreement
NCM 7
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1521
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
17-2019 6-10-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 260 7
18-2019 6-24-2019 Redevelopment
Plan Amendment
NCM 7
19-2019 6-24-2019 Outdoor Activities
Amendment
Ch. 188 7
20-2019 6-24-2019 Peace and Good
Order Amendment
Ch. 198 7
21-2019 8-12-2019 Solid Waste:
Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 156, Art.
II
7
22-2019 8-12-2019 Housing
Standards;
Property
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 159 7
23-2019 Not Adopted
24-2019 8-26-2019 Transfer of
Property
NCM 7
25-2019 8-26-2019 Transfer of
Property
NCM 7
26-2019 8-26-2019 Transfer of
Property
NCM 7
27-2019 8-26-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 260 7
28-2019 8-26-2019 Fire Prevention:
Knox-Boxes®
Ch. 146, Art.
II
7
§ DL-2. Disposition of Board of Health ordinances.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2011 3-20-2012 Health and Human
Services, Department of
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. XVI
1-2012 3-20-2012 Mercantile permits Ch. 280
2-2012 12-18-2012 Smoking Ch. 294
§ DL-1 EAST ORANGE CODE § DL-2
C:1522